2 Land Use, Community
  Design, and Historic
  Preservation Element
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                         2.1	 Introduction and
                                                       Purpose
                                         The way in which a City allocates its land to meet the needs of
                                         residents and businesses is central to the General Plan. In order
                                         to accommodate a growing, changing population and increasingly
                                         diversified employment, Woodland must meet the needs of these
    Land use decisions and design        groups and uses while still maintaining the aspects of the built envi-
    standards contribute to Woodland’s   ronment that current citizens value: an orderly pattern of develop-
    identity and livability.
                                         ment that retains and enhances Woodland’s quality of life and a dis-
                                         tinctive identity bolstered by the city’s unique historical heritage.
       See the Introduction and Admin-   A city’s urban form is shaped gradually over a long period of time.
       istration chapter for more infor- Woodland developed over time as a result of its founding as an
       mation on Woodland’s historical   agricultural center of the region and its designation as the county
       development.                      seat. This laid the foundation for the neighborhoods, corridors and
                                         architectural heritage evident today.
                                         The Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Ele-
                                         ment directs the location and form of future development, shaping
                                         where people will live, work, play, and shop in Woodland. It pres-
                                         ents the desirable pattern for the ultimate development of the city
                                         for the General Plan horizon (year 2035) and seeks to ensure that
                                         land use planning reflects the community’s evolution and changing
                                         demographics, while promoting sustainability. Goals and policies
                                         related to urban form and design will inform development deci-
                                         sions by providing a common understanding of the characteristics
                                         the community wishes to achieve and preserve. Each development
                                         project must consider its impact on the form and character of the
                                         community as a whole, particularly regarding the project’s overall
                                         massing and its interaction with the street and public realm.
                                         The concept diagram shown in Figure 2-1 provides a simplified
                                         representation of how the city will develop by 2035. Each of the
                                         land groupings illustrated in the concept diagram – residential
                                         neighborhoods, centers, corridors, new growth areas, and green
                                         spaces – are discussed generally in Section 2.2 and outlined in
                                         greater detail in Section 2.3. A complementary diagram that il-
                                         lustrates that city’s basic roadway network is shown in Figure 2-4.
LU 2-2

                                                              Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                Figure 2-1:	Concept Diagram
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Residential Neighborhoods
                Floo d
                Study                                                                                                                                                              Fl ood
                Area                                   N or th ern                                                                                                                                                            Downtown
                                                       G ateway                                                                                                                    Study
                                                                                                                                                                                   Area                                       Mixed Use Corridor
                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Commercial Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Employment Center
                                               KENTUCKY AVE                                                                      KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              New Growth Areas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Green Space
                                                                                                     PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                             I ndustrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Flood Study Area
                                                                 EAST ST
                                                                                                                                 Area
                                                                                                                                                                   COUNTY RD 102
PEDRICK RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              New Specific Plan Area
                                     WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Eas te r n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G ateway
                         MAIN   ST                                             MAIN    ST                                                                                             MAIN   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                Water
                      GIBSON RD                                                                    GIBSON RD                                                                                  Pollu tion
                                                                                                                                                                                               Control
                                                                                                                                                                                               Facilit y
                                                                                             113                              PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                               COUNTY RD 102
                                                                 ST
                                                                 EAST
             Neighbo r h ood
                 Pa r k      G reen b el t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fu tu re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Business
                                                                                                         HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                            HERITAGE PARKWAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pa r k
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Regional
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Par k
                                                                           COUNTY   RD 25A
                                                                                                   S o u t h e r n G ateway                                                                             0      1/4      1/2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MILES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                      B u s i n e s s Pa r k
                                                                                                                                                                                              SOURCE: City of Woodland, 2017; Dyett & Bhatia, 2017
  This diagram provides a graphic representation of the key ideas embodied in the General Plan, including corridors,
  commercial and employment centers, new growth areas, traditional residential neighborhoods, and green spaces.
  All boundaries are approximate.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LU 2-3
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                    The Land Use, Community Design, and
                                    Historic Preservation Element is organized
                                    as follows:
                                    •	 Section 2.1: Introduction and Purpose. Introduces the
                                        topics covered in this Element and outlines the Element’s rela-
                                        tionship to State law and the Visioning Statement and Guiding
                                        Principles.
                                    •	 Section 2.2: Growth and Change. Presents the overall
                                        growth strategy for Woodland through 2035.
                                    •	 Section 2.3: Citywide Land Use and Community De-
                                        sign. Provides a Land Use Diagram, descriptions of each land
                                        use designation, identification of community design concepts,
    The land use framework balances     as well as goals, policies and standards that address the devel-
    accommodating growth with main-     opment and design.
    taining community character.
                                    •	 Section 2.4: Historic Preservation. Outlines goals and pol-
                                        icies related to the preservation, promotion, and enhancement
                                        of Woodland’s historic resources.
                                    •	 Section 2.5: Goals and Policies.
                                    For more information on existing land use conditions and back-
                                    ground data, refer to the Opportunities and Challenges, Issues and
                                    Options report released during the initial phase of the General Plan
                                    planning process.
                                    Relationship To State Law
                                    State law (Government Code Section 65302(a)) requires general
                                    plans to include a Land Use Element that contains the following
                                    key topics identified in Table 2-1 below. State law provides that
                                    the General Plan can address these topics in any format and is
                                    required to address them only to the extent that they are relevant
                                    in the Planning Area.
                                    While the inclusion of community design and historic preservation
                                    is not required in any of the seven mandated elements of a general
                                    plan, California Government Code Section 65303 indicates that
                                    a general plan may address any other subjects that a community
                                    considers important to the physical development of the city.
LU 2-4

   Table 2-1:	
                                  Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                     Land Use Topics Required by State Law
                                                                                                                 2
                                                      Addressed in this    Location if not addressed in this Ele-
  Required Topic
                                                      Element              ment
   Proposed general distribution, location,            Yes
   and extent of land uses
   Population density and building intensity by        Yes
   land use
   Areas subject to flooding                           No                   Addressed in the Safety Element
   Designated land use category for                    No                   A land use category for timberland
   timberland production                                                    production is not provided as the
                                                                            Planning Area has no timberland
                                                                            production areas.
   Consideration of the impact of new growth           No                   The impact of new growth on military
   on land adjacent to military facilities and                              readiness activities is not addressed
   underlying military airspace                                             because there are no military facilities
                                                                            in or adjacent to the Planning Area.
Relationship to Visioning Statement and Guiding
Principles
While the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preserva-
tion Element connects to many of the values expressed in the
Visioning Statement and Guiding Principles, it most closely reflects
the following excerpts from the Visioning Statement:
“In 2035 Woodland is a highly desirable community to live, learn, work
and recreate. It has maintained its small town feel while maturing into
an attractive, vibrant and sustainable city that celebrates its architectural
heritage and cultural diversity.Woodland is a healthy community with liv-
able neighborhoods, a thriving downtown, well maintained infrastructure,
excellent schools and recreational amenities connected by a seamless
network of trails and paths.”
“Woodland has become a destination for visitors seeking to experience
its unique agricultural, historical, recreational, cultural, and entertainment
amenities.”
While the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preserva-
tion Element’s broad scope relates to nearly all of the Guiding
Principles, this Element most directly supports the following:
                                                                                                                   LU 2-5

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                      •	 Quality and Character: Retain and enhance Woodland’s
                                         quality of life, its distinctive identity and small-town character-
                                         istics.
                                      •	 Orderly Development: Promote new growth while achiev-
                                         ing an orderly pattern of community development, consistent
                                         with economic, social, fiscal and environmental needs.
                                      •	 Historic Downtown: Strengthen the historic downtown dis-
                                         trict as the City’s center of shopping, dining, entertainment and
                                         employment.
                                      •	 Housing Choice: Provide a variety of housing types to meet
                                         the needs for all generations and income levels.
                                      •	 Agricultural Heritage: Preserve and protect prime agricul-
                                         tural lands and their uses within and surrounding the com-
                                         munity.
                                   2.2	 Growth and Change
                                   Much of Woodland, including existing residential neighborhoods, is
                                   not expected to change during the planning horizon of this Gener-
                                   al Plan. However, there are some areas where the city does expect
                                   to see change. These areas include Downtown, major corridors,
                                   the industrial area, and large areas of land designated for future
                                   growth. Many of the goals and policies in this element are focused
                                   on supporting growth in these areas.
                                   Opportunity Sites
                                   Figure 2-2 identifies development “opportunity sites” across the
                                   Planning Area that include vacant land, City owned property, unde-
                                   rutilized land (where the value of the improvements on the prop-
                                   erty is less than the value of the underlying land), and farmland.
                                   There is no guarantee that opportunity sites will develop or rede-
                                   velop within the planning period, nor is new development limited
                                   to these areas. Opportunity sites are merely those that analysis
                                   shows are most likely to change use and support new population
                                   or jobs.
LU 2-6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 2-2:	Opportunity Sites
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 2-2:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Opportunity Sites
                                                                                                                                             N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Opportunity Sites
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Planning Area Parcels
                                                                                                 I-5                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The Urban Limit Line protects                                        Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             agricultural lands surrounding the
                                                                                                                                                                                            N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Planning Area from urban develop-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ment.
                 W KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ramps
                                                                                                             COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Railroads
                                                                                                                                              EAST ST
                                                    W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City Limits
                       ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sphere of Influence
                                                                                          BEAMER ST                                                                                                          E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Urban Limit Line
                                                                CALIFORNIA ST                                                                                  LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Opportunity sites include vacant land,
                                                                                                                                     NORTH ST                                                                                                                                                                          City owned property, underutilized land
                                                                                                COURT ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (where the value of the improvements
                 W MAIN ST                                                                   MAIN ST                                                                                                             E MAIN ST                                                                                             on the property is less than the value
                                                                                          LINCOLN AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of the underlying land), and farmland.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       There is no guarantee that opportunity
                                    COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                          THIRD ST                                                                                                                                                                I -5                 sites will develop or redevelop within
                                                                                           CROSS ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the planning period, nor is new devel-
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FA R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       opment limited to these areas.
                                                                                                                                           EAST ST
                                                                                                           COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AV           AM                                                                Opportunity sites are merely those that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EG                         E
                                                                                                                                                         E GUM AVE                                                                                    AV                                                               analysis shows are most likely to change
                                                       CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       use and support new population or jobs.
                                                                                                                                                                       MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       This graphic also illustrates that there
                                                                                WEST ST                                                                                                                                   BRANIGAN AVE                                                                                 are large portions of the city that are
                                                                                              GIBSON RD                                                                                                                   E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       developed and are unlikely to change.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PIONEER AVE
                                                                                            EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                   HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                     113                                        MARSTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0            0.375          0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LU 2-7
 City of Woodland General Plan 2035
   This page intentionally left blank.
LU 2-8
Infill Development
                                             Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                                       2
The goals and policies of this General Plan promote infill develop-
ment and compact, sustainable growth. Compared to greenfield
                                                                                             The goals and policies of this
development, infill is generally perceived to be more difficult be-                          General Plan promote infill
cause of concerns raised by existing neighbors, concerns about                               development and compact,
compatibility with existing land uses, and regulations that may be                           sustainable growth.
more oriented to greenfield growth than infill situations. In some
instances, infill development may be hampered by the physical con-
dition and other infirmities of existing, often older, infrastructure.
This often means that infill growth is more expensive and less cer-
tain for the developer. Conversely however, infill growth typically
allows current land use patterns to become more efficient, pro-
vides for maximum use of existing infrastructure investments, and
is generally less expensive for ongoing public sector operations
and maintenance. Infill also generally brings in more tax revenue
for the City because the land is usually not subject to revenue
sharing with the County.
The Notice of Preparation and project description for the General
Plan was released in March 2013. The time frame and analysis for
the General Plan, Climate Action Plan, and Environmental Impact
Report is based on this initial starting date and projects forward
to 2035. Based on an analysis of existing conditions, demographic
and economic trends, and opportunity sites, Table 2-2 provides an
overview of new and overall development expected by 2035. The
General Plan assumes that approximately 7,000 new housing units
and up to 17.4 million non-residential square feet will be devel-
oped over the planning horizon. Additional detail on General Plan
land use designations and the distribution of assumed growth is
covered in Section 2.3 and Appendix B.
Table 2-2:	              Anticipated Growth through General Plan Horizon (2035)
                                                                                        New Development                Total
                                                                     Existing (2013)
                                                                                                  (2035)             (2035)
   Population                                                                    55,700          19,300             75,000
   Housing Units                                                                 20,000           7,000             27,000
   Non-Residential Square Footage                                           19,824,000       17,386,000         37,210,000
   Jobs                                                                          26,000          19,340             45,340
   Jobs/Housing Ratio                                                              1.30             2.76               1.68
Source: US Census Bureau; California Department of Finance; Dyett & Bhatia, 2016
                                                                                                                         LU 2-9
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                           Goals and policies in this section provide for strategic growth
                                           and change that preserves and enhances existing neighborhoods;
                                           prioritizes new growth in infill areas through the revitalization of
                                           Downtown, key corridors and employment centers; provides for
                                           orderly expansion to “greenfield” new growth areas; and maintains
                                           Woodland’s unique agricultural and historical heritage. The pro-
                                           posed changes focus on enhancing the quality of life for Woodland
                                           residents, workers and visitors through improved connectivity, in-
                                           creased access to amenities, and greater housing and employment
                                           choices.
     Compact neighborhoods provide residents with convenient access to nearby parks, services, and amenities.
LU 2-10

2.3	 Citywide Land Use
                               Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                       2
             & Community
             Design
Community Design Principles
Good community design is not only aesthetically pleasing, but func-
tional as well. Goals and policies in this General Plan respect the
desirable qualities of the city’s existing neighborhoods and historic
center, while promoting design coherence and strengthened com-
munity identity. Good design principles are important at multiple
levels, from citywide, to centers, corridors, neighborhoods, and in-
dividual projects. Community design policies at any scale should
create meaningful and vibrant places that are functional, promote
health and sustainability, respect people, and create a strong sense
of identity and place. Linear systems, such as highways, streets,
sidewalks, paths and greenbelts, must allow for efficient movement
while contributing to the aesthetic qualities that make an enjoyable
living environment.
Pattern and Scale of Development
A comparison of the block patterns and street network mobil-
ity between various Woodland neighborhoods is depicted in Fig-         Community design is important in
                                                                       creating a functional, vibrant city.
ure 2-3. Woodland’s newer residential neighborhoods east, south,
and west of Downtown generally reflect a different urban struc-
ture than the city’s historic core. Although they are connected
via arterial roads to the more regular, orthogonal grid of central
Woodland, these neighborhoods are characterized by curvilinear
streets, varying block sizes, and cul-de-sacs, which result in irregu-
lar parcel sizes and shapes.This suburban development pattern was
preferred in the latter half of the 20th century and utilizes a more
pronounced street hierarchy as its organizing principle. However,
it tends to create greater congestion as traffic is funneled from
non-continuous neighborhood streets onto collector and arterial
streets. A street grid, such as the pattern of Downtown streets,
allows a more balanced dispersion of traffic and improves walking
and biking convenience.
                                                                                                       LU 2-11

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
LU 2-12
Area 1:                                                                                            Area 2:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Area 3:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 2-3:	Neighborhood Form Analysis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
Early 20th Century-1960                                                                            1930-1975
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1990-2010
The rectangular north-south oriented street                                                        The rectangular north-south oriented street
grid is common in pedestrian-oriented main                                                                                                                                                                                                  A mix of regular and irregular street patterns
                                                                                                   grid built before 1975 contains the occa-
streets and neighborhoods built prior to the                                                                                                                                                                                                with long block lengths were common in
                                                                                                   sional cul-de-sac. This type of pattern is modi-
1950s with frequent use of alleys to access                                                                                                                                                                                                 auto-oriented, residential subdivisions in the
                                                                                                   fied by the addition of some auto-oriented,
garages and business service entries. This                                                                                                                                                                                                  1990s. The larger blocks are often later subdi-
                                                                                                   subdivided lots.
type of street and block pattern is often called                                                                                                                                                                                            vided into additional streets and lots accessed
‘traditional neighborhood development’.                                                                                                                                                                                                     by driveways.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Land Use
                                                                                                                                                                          NORTHWOOD DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HO
                                                                 BEAMER ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST                        DR   FA R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TT CI R                                             ME                WE
                                                                                                                                                                       SOUTHWOOD DR                                                                                           MERRI                                                              D     LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Low Density Residential                                                Office
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EA
                                                                                                                            WENDELL WAY              AMBORT WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Y                            M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WA
                                                                                                                                                                               MARSHALL AVE                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CTAV
                                                                                          3RD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                      LOCUST ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ATWELL CIR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Medium Density Residential                                             Public/Institional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E                          EA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AV
                                           ELM ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GU                           INS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COL L                        AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      High Density Residential                                               Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HAYS ST                                                                                                                                                               CL
                                           CLOVER ST
                                                                                                            CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MCKINLEY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ROSS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DR
       WALNUT ST
                                                                                 2ND ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Commercial                                                             Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EUNICE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O LVER A
                                                                                                                                                                                             WEST ST
                                                    COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                 RANCHO WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GARCIA DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CRANSTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CE DR
                                                                                                                                                                         WESTWAY DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     W
                                                                        1ST ST
                   ELLIOT ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            KE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                                                                                  CASA LINDA DR                                                                 OLIVER CT                          LUSK DR                                         ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CIR                    LOSOYA DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0                              1/4                                    1/2
                                                                                                                                    RANCHO WAY             MIDWAY DR
                                                                 NORTH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ANDERSON                                                                                         BARTH CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HUNTER LN
                                  ELM ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MILES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CAMPBELL CIR
                                       COURT ST                                                                                                                                       GIBSON ST                                                                                                                    BRANIGAN AVE
     Through Streets: 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                         Through Streets: 17                                                                                                                    Through Streets: 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1                             PIONEER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MAIN    ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A VE               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2                          GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       113
      Intersections: 32                                                                                   Intersections: 37                                                                                                                     Intersections: 45
Neighborhood walkability can be measured by the spacing of intersections which determine block                                                                                                                                                  Frequent intersections and driveways interrupt passing motor vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle
sizes. The most pedestrian-oriented blocks should be no longer than 600 feet on any side with shorter                                                                                                                                           movement, and limit the placement of street trees. Dead-end streets and cul-de-sacs create
lengths of 330 feet recommended for pedestrian and bicycle connectivity or bisecting blocks with                                                                                                                                                long blocks and force local circulation into collectors that intersect arterial streets.
pathways.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 2-13

 City of Woodland General Plan 2035
   This page intentionally left blank.
LU 2-14
                                Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
Travel Corridors and Streetscape Design
                                                                                                        2
                                                                           Refer to the Transportation and
Travel corridors include roadways, bicycle and pedestrian paths,           Circulation Element for addition-
and railways. These routes are not just modes of access, but an im-        al goals and policies regarding
portant way of experiencing the city. Cities are often defined and         the city’s roadway network and
remembered by the quality of their streets. The uses and struc-            accommodation of all modes of
tures located along the street, the height and scale of the buildings      transportation.
in relation to the street and sidewalk widths, the condition of the
public right-of-way, and the appearance and location of property
frontages impact the design quality and feel of a street. Elements
such as special paving materials, landscaping, bike lanes, pedestrian-
scaled lighting, and street-facing plazas, must be carefully orches-
trated to produce a successful and memorable streetscape. The
General Plan seeks to foster a variety of travel routes for pedestri-
ans, cyclists, drivers and transit riders that provide enjoyable ways
to experience Woodland, and that relate appropriately to the type
and scale of development along them. Figure 2-4 illustrates the
general hierarchy of key roadways in the city.
Gateways and Public Art
A critical part of establishing the identity of Woodland as a whole
will involve creating distinctive “gateways.” These are specially de-
signed landmark elements that are located at key entrances to the
city or districts within it. It is essential that gateway features are
unique in design, visible to both motorists and pedestrians, and       Streetscape design includes elements
emblematic of the city and/or district they introduce. At entrances    such as safe pedestrian/bicycle paths,
to the city from the freeway (shown in Figure 2-4), gateway fea-       lighting and landscaping.
tures should announce one’s arrival into Woodland and utilize well
designed signage to lead visitors Downtown or to businesses along
                                                                           Refer to the Healthy Community
the city’s key corridors.
                                                                           Element for additional informa-
                                                                           tion about the promotion of arts
Public art also plays an important role in relating the story and
                                                                           and culture in Woodland.
identity of the city, and in creating the opportunity for residents
and visitors to participate and share in its development. The realm
of public art is broad and can include sculptures, paintings, murals,
mosaics, and artful streetscape elements, such as benches, lighting,
and garbage bins.
                                                                                                         LU 2-15

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
LU 2-16
Figure 2-4:	Roadway Network
                                            Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                               Roadway Network
                                                                                                                                                                 Major Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                 Other Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                 Freeway
                                                                                                                           COUNTY RD 102
                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                 Highway Interchange
                                                                                                                                                                 Planning Area
              KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                             KENTUCKY AVE
                             WEST ST           EAST ST                  PIONEER AVE
               BEAMER ST                                                                        BEAMER ST
                MAIN   ST              Downtown                                                               MAIN   ST
                                                                                                                                           5
 PEDRICK RD
                                                                                          PIONEER AVE
              GIBSON RD                                                                                     GIBSON RD
                             WEST ST
                                                                                                                          COUNTY RD 102
                                                                    HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                               EAST ST
                                                             113
                                                                                         K LAND AVE
                                                                                        PA R
                                                                                                        HERITAGE PARKWAY
                                                                                                                                                      0        1/4      1/2               1
                                                                                                                                                                       MILES
                                                         COUNTY RD 25A
                                                                                                                                               SOURCE: City of Woodland, 2016; Dyett & Bhatia, 2016
      Refer to the Transportation and
      Circulation Element for the City-
      wide Circulation Diagram.
                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 2-17
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                       Land Use Diagram and Designations
                                       The Land Use Diagram illustrates the long-term vision of how and
                                       where the city will grow and change over the next 20 years to
                                       accommodate projected population and job growth. This section
                                       presents the Land Use Diagram as well as allowed uses, density
                                       and intensity standards, and urban form characteristics for each
                                       land use designation. The Land Use Diagram in Figure 2-5 illus-
                                       trates the land use framework of the General Plan, serving as a
                                       graphic representation of its goals and policies. It designates the
       Table 2-3 summarizes the land   general location, distribution, and extent of land uses.The legend of
       use designations and standards. the diagram includes the land use designations summarized in Table
                                       2-3 and described in the following subsections.
                                       More detailed descriptions of each land use designation can be
                                       found in the subsections that follow, grouped by the land catego-
                                       ries illustrated in the concept diagram (Figure 2-1). Descriptions
                                       of each land use designation include allowed uses, development
                                       standards and urban form characteristics.
                                       Allowed Uses
                                       The descriptions of each land use designation include the range
                                       of allowed uses. The uses listed are meant to be broad enough to
                                       give the city flexibility in implementing the General Plan, but clear
                                       enough to provide sufficient direction regarding the expected type
                                       of development. More detailed regulation regarding allowable uses
                                       and development standards is provided in the Zoning Ordinance.
                                       Development Standards
                                       Gross and Net Dwelling Unit Density - Residential Uses
                                       Density is the number of permanent residential dwelling units per
                                       acre of land. Gross density includes the total acreage of a site
                                       measured to the centerline of proposed bounding streets and to
                                       the edge of the right-of-way of existing or dedicated streets. Net
                                       density contains only the site or parcel area. For General Plan pur-
                                       poses, gross density is used in land use designations unless other-
                                       wise noted.
LU 2-18
                               Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) - Non-Residential Uses
                                                                                                  2
For non-residential uses, development intensity is controlled by a
Floor Area Ratio (FAR), which refers to the ratio between a build-      Floor Area Ratio (FAR) is a
ing’s total floor area and the total area of the site. For instance, as
                                                                        ratio between the total floor
illustrated in Figure 2-6, a one-story building occupying one half of
a parcel has an FAR of 0.5; a two-story building occupying a quar-      area of a building and the
ter of a parcel also has an FAR of 0.5.                                 total site area.
Floor Area Ratio Diagram
Urban Form Characteristics
The urban form characteristics that follow describe the physical
form envisioned for each land use designation. They are intend-
ed to provide a common understanding around what constitutes
good design and to consider the implications of individual project
design on the form and character of the community as a whole.
Unlike the development standards described above, the urban
form characteristics are intended as recommendations rather than
required standards. They include recommendations about a num-
ber of urban design considerations, including the relationship of
buildings to the street, the height of buildings relative to adjacent
neighborhoods, and the location and character of parking, bike, and
pedestrian facilities.
                                                                                                   LU 2-19

  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Table 2-3:	         Land Use Designations and Standards Summary Table
 Land Use Designation                                                                  Gross Density (du/ac)         FAR (Floor Area Ratio)
                                            Low Density                                             1.0 to 8.0                             N/A
                                            Residential (LD)
                                            Medium Density                                         8.1 to 19.9                             N/A
                                            Residential (MD)
                                            High Density                                         20.0 to 40.0                              N/A
                                            Residential (HD)
                                            Downtown Mixed                                          Unlimited           1.0 to 4.0 for all uses
                                            Use (DX) 1, 2                                                                           combined
                                            Corridor Mixed                                       20.0 to 40.0           0.25 to 2.0 for single
                                            Use (CX)2                       Lower densities may be allowed                                 use;
                                                                              where proposed development                 0.5 to 3.0 for mixed
                                                                               abuts low density residential                                use
                                                                                                development.
                                            Specific Plan (SP)3                                             8.0                             0.3
                                            Neighborhood                 Unlimited above the ground floor             0.15 to 0.5 for all uses
                                            Commercial (NC)                                                                         combined
Notes:
  1. The assumed maximum achievable density in the Downtown Mixed Use designation is 40 dwelling units per acre. Single use development
     will be allowed off of West Main Street.
  2. New development may be allowed to exceed FAR limits if it offers significant community benefit, such as the provision of publicly acces-
     sible open space, the restoration and/or adaptive reuse of a historic structure, or the promotion of transit accessibility.
  3. Density and intensity for the Specific Plan designation are both assumed averages across each individual Specific Plan area. SP-1C assumes
     a lower density of 3.0 dwelling units per acre and no non-residential development.
  LU 2-20
Land Use Designation
                        Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                        Gross Density (du/ac)
                                                                                         2
                                                                              FAR (Floor Area Ratio)
                     Community Commercial (CC)                          N/A               0.15 to 0.5
                     Regional Commercial (RC)                           N/A               0.15 to 0.7
                     Business Park (BP)                                 N/A              0.25 to 2.0
                     Industrial (IN)                                    N/A                Up to 0.8
                     Public/Quasi Public (PQ)                           N/A           No maximum,
                                                                               assumed average 0.25
                     Open Space (OS)                                    N/A                    None
                     Flood Study Area (FS)                              N/A                    None
                     Light Industrial Flex Overlay (IF)                 N/A     Determined by base
                                                                                         designation
                                                                                          LU 2-21
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
LU 2-22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 2-5:	Land Use Diagram
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 2-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Land Use Diagram
                                                                                                                                                    N EAST ST
                                              SP-3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Low Density Residential (LD)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Medium Density Residential (MD)
                                                                                                      I-5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    High Density Residential (HD)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Downtown Mixed Use (DX)
                                                         SP - 3B
                                                                                                                                                                                                               N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Corridor Mixed Use (CX)
                                                                                                    SP - 3A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
                 W KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E KENTUCKY AVE                                                                        Community Commercial (CC)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Regional Commercial (RC)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                    COLLEGE ST
                                                         W WOODLAND AVE                                                                             EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Business Park (BP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Industrial (IN)
                                                                                                     BEAMER ST                                                                                                                 E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Specific Plan (SP)
                       ASHLEY AVE
                                                                      CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Public/Quasi Public (PQ)
                                                                                                                                                                      LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                            NORTH ST                                                                                                                                                                                         Open Space (OS)
                                                                                                      COURT ST
                 W MAIN ST                                                                      MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Flood Study Area (FS)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E MAIN ST
                                                                                                  LINCOLN AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Light Industrial Overlay (IF)
                                                                                                                                 THIRD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Spring Lake Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I -5
                                                                                                CROSS ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     New Specific Plan Boundary
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FA R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E    NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AV           AM                                                       Transportation
                                         COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EG
                                                                                                                 COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                E GUM AVE                                                                                                 AV
                                                              CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Highways
                                                                                      WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                               MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                  EAST ST                                                                                      BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Principal Arterials
                                                                                                   GIBSON RD                                                                                                                                  E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PIONEER AVE
                                    EL DORADO DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Local Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Boundaries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FARMERS CENTRAL RD                                                                         City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sphere of Influence (SOI)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                 SP - 1C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SP-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                           SP - 1A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                   SP - 1B
                                                                                                            SP-1
                                                                                                                                                                             113                                               MARSTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0            0.375          0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Date: 03/20/2017
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 2-23
 City of Woodland General Plan 2035
   This page intentionally left blank.
LU 2-24
Residential Neighborhoods
                                                                Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                2
Woodland’s residential neighborhoods contain numerous assets, including
architectural variety in homes and buildings, mature trees and landscaping,
and historic character. The predominant architectural styles in Woodland’s
residential neighborhoods generally reflect the time period in which de-
velopment occurred. Residences in the city’s historic core represent an
eclectic mix of early- and mid-20th century styles ranging from Victorian
and Craftsman to Colonial Revival and Spanish Colonial. Neighborhoods
developed in the latter half of the century as subdivisions tend to reflect a
more uniform architectural style, with largely single-family ranch homes as
well as some larger lot, estate style homes on the west side of town.
Development in the Southeast Area Specific Plan, which has occurred
since 1990, features a more curvilinear street pattern with large, two-story
homes with prominent garage entrances on relatively small parcels. New
residential development within the Spring Lake Specific Plan neighborhood
also generally follows this development type with the added goal of emulat-
ing the best characteristics of older neighborhoods, including a traditional
street grid with smaller blocks, front porches, shallower front setbacks, his-
toric style lighting and monument features to create a sense of place.
The General Plan supports the preservation and enhancement of Wood-
land’s existing residential neighborhoods with goals and policies focused on
maintenance and supporting high-quality new development that is compat-
ible with each neighborhood’s existing development. Most new residential
development in existing neighborhoods is expected to occur in the Spring
Lake Specific Plan area.
Figure 2-6:	 Residential Neighborhoods
                                                                                                                                                              Residential Neighborhoods
                                     5
                KENTUCKY AVE                                                                            KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                            PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                         COUNTY RD 102
                                         EAST ST
PEDRICK RD                 WEST ST
             MAIN   ST                             MAIN    ST                                                                                     MAIN   ST
                                                                                                                                                         5
             GIBSON RD                                                                                   GIBSON RD
                                                                                          PIONEER AVE
                                                                      HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                     COUNTY RD 102
                                                                113
                                         EAST ST
                                                                                              HERITAGE PARKWAY
                                               COUNTY     RD 25A
                                                                                                                                                                 0   1/4    1/2       1
                                                                                                                                                                           MILES
                                                                                                                                                                                                LU 2-25
                                                                                                                                         SOURCE: City of Woodland, 2017; Dyett & Bhatia, 2017

  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Low Density Residential (LD)
The Low Density Residential designation primarily accommodates low density detached single-family residential
units on individual lots with private yards and private parking. Some attached housing types such as duplexes and
secondary units are also permitted.With conditional review, allow for the consideration of up to four (4) units on
a lot in appropriate locations, based on density, exemplary design, and site compatibility assessment (in no case to
exceed 8 dwelling units per acre).
Development Standards:
 •	 Density from 1.0 to 8.0 dwelling units per gross acre
Urban Form Characteristics                                      width to provide a comfortable pedestrian
 •	 Range of single-family housing types and designs            experience
 •	 Housing that is oriented toward the street               •	 Services, amenities and opportunities for
                                                                recreation located within walking distance of
 •	 Buildings with attractive architectural features such       neighborhood residents
    as front porches, articulated facades, dormers, trim
    and moldings, and high-quality building materials        •	 Require 360-degree architectural treatment, such
                                                                that all publicly visible sides of a structure receive
 •	 Street design that allows bicycles and motor                enhanced architectural treatment
    vehicles to share space on traffic-calmed streets
                                                             •	 Energy efficient and water efficient design,
 •	 Landscaped, pedestrian-oriented sidewalks with              including landscaping
    attractive lighting, large canopy trees, and sufficient
                                                             •	 Pitched and varied rooflines
  LU 2-26

                          Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                             2
Low Density Residential (LD)
                                             Large canopy trees
                                               that add to an
                                           attractive streetscape
     Prominent front
    entry with separate                                                       Garage entrances
           walk                                                              recessed from front
                                                                                  wall plane
                                       Architectural features
                                      add variety and reflect
                                      historic building forms
                                                                                              LU 2-27
  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Medium Density Residential (MD)
The Medium Density Residential designation accommodates a range of attached and detached housing types,
including small-lot subdivisons, duplexes, triplexes, zero-lot-line developments, townhouses, walk-up apartments
and condominiums with private open space, and multi-unit structures with common open space areas and ameni-
ties. In addition, medical and professional offices may be allowed with discretionary approval when found to be
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
Development Standards
 •	 Density from 8.1 to 19.9 dwelling units per gross acre
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Building mass broken into smaller units, possibly        •	 Easily identified and sheltered entrances to units
     including some one-story elements                       •	 Energy and water efficient design, including
 •	 Alleys or central parking courts that allow a more           landscaping
     continuous street frontage and uninterrupted            •	 Parking sited off the primary access street and
     sidewalks                                                   screened with landscaping
 •	 Landscaped, pedestrian-oriented sidewalks with           •	 Street design that allows bicycles and pedestrians
     attractive lighting and large canopy trees                  to share space on traffic-calmed streets
 •	 Services, transit, amenities and opportunities for       •	 Attractive landscaping, including larger trees
     recreation located within walking distance of
     neighborhood residents                                  •	 Range of housing types and designs
 •	 Sufficient outdoor privacy for each unit (i.e., patios   •	 Pitched and varied rooflines
     and decks)                                              •	 Recreation areas for children
 •	 Functional and accessible interior site open space       •	 Require 360-degree architectural treatment, such
     that may include a community garden                         that all publicly visible sides of a structure receive
                                                                 enhanced architectural treatment
  LU 2-28

                        Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                          2
Medium Density Residential (MD)
  Roof and wall
   articulation
     breaks up                                                        Range of
 building massing                                                  housing types
                                                                    and densities
                                                                                  Second dwelling
                                                                                     units are
                                                                                  accommodated
                         Pedestrian
                           friendly
                          sidewalks                       Building
                                                         entrances
                                                      oriented toward
                                                          the street
                                                                                           LU 2-29
  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
High Density Residential (HD)
The High Density Residential designation accommodates a broad range of attached housing types, including tri-
plexes, fourplexes, row houses, and stacked flats (apartments or condominiums). Units can be contained in single
structures or in a collection of cohesive structures with common open spaces and amenities. The higher density
range (25.0 to 40.0 dwelling units per acre) provides for multi-story structures with centrally located parking in
order to provide urban intensity at locations within easy walking distance to transit, recreation, and community
facilities. In addition, ancillary commercial uses as well as medical and professional offices may be allowed with
discretionary approval when found to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
Development Standards
 •	 Density from 20.0 to 40.0 dwelling units per gross acre
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Sites that are open to the street instead of fenced       •	 Main entrances that are distinctive and oriented to
     or walled off with solid barriers                           the street
 •	 Street design that allows bicycles and pedestrians        •	 Attractive landscaping, including larger trees
     to share space on traffic-calmed streets                 •	 Energy and water-efficient design, including
 •	 Landscaped, pedestrian-oriented sidewalks with               landscaping
     attractive lighting and large canopy trees               •	 Parking sited off the primary access street and
 •	 Services, transit, amenities and opportunities for           screened with landscaping
     recreation located within walking distance of            •	 Recreation areas for children
     neighborhood residents
                                                              •	 Covered parking with solar encouraged
 •	 Range of apartments, condominiums and urban
     housing types and designs                                •	 Pedestrian and bicycle connectivity to and within
                                                                 the project site
 •	 Massing of large buildings broken up with
     articulated facades and varied rooflines, materials,     •	 Require 360-degree architectural treatment, such
     and color                                                   that all publicly visible sides of a structure receive
                                                                 enhanced architectural treatment
 •	 Functional and accessible interior site open space
     that may include a community garden                      •	 Pitched and varied rooflines
  LU 2-30

                                 Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                        2
High Density Residential (HD)
                                                                          Attractively
                                                                           designed
                                                                           common
                                                                          open space
                                                                                        Parking
                                                                                       located to
        Entryways
                                                                                       the rear of
        oriented to
                                                                                        building
           street
                     Building bulk
                    and mass broken
                    up by articulated
                    facades and roof
                          lines                    Prominent                            Buffer to less
                                                     entry                            intense land uses
                                                                                                        LU 2-31
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
LU 2-32
Downtown
                                                                      Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
Downtown serves as the civic, cultural, and entertainment center                                                                                                                                    Refer to Section 2.4 for ad-
of the city. The General Plan provides for the continued rejuvena-                                                                                                                                  ditional information, goals and
tion of Downtown Woodland as a vibrant mixed-use district that                                                                                                                                      policies about historic preserva-
encourages continued rehabilitation of historic buildings that will                                                                                                                                 tion in Woodland.
help ensure that Downtown retains its unique character.
Figure 2-7:	Downtown
                                                                                                                                                                       Downtown
                                           5
                 KENTUCKY AVE                                                                     KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                    PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                             COUNTY RD 102
                                                EAST ST
 PEDRICK RD                      WEST ST
              MAIN   ST                                        MAIN   ST                                                                        MAIN   ST
                                                                                                                                                            5
                     GIBSON RD                                                                                  GIBSON RD
                                                                                                  PIONEER AVE
                                                                            HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                            COUNTY RD 102
                                                                      113
                                               EAST ST
                                                                                                      HERITAGE PARKWAY
                                                          COUNTY RD 25A
                                                                                                                                                                   0   1/4    1/2       1
                                                                                                                                                                             MILES
                                                                                                                                             SOURCE: City of Woodland, 2017; Dyett & Bhatia, 2017
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 2-33
  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Downtown Mixed Use (DX)
The Downtown Mixed Use designation applies to Woodland’s historic downtown core and is established to cre-
ate a vibrant city center with a diverse mix of offices, housing, theaters, retail stores, professional services, and
restaurants that serve residents, employees, and night-time entertainment populations. Both vertical and horizon-
tal mixed-use is allowed, though vertical mixed-use is strongly encouraged on Main Street. Technology uses, arts
and crafts studio spaces, and live/work units are encouraged to be integrated as part of this dynamic mixed-use
district.
Development Standards
 •	 Allowable FAR ranges from 1.0 to 4.0 (combined residential and non-residential uses)
 •	 Unlimited residential density; residential uses must be within the defined FAR
 •	 New development may be allowed to exceed FAR limits if it offers significant community benefit, such as the
    provision of publicly accessible open space, the restoration and/or adaptive reuse of a historic structure, or
    the promotion of alternative modes of transportation
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Consistent setbacks along Main Street that create          shared public facilities or structured parking that
    a unified street wall; no front setbacks where             does not front onto Main Street; limited driveways
    possible; unless used for outdoor dining or a              on Main Street
    similar public purpose, contributing positively to
    the street life                                         •	 Street design balancing pedestrian and bicycle use
 •	 Building entrances oriented toward the street              with vehicular circulation
 •	 Building storefronts along Main Street and              •	 Consistent planting of street trees to provide
    intersecting streets with a high degree of                 shade and enhance character and identity, with
    transparency                                               type and size of trees to be determined by the
                                                               type and character of the street
 •	 New development between two and six stories -
    no new one-story buildings                              •	 Broad sidewalks appointed with pedestrian
                                                               amenities, including attractive lighting and street
 •	 Signature design qualities and attractive                  furniture
    architectural features, including simple facades with
    good detailing, recessed entryways, and compatible      •	 Well-designed, publicly-accessible open space
    awnings, canopies, and cornices                         •	 Alleyways that accommodate pedestrian access
 •	 Higher intensity development designed with                 and unique outdoor spaces
    sensitivity to adjacent lower-intensity residential     •	 Paseos and the creation of courtyards and
    development                                                intimate gathering spaces between buildings that
                                                               provide a pleasing space to shop, dine and explore
 •	 Parking located to the side, or rear of buildings or
    underground whenever possible; preference for
  LU 2-34

                                             Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                                          2
 Downtown Mixed Use (DX)
                                                                Corner accent
                                                                  treatments
              New development
              between two to six           Good facades can                    Vertical mixed use
                    stories                  be simple and                     creates a variety of
                                                                                                         Stepback upper floors
                                           attractive with an                 uses and spaces, and
      Signature                                                                                          to reduce visual scale
                                          active ground level                   increases activity
    architectural                                                                                                of facade
       features
                                                                                                              Adaptive reuse of
                                                                                                               historic structure
                                                                                                              Use of rear areas to create
                                                                                                                     patios, access
    Consistent setbacks
create a unified streetwall;
 sidwalk retail continuity
                          Bulbouts, street trees,
                         and stylized crosswalks
                            create a pedestrian           Ground floor
                           friendly streetscape        transparency creates
                                                      an engaging pedestrian                                 Activated inviting
                                                           environment         Paseo creates an intimate
                                                                                    gathering space       streetfront with patios
                                                                                                          and courtyards spaces
                                                                                                                          LU 2-35
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                        Mixed-Use Corridors
                                        The General Plan envisions Woodland’s key corridors as lively and
                                        welcoming multi-functional streets that are destinations in and of
                                        themselves and prime opportunities for mixed use infill develop-
                                        ment and streetscape improvements. Overall, the intent is to pro-
      Refer to the Transportation and
                                        mote corridor revitalization, but at lower intensities than in the
      Circulation Element for more
                                        Downtown core. Each of the corridors will tie together areas of
      information, goals and policies
                                        disparate character into visually cohesive, bicycle- and pedestrian-
      related to Complete Streets.
                                        friendly “Complete Streets” with a stronger sense of place. Where
                                        appropriate, opportunities for adaptive reuse will be encouraged,
                                        particularly on East Street. In addition, each will strengthen adja-
                                        cent neighborhoods by offering easily accessible services, ameni-
                                        ties, and entertainment options to nearby residents.
                                        As shown in Figure 2-8, Woodland’s key corridors include Main
                                        Street, East Street, Kentucky Avenue and County Road 102:
                                                     •	 West Main Street. West of Downtown, Main Street is prin-
                                                        cipally a commercial corridor consisting of single-story, stand-
                                                        alone buildings and strip mall structures with large, street-
                                                        fronting surface parking lots. Streetscape improvements to
                                                        enhance bicycle and pedestrian mobility between CR 98 and
                                        Figure 2-8:	Mixed Use Corridors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mixed Use Corridor
                                                                                5
                                                                               KENTUCKY AVE                                                 KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                              PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                   COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                              EAST ST
                                        PEDRICK RD                   WEST ST
                                                      MAIN   ST                                          MAIN   ST                                                                           MAIN       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                             GIBSON RD                                                                                     GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                             PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                    COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                      HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                113
                                                                                              EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                     HERITAGE PARKWAY
                                                                                                    COUNTY RD 25A
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0    1/4    1/2    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MILES
                                                                                                                                                                                    SOURCE: City of Woodland, 2017; Dyett & Bhatia, 2017
LU 2-36

                                Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
   West Street are planned for 2018. The General Plan reimag-
   ines West Main Street as a mixed-use corridor containing sig-
                                                                                              2
   nificant residential infill and neighborhood-serving retail. High-
   er-density and intensity development is encouraged to give the
   corridor a more urban character. Corresponding zoning will
   be performance- and/or form-based in order to promote flex-
   ibility, avoid incompatibility issues, and improve urban design.
•	 East Street. The East Street Corridor is highly auto-oriented
   with a mix of uses that include grain silos, the Yolo County
   Fairgrounds, and the County Fair Mall. Recent studies have ex-
   plored the feasibility of relocating the active railroad tracks
   that line the west side of the corridor, moving them east of
   city limits. The intent of the General Plan is to promote corri-
   dor revitalization along the East Street corridor. Performance-
   and/or form-based zoning regulations will increase flexibility
   and improve urban design. Residential mixed-use projects are
   encouraged. Neighborhood revitalization is the focus along
   North East Street, along with addressing the transition zone
   to the industrial area. South East Street presents the poten-
   tial for multi-story, mixed-use development and new economic
   opportunity for the County Fair Mall. If the rail relocation ef-
   fort is ultimately successful, development potential along East
   Street could be even greater, and enhanced by the possibility
   for a rails-to-trails path along the existing rail right-of-way.
•	 Kentucky Avenue. Kentucky Avenue serves as a main truck
   route through town with a mix of mostly service and indus-
   trial uses. The Kentucky Avenue Complete Streets Widening
   and Reconstruction Project has provided the corridor with
   numerous streetscape improvements between College Street
   and East Street, including bicycle lanes, landscape-separated
   sidewalks, and landscaped medians. The General Plan envi-
   sions the western portion of Kentucky Avenue from CR 98 to
   East Street to continue to function as an agriculture-industrial
   corridor while sensitively integrating newer, higher-intensity
   mixed-use development that activates sections of the corridor.
•	 County Road 102. County Road 102 is an important north-
   south corridor that provides access to Davis to the south and
   unincorporated Yolo County to the north. Just south of I-5,
   the corridor is anchored by a large, regional commercial cen-
   ter. South of the shopping center, CR 102 is largely lined with
   residential development on the west side of the street, while
   it is generally vacant on the east side. The General Plan sup-
   ports growth of this corridor to include a mix of uses including
   retail, medical services, offices, business park development and
   housing.
                                                                                              LU 2-37

  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Corridor Mixed Use (CX)
The Corridor Mixed Use designation allows for both vertical and horizontal mixed use. Ground floor retail and
service uses may be required in certain locations. Corresponding zoning will be performance- and/or form-based
in order to promote flexibility and minimize non-conformance issues of existing uses.
West Main Street and East Street
Residential, retail, commercial service, office, and light industrial (East Street only) uses are all permitted in a hori-
zontal or vertical mixed-use setting.
Kentucky Avenue
Between Cottonwood Street and the west railroad boundary, a range of uses are allowed, including commercial
service, light industrial, and agricultural industrial. New residential mixed use development on the north side of
the corridor will be considered only in the context of a new Specific Plan for the SP-3 area.
Development Standards
 •	 Allowable FAR is 0.25 to 2.0 for single-use developments and 0.5 to 3.0 for mixed-use developments
    (combined residential and non-residential uses)
 •	 Residential density ranges from 20.0 to 40.0 dwelling units per gross acre. Lower densities may be allowed
    where proposed development abuts low density residential development.
 •	 New development may be allowed to exceed FAR limits if it offers significant community benefit, such as the
    provision of publicly accessible open space, or the promotion of transit accessibility
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Building entrances oriented toward the street               •	 Parking located to the side and rear of buildings
 •	 Signature design qualities and attractive                      whenever possible
    architectural features, including articulated facades,      •	 Street design balancing pedestrian and bicycle use
    projections, and recessed entryways                            with vehicular circulation
 •	 Adaptive reuse along East Street where existing             •	 Consistent planting of street trees to provide
    buildings have desirable characteristics                       shade and enhance character and identity
 •	 Higher intensity development designed with                  •	 Well-designed, publicly-accessible open space
    sensitivity to adjacent lower-intensity residential
    development
  LU 2-38

                                Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                            2
Corridor Mixed Use (CX)
           Adaptive reuse of
           existing buildings                                               Awnings and street
             with desirable              Courtyard areas                 trees create an inviting
                 features                                               pedestrian environment
                            Complete Street
                               Design
                                             Recesses add
                                             architectural   A wide variety of
                                                            building forms and                  Parking
                                                interest
                                                             uses create visual             located to the
                                                           interest and increased           side or rear of
                                                                   activity                    building
                                                                                                            LU 2-39
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
LU 2-40
Centers
                                                                               Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
The City of Woodland has a number of distinct centers that are
hubs of activity, commerce, and employment. The General Plan
provides for the intensification, reuse and revitalization of Wood-
land’s centers in a way that enhances the city’s vitality and comple-
ments adjacent neighborhoods.
             •	 Commercial Centers. The General Plan envisions the city’s
                neighborhood, community, and regional commercial centers to
                be attractive activity hubs that meet the needs of local resi-
                dents while drawing and benefiting from the spending power
                of regional visitors and workers.
             •	 Employment Centers. Key employment centers in Wood-
                land include the industrial area, future master-planned business
                parks, hospitals, public facilities and institutions, and govern-
                ment clusters. Goals and policies in the General Plan support
                a range of business opportunities while encouraging the city’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                          The General Plan supports a range of
                established and emerging industries.                                                                                                                                                      business opportunities.
Figure 2-9:	Commercial and Employment Centers
                                                                                                                                                                            Commercial Center
                                                                                                                                                                            Employment Center
                                       5
                                      KENTUCKY AVE                                                          KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                    I ndustrial
                                                                                                        Area
                                                                                              PIONEER AVE
                                                      EAST ST
                                                                                                                                   COUNTY RD 102
PEDRICK RD                  WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                       E as t Main Stre et
                                                                                                                                                                       Regional Ce nter
               MAIN   ST                                          MAIN   ST                                                                            MAIN   ST
                                                                                                                                                                   5
             GIBSON RD                                                                                                    GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                               Future
                                                                                                                                                              B us ines s
                                                                                                                                                                 Par k
                                                                                                            PIONEER AVE
                                                                                    HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                 COUNTY RD 102
                                                                              113
                                                     EAST ST
                                                                                                                  HERITAGE PARKWAY
                         S outhern G ateway
                            Business Park
                                                               COUNTY RD 25A
                                                                                                                                                                            0   1/4    1/2       1
                                                                                                                                                                                      MILES
                                                                                                                                                   SOURCE: City of Woodland, 2017; Dyett & Bhatia, 2017
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 2-41

  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
The Neighborhood Commercial designation provides for smaller-scale retail, office and service-oriented busi-
nesses to primarily meet the needs of local neighborhoods. Entertainment uses are not permitted so as to not
compete with the Downtown core. Smaller scale specialty grocery stores bring fresh food options to the neigh-
borhood within easy walking or biking distance for residents. These grocery stores are encouraged as anchor
uses, accompanied by smaller stores, such as coffee shops, banks, restaurants, and professional offices.
Development Standards
 •	 Unlimited residential density above the ground floor
 •	 FAR from 0.15 to 0.50 for all uses combined
 •	 Maximum 60,000 square foot floorplate for any single user
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Compatible with surrounding development in             •	 Attractive landscaping and streetscape elements
    terms of scale, building design, materials and colors     that enhance neighborhood center character and
 •	 Building entrances oriented toward the primary            identity
    street and/or well-designed walkways connecting        •	 Outdoor patios/plazas as focal gathering point
    to adjacent sidewalks and parking areas                •	 Shaded walkways and parking areas
 •	 Parking located to the side or rear of buildings       •	 Drive-through windows/establishments are not
    whenever possible
                                                              allowed
 •	 Convenient and attractive pedestrian and bicycle
    connections from adjoining neighborhoods and
    transit
  LU 2-42

                        Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                              2
Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
                                              Adjacent to
                                              residential
                                                             Ample landscaping
                                                              creates a buffer to
                                                            adjacent development
                                                                                  Parking located
                                                                                     in the rear
                                                                                   Building scale that
       Safe, convenient
                                                                                    is proportional to
         connections
                                                                                  nearby development
           to nearby
        neighborhoods
                             Pedestrian plaza
                               with seating
                                                                                              LU 2-43
  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Community Commercial (CC)
The Community Commercial designation provides for commercial development that serves local neighborhoods
as well as a broader area of the community than the Neighborhood Commercial designation, but does not regu-
larly attract regional, visitor, or pass-through traffic. Allowable uses include retail, services, grocery stores, restau-
rants, professional offices, and similar commercial uses. Hotels are also permitted. Entertainment uses and spe-
cialty retail are not permitted so as to not compete with these types of commercial uses in the Downtown core.
Development Standards
 •	 FAR from 0.15 to 0.50
 •	 Maximum 60,000 square foot floorplate for any single user
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Large buildings “broken up” by variations in                •	 Attractive landscaping in and around parking areas
     building form and architectural design                        that provides shade and enhances community
 •	 Exterior lighting that is architecturally integrated           center character and identity
     with building style, material and colors                   •	 Outdoor patios/plazas as focal gathering point
 •	 Building signage that is integrated into the                •	 Shaded walkways and parking areas
     architectural design of each commercial                    •	 Drive-through windows/establishments strongly
     establishment
                                                                   discouraged and prohibited within a 1/2 mile of a
 •	 Convenient pedestrian connections from adjoining               school
     neighborhoods and transit
  LU 2-44

                              Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                   2
Community Commercial (CC)
                                              Convenient pedestrian
                                              connections to nearby
                                                 neighborhoods               Ample landscaping
                                                                              creates a buffer to
                                                                            adjacent development
                                                                                           Attractive
                                                                                         landscaping in
             Architecturally                                                              parking areas
           significant features
                                               Plaza
                                                                                                    LU 2-45
  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Regional Commercial (RC)
The Regional Commercial designation is intended to accommodate retail establishments that serve residents and
visitors of the region at large. Shopping malls and large format “big-box” retail are allowed, as are supporting uses
such as gas stations and hotels.1 Up to 10 percent of the total square footage of a regional commercial center
may consist of ancillary office spaces that support commercial uses and/or stand-alone, professional office build-
ings. The typical service area for goods and services would be regional in scope, serving 250,000 people or more
with larger-format anchor stores (60,000 to 100,000+ square feet) that create higher shopping expenditures and
possibly lower frequency of shopping trips. Expansion of complementary clusters of larger-format or unique re-
tail, healthcare, commercial, recreational and possibly institutional uses that reinforce and support each other is
encouraged. Entertainment uses are not permitted so as to not compete with these types of commercial uses in
the Downtown core.
Development Standards
 •	 FAR from 0.15 to 0.7
 •	 FAR bonuses for upper-story office, lodging, and service uses; upper-story office uses would be exempt from
      the 10 percent office maximum
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Architectural features in keeping with the overall                               •	 Exterior lighting that is architecturally integrated
      urban design of the center                                                          with building style, material and colors
 •	 Internal walkability with pleasant, shaded pathways                              •	 Attractive landscaping with shade trees to provide
 •	 Pedestrian and bicycle connections to adjacent                                        substantial tree canopy in and around parking
      neighborhoods where feasible                                                        areas that enhance regional center character and
                                                                                          identity
 •	 Distinctive gateway or entry features that enhance
      the quality and character of Woodland                                          •	 Plaza and outdoor patio areas with public art that
                                                                                          create a focal point
 •	 Building signage that is integrated into the
      architectural design of each commercial                                        •	 Multiple-story intensity of office uses
      establishment
1	 A “big-box” store is a physically large retail establishment that is typically part of a chain, typically larger than 60,000 square feet and commonly greater
    than 100,000 square feet.
  LU 2-46

                            Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                             2
Regional Commercial (RC)
                                  Comfortable bike/
                                pedestrian connections
                                                                                      Architectural detail
                                                                                     creates an attractive
                                                                                            setting
                                                                                          Buildings located
                                                                                           at the street edge
      Ample,
     attractive
   landscaping
                Plaza/focal
                   point
                                  Transit stop
                                                                                              LU 2-47
   City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Business Park (BP)
The Business Park designation accommodates master-planned office parks that may include a mix of research and
development, green technology uses, and light manufacturing related to research and development. Other uses
allowed in this designation include professional offices, hotels, and up to 25 percent general commercial uses that
cater to industrial and office uses. High-density housing ancillary to the business park is also allowed at a minimum
density of 25 dwelling units per acre.
Development Standards
 •	 FAR from 0.25 to 2.0
 •	 High-density housing must be at a density of 25 to 45 dwelling units per acre
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Compact development pattern with buildings sited         •	 Well-integrated landscaping and streetscape
     at or near front lot lines along primary streets            elements that enhance business park character
 •	 Building entrances oriented toward primary street            and identity
     with monumental features                                •	 Green building and site design features
 •	 Attractive and visually unified architectural            •	 Sustainable stormwater management facilities,
     features, including facade and roof articulation,           including bioswales, rain gardens and permeable
     projections, recesses, and a variety of surface             paving
     textures
                                                             •	 Parking located to the side or rear of the
 •	 Convenient and attractive pedestrian and bicycle             building whenever possible, and appropriately
     connections from adjoining greenbelts, trails,
                                                                 shaded utilizing trees, solar cover structures, or a
     neighborhoods, services, and transit
                                                                 combination of the two
 •	 Transit stop within the business park where
     appropriate
   LU 2-48

                                    Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                             2
Business Park (BP)
                                                                      Compact
                                                                development pattern
                                                               with buildings located             Shaded parking lots
                                                                along primary streets
                                                                 and parking behind
Multiple buildings and
  landscaping create a
 “campus-like” setting
     Attractive
    landscaped
      setbacks
                 Prominent entrance
                   oriented toward
                    primary street
                                          Convenient bike,
                                           pedestrian, and
                                            transit access        Green Street - Class 1 bicycle path,
                                                                     well shaded Complete Street
                                                                                                             LU 2-49

  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Industrial (IN)
The Industrial designation allows manufacturing, processing, refining, and similar activities including those with
outdoor facilities. It also provides for warehousing/distribution and logistics uses with supporting commercial
services and office space. Some ancillary retail and dining that supports businesses and workers is also permitted.
Development Standards
 •	 Maximum allowable FAR is 0.8
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Attractive architectural features, including building         to easily enter and maneuver within individual
    wall and roof articulation, projections, recesses,            properties
    and variety of surface colors and/or textures            •	 Screening of outdoor storage areas and truck bays,
 •	 Landscaping that buffers parking areas and adjacent         through building placement, fencing, or permanent
    sensitive uses                                              landscape features
 •	 Industrial park signage and/or monuments that            •	 Appropriate performance standards that minimize
    establish a visually-unified identity for the industrial    impacts to adjacent uses from dust, noise,
    area                                                        vibration, and heavy truck traffic
 •	 Rooftop equipment screened from view toward              •	 Parking located to the side or rear of the
    public right-of-way                                         building whenever possible, and appropriately
 •	 Ample circulation space to permit large trucks              shaded utilizing trees, solar cover structures, or a
                                                                combination of the two
  LU 2-50

                        Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                         2
Industrial (IN)
        Most active                                                          Ample space for
         building                                                           truck movements
    operations located                                                         and landing
    at interior or rear
        of the site
       Attractive
    building design
    for facades that
    are visible from                 Majority of
    the main street                   parking to
                                    back or side of     Significant
                                      buildings        landscaping
                                                          buffer
                                                                                          LU 2-51
  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Light Industrial Flex Overlay (IF)
This overlay designation is applied to areas where light industrial or service commercial uses are also appropri-
ate or desired. The type and character of overlay uses will vary depending on the base designation, as described
below. Such uses include auto sales and repair, storage facilities, equipment rental, wholesale businesses, nurseries,
contractors’ facilities, and retail not typically located in shopping centers. Ancillary office spaces that support such
commercial uses are also permitted. Heavy industrial uses are not appropriate.
Base Designation
  Corridor Mixed          The Light Industrial Flex Overlay applied over the Corridor Mixed Use base designation serves as a
  Use                     transition between industrial and residential mixed-use areas. Smaller-scale custom, light industrial
                          and creative manufacturing uses that contribute to the vitality and creative identity of the corridor
                          will be encouraged.
  Regional                The Light Industrial Flex Overlay provides for a transition from industrial to retail for the area
  Commercial              south of East Main Street and north of Interstate 5 (I-5). In addition to uses permitted by the
                          base Regional Commercial designation, custom to light industrial uses, new auto and RV sales and
                          service, limited contractor facilities, and other retail not typically found in retail centers will also be
                          considered.
  Industrial              The goal of applying the Light Industrial Flex Overlay over an Industrial base designation is to
                          minimize conflicts that potentially would have occurred with heavier industrial uses located adjacent
                          to other sensitive uses. When applied over the Industrial base designation, the Light Industrial Flex
                          Overlay provides for a mix of general, light, to custom industrial and manufacturing uses, including
                          multi-tenant spaces with offices, contractor storage, agricultural processing, food producers,
                          industrial technology, and other sensitive processing uses that require controlled performance
                          standards. The larger, heavier uses that may create odors, particulates, dust, vibration,etc. are
                          restricted. Outdoor storage will be screened or covered as appropriate.
Development Standards
 •	 Allowable FAR is specified by the base designation
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Building design will vary; general urban form                      •	 Areas with a Corridor Mixed Use or Regional
    characteristics should follow those of the base                       Commercial base designation will have performance
    designation                                                           standards and design criteria that ensures
 •	 Context sensitive design of industrial and                            development in the overlay is attractive and visually
    commercial uses, including screening, buffer                          complementary to adjacent development
    landscaping, and upper story setbacks, when located                •	 Areas with an Industrial base designation will benefit
    adjacent to lower intensity and residential uses                      from a higher level of design than industrial areas
 •	 Streetscape design which promotes an attractive                       without this overlay; where the existing development
    and uncluttered street appearance with appropriate                    does not comply with new design criteria, the City
    fencing, landscaping, and screening                                   will strive to ensure that new standards are applied
                                                                          incrementally over time to foster the desired visual
  LU 2-52                                                                 transition

                                       Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                           2
Public/Quasi Public (PQ)
The Public/Quasi Public designation provides for public and quasi-public facilities such as colleges, schools, hos-
pitals, penal institutions, libraries, museums, government offices and courts, places of worship, meeting halls, cem-
eteries and mausoleums, and similar uses. It also includes public facilities such as fire and police stations, recycling
centers, and wastewater treatment.
Development Standards
 •	 No maximum FAR, assumed average of 0.25
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Building design will vary substantially with use;        •	 Screening of any storage and equipment as
    as appropriate, incorporation of attractive                  necessary from the public view
    architectural features, including articulation,
    projections, recesses, and variety of surface
    textures
                                                                                                            LU 2-53

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   New Growth Areas (Planned
                                   Development)
                                   A significant portion of new residential development in Woodland
                                   will occur in new growth areas designated as “Specific Plan.” Ad-
                                   dressed in Government Code Section 65450, a specific plan is a
                                   comprehensive planning and zoning document for a defined geo-
                                   graphic region of a city. It implements the General Plan by provid-
                                   ing a special set of development policies and standards that are
                                   applied to the specific plan area, and by specifying zoning, needed
                                   infrastructure, and an infrastructure financing plan to facilitate im-
                                   plementation. This General Plan requires that major new residen-
                                   tial development on “greenfield” or previously undeveloped land
                                   will be planned through the Specific Plan process. As shown in
                                   Figure 2-11, Woodland has designated three areas within the ULL
                                   for future Specific Plan development: SP-1 in the south, SP-2 in the
                                   east, and SP-3 in the north.
                                   Each Specific Plan will create neighborhoods that include a mix
                                   of housing types and sizes integrated with community facilities
                                   and resources, such as parks, schools, child care facilities, grocery
                                   stores and other neighborhood commercial uses. Employment
                                   uses will be incorporated in order to maintain a good balance of
                                   jobs and housing that supports a reduction in vehicle miles trav-
                                   elled (VMT). In addition, they should be planned in a manner that
                                   supports walking, bicycling, and the use of transit as alternative
                                   modes of transportation that reduce greenhouse emissions and
                                   promote healthy, active lifestyles.
LU 2-54

Figure 2-10:	 New Growth Areas
                                                                                Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                New Growth Area
                                         5
                 SP-3B
                                        SP-3A
                                        KENTUCKY AVE                                                        KENTUCKY AVE
                                                       EAST ST                                PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                        COUNTY RD 102
PEDRICK RD                    WEST ST
                 MAIN    ST                                         MAIN   ST                                                                              MAIN   ST
                                                                                                                                                                       5
                 GIBSON RD                                                                                                GIBSON RD                                                    SP-2
                                                                                                            PIONEER AVE
                                                       EAST ST
                                                                                      HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                      COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                113
                                                  SP-1C
                                                                                                                   HERITAGE PARKWAY
                                                                  SP-1B
                                                                            SP-1A
                                                                 COUNTY RD 25A
                                                                                                                                                                                0    1/4   1/2       1
                                                                                                                                                                                           MILES
                                                                                                                                                        SOURCE: City of Woodland, 2017; Dyett & Bhatia, 2017
             •	 SP-1(South Growth Area): SP-1 is located in the south-
                ern portion of the Planning Area, generally south of CR 24A
                and west of CR 101. It includes the area referred to in older
                planning documents as the Spring Lake Master Plan Remainder
                Area. Its location offers the opportunity for good connectiv-
                ity with the Spring Lake neighborhood and benefits from ex-
                isting roadway, drainage, water and sewer infrastructure that
                was sized to accommodate development in this area. SP-1 is
                separated into three sub-areas. SP-1A encompasses 347 acres
                and is located on the eastern portion of the Specific Plan area
                between State Route 113 and Spring Lake. SP-1B is located
                between East Street and State Route 113, covering 248 acres.
                SP-1C is the smallest of the three at 151 acres and is located
                west of East Street.
              The General Plan envisions SP-1A to develop as a mixed-use
              neighborhood anchored by a research and technology busi-
              ness park in the “Southern Gateway” located at CR 25 and SR
              113. The highest intensity of development will occur within the
              business park area, providing a prime opportunity for job cre-
              ation within Woodland. The remainder of SP-1A will be largely
                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 2-55

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                      residential with some open space and recreation areas. The
                                      Southern Gateway portion of SP-1B is also expected to de-
                                      velop to complement the business park and commercial devel-
                                      opment in SP-1A. SP-1C is assumed to be entirely residential.
                                      Sustainable development will be encouraged in SP-1 through
                                      the use of renewable energy sources and water conservation
                                      tools with the goal of striving to achieve zero net energy at the
                                      building and neighborhood level to the extent feasible.
                                   •	 SP-2 (East Growth Area): SP-2 is located in the eastern
                                      portion of the Planning Area, south of Interstate 5 and to the
                                      east of the Water Pollution Control Facility. Due to its distance
                                      from Downtown urban core, SP-2 is envisioned to function as
                                      a sustainable “complete neighborhood” with a town center so
                                      that all daily needs (schools, parks, grocery stores, public facili-
                                      ties, etc.) are located within the Specific Plan Area. In addition,
                                      sustainable development will be encouraged in SP-2 through
                                      use of renewable energy sources and water conservation tools
                                      with the goal of striving to achieve zero net energy at the
                                      building and neighborhood level to the extent feasible.
                                   •	 SP-3 (Northwest Growth Area): SP-3 is located generally
                                      north of Kentucky Avenue, south of Interstate 5, between CR
                                      98 and the Northern Pacific railroad tracks. It is separated into
                                      two distinct sub areas, with SP-3A encompassing the eastern
                                      half of the Specific Plan area and SP-3B occupying the western
                                      half. The General Plan envisions that SP-3A will contain a mix
                                      of residential, commercial, office, and light industrial uses. De-
                                      velopment of this area will provide amenities that serve not
                                      only new residents but also existing residents in nearby neigh-
                                      borhoods that currently lack convenient access to grocery op-
                                      tions and community services. SP-3B will continue to be largely
                                      industrial with some low density residential uses along CR 98.
                                      Additionally, sensitively designed transition areas will minimize
                                      compatibility concerns between residential, commercial and
                                      industrial uses. The boundaries of SP-3 contain developed resi-
                                      dential areas that are currently unincorporated; Specific Plans
                                      prepared for this area will be required to include these resi-
                                      dential areas in plans and annexations.
LU 2-56

                              Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
Unincorporated Disadvantaged Communities
                                                                                                                                                                              Refer to the Public Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
Enacted in 2011, SB 244 requires cities to address the infrastruc-                                                                                                            and Services Element for
ture needs of disadvantaged unincorporated island or fringe com-                                                                                                              additional information regarding
munities located within or near their boundaries. For cities, a5 “dis-                                                                                                        city utilities and fire protection
                                                                                                                      WEST ST
                                     COUNTY RD 98
advantaged unincorporated community” is defined as a fringe or                                                                                                                services.
                                                                                                                                          C I T Y LI M I T S
                                                         Westucky
island community in which the median household income is 80
percent or less of the statewide median household income. The
                                                       KENTUCKY AVE
law states that each city must include the following information
                                                                                                                                                                                        EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                               ST
about any applicable communities in the Land Use Element of the            ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                                     WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                               COLLEGE
General Plan:
  •	 Identify and describe every “island community” or “fringe com-
     munity” located within that city’s sphere of influence that is
     considered to be a disadvantaged unincorporated community;
                                                                                                                    5                                                                                                  5
  •	 Include an analysis of water, wastewater, stormwater drainage,
     and structural fire protection needs or deficiencies for each of
     the identified communities; and
                                                    COUNTY RD 98                                                                                                         COUNTY RD 98
                                                                                                                                WEST ST                                                                                     WEST ST
                                                    Westucky                                                                                                                                                     Westucky
  •	 Include an analysis of potential funding mechanisms     that could
                                                                   CIT Y LI M I T S                                                                                                     CI T Y LI M I T S
     make the extension of services and facilities to identified com-
     munities financially feasible.                                       KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                            KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                        ASHLEY AVE
According to an income survey conducted by Yolo County in                                              WOODLAND AVE
2013, Westucky, an unincorporated residential community located
immediately north of Kentucky Avenue and west of West Street
within the SP-3 boundary, qualifies as disadvantaged pursuant to
SB 244. Surrounded by agricultural, commercial, and industrial land
uses, Westucky is comprised of low density, detached residential
housing. According to the income survey, approximately 88 per-
cent of Westucky residents are in households that qualify as Low-
Income (between 51 and 80 percent of area median income),Very
Low-Income (31 to 50 percent AMI), or Extremely Low-Income
(below 30 percent AMI).
To address infrastructure deficiencies in Westucky, Yolo County
was awarded a Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
in 2013 to rebuild the area’s private and failing water system.
Since then, the City of Woodland and Yolo County have executed
a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to extend City water
and sewer services to Westucky.  With extension of water service
to Westucky, fire hydrant(s) will be installed to meet the City of
Woodland standards. The closest fire station to the area is located
at 101 Court Street. As discussed in the Public Facilities and Ser-
vices Element, the City may consider relocating an existing fire sta-
tion further north in order to improve coverage as development
of SP-3 occurs.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 2-57

  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Specific Plan (SP)
The Specific Plan designation identifies areas where a Specific Plan consistent with State law shall be adopted to
direct development in a coordinated, master-planned manner across multiple properties with adequate provision
of infrastructure and public facilities to support that development.
The Specific Plan designation allows agricultural and open space uses to continue temporarily until such time as
the Specific Plan has been adopted, or the land use designation is otherwise amended. Ultimate land uses must be
consistent with the adopted Specific Plan. Capital-intensive agricultural uses are discouraged in lands designated
Specific Plan so as not to preclude later planned urban uses.
Development Standards
 •	 Allowable density and FAR standards will correspond with the ultimate General Plan land use designations
     adopted for each Specific Plan area
 •	 Residential uses must achieve an overall minimum average gross density of 8 dwelling units per acre across
     the Specific Plan. Gross density includes the total acreage of a site measured to the centerline of proposed
     bounding streets and to the edge of the right-of-way of existing or dedicated streets.
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Mix of residential and employment uses that               •	 Incorporation of sustainable stormwater
     maintains a healthy jobs/housing balance and                management features such as bioswales, rain
     provides residents with convenient access to                gardens, and pervious pavement
     services and amenities                                   •	 Pedestrian-scale blocks that are easy to navigate
 •	 Distinct neighborhood focal points, such                  •	 Well-integrated roadway network with off-street
     as neighborhood commercial nodes, plazas,                   greenbelt paths
     neighborhood parks, or community gardens that
     promote social interaction and healthy community         •	 Landscaped streets with attractive lighting and
     living                                                      large canopy trees
 •	 Public art in open spaces and other highly visible        •	 Transit, services, amenities and opportunities for
     locations                                                   recreation located within walking distance of
                                                                 neighborhood residents
 •	 Energy- and water-efficient design, including
     landscaping                                              •	 Multimodal connections to adjacent
                                                                 neighborhoods
  LU 2-58

                                        Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
•	 Avoidance of noise walls to the greatest extent
   possible
                                                                      •	 Housing that is oriented toward the street or
                                                                         other public space
                                                                                                                         2
•	 Range of housing types that accommodate people                     •	 Require 360-degree architectural treatment, such
   of all incomes and abilities through all stages of life               that all publicly visible sides of a structure receive
•	 Housing design that incorporates contextual and                       enhanced architectural treatment
   attractive architectural features, such as front                   •	 Encourage a variety of architectural styles to
   porches, balconies, well-designed facades, dormers,                   give the appearance that neighborhoods have
   trim and moldings, and high-quality building                          developed over time, particularly in larger tract
   materials                                                             developments
Specific Plan (SP)
                                          Mix of residential                   Energy efficient
                                          and employment                     design that utilizes            Well integrated
                                                 uses                         renewable energy            network of greenbelt
            Pedestrian scaled
                 blocks                                                                                           paths
     Range of housing                                        Public Art                 Transit services within
    types and densities                                                                   walking distance of
                             Neighborhood green - a                                             residents
                           central gathering place that
                              fosters community life
                                                                                                                         LU 2-59

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                    Green Space
                                                    Parks, greenbelts and natural open space provide recreation op-
      Refer to the Public Facilities and            portunities for Woodland residents and visitors as well as impor-
      Services Element for additional               tant ecological benefits. The General Plan envisions enhancing
      information on parks and                      Woodland’s existing parks and natural open spaces while encour-
      recreation                                    aging new development to feature a connected system of green-
                                                    belts that introduce opportunities for linear parks and trails that
                                                    connect different parts of the city.
                                                        Figure 2-11:	 Green Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Green Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Flood Study Area
                                                                                5
                                                                               KENTUCKY AVE                                                        KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                              EAST ST                                PIONEER AVE
                                           PEDRICK RD                WEST ST
                                                         MAIN   ST                                         MAIN   ST                                                                                MAIN   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                    PIONEER AVE               COUNTY RD 102
                                                            GIBSON RD                                                                                             GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                             HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                       113
                                                                                              EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                         HERITAGE PARKWAY
                                                                                                        COUNTY RD 25A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0   1/4    1/2       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MILES
                                                                                                                                                                                              SOURCE: City of Woodland, 2017; Dyett & Bhatia, 2017
LU 2-60

                                       Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                          2
Open Space (OS)
The Open Space designation provides for public parks, agricultural uses, outdoor recreational and equestrian uses,
habitat protection, irrigation canals, reservoirs, watershed management, and natural recreation viewing areas typi-
cally limited for human occupation due to public health and safety hazards such as earthquake faults, floodways,
unstable soils, or areas containing wildlife habitat and other environmentally-sensitive features. Existing agricul-
tural uses are permitted to continue operation, but new commercial agricultural uses are generally not permitted.
Such land areas are primarily publicly owned, but may include private property.
Development Standards
 •	 No development intensity is assumed for this designation; however, a limited number of facilities such as
     restrooms, maintenance buildings, education centers, and community gathering places may be allowed, with
     context-sensitive density/intensity to be determined on a project-specific basis
Urban Form Characteristics
 •	 Design will match the appropriate level of use (for         accessible greenways; natural “dark sky” conditions
     example, neighborhood and community parks will             to be maintained in natural open space areas and
     receive greater landscaping and design attention           sensitive habitat
     than natural areas) in a manner that is compatible      •	 Careful location of park facilities and parking so
     with the surrounding physical context                      as to most effectively serve the planned uses
 •	 Signage and maps that emphasize linkages between            of the park or open space while minimizing
     parks, greenbelts and open space systems                   negative impacts on surrounding neighborhoods
 •	 Appropriate lighting for evening use of sports              (particularly related to noise and parking/access)
     fields/courts, recreation facilities and publicly
                                                                                                          LU 2-61

   City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Flood Study Area (FS)
The Flood Study Area designation is applied to areas restricted from urban development due to health and safety
concerns related to flood risk, or because the property falls within a likely future flood project improvement area.
Allowed uses include open space, as well as low-intensity agriculture or recreational uses. Generally, land uses that
require extensive capital improvements or permanent infrastructure improvements shall be prohibited, with the
exception of improvements related to flood protection and control. Existing structures and business operations
in areas designated as Flood Study Area may remain but may not expand.When the exact boundaries of the future
flood project are determined, the City will initiate an amendment to the Land Use Diagram to update the adjacent
land use designations, as necessary.
Development Standards
  •	 No development intensity is assumed for this designation.
Urban Form Characteristics
  •	 No urban form characteristics are defined for this designation.
   LU 2-62

Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
      2.4	 Historic Preservation
                                                                        2
      Woodland has a rich historic heritage and many significant historic
      buildings, districts, events and artifacts that reflect its past. These
      are symbols of Woodland’s unique heritage and identity. Down-
      town Woodland in particular includes many historically-significant
      buildings and is recognized as a National Register Historic District.
      To this day, the Downtown Woodland Historic District retains
      much of its historic appearance and function and is considered
      the heart and jewel of Woodland. The district has major examples
      of several architectural styles, including Italianate, Richardsonian
      Romanesque, Spanish Colonial Revival, Streamline, and several ver-
      sions of the Second Renaissance Revival. The historic integrity of
      the district is high due to the concentration of resources, the pro-
      portion, size and importance of the contributing historic buildings,
      and the relative inconspicuousness of non-contributing buildings.
      The Woodland Opera House and Yolo County Courthouse are
      included on the National Register of Historic Places. Other Down-
      town buildings on the National Register include the I.O.O.F. Build-
      ing, Porter Building, Woodland Public Library, R.H. Beamer House,
      Jackson Apartments, and Hotel Woodland. Outside Downtown, the
      Gibson Mansion Historical museum is also a City historic building
      and listed on the National Register. In addition, Woodland’s his-
      toric neighborhoods offer a variety of historically and architec-
      turally significant structures. The Downtown Historic District and
      recognized historic architectural resources citywide are mapped
      in Figure 2-12.
      Policies in the General Plan continue to promote historic preserva-
      tion in Woodland through community education and coordination
      with historic preservation groups. Awareness and appreciation of
      Woodland’s historic resources will foster a greater enjoyment of
      the city and greater support for historic preservation efforts. Fur-
      ther, the historic Downtown is the City’s center of shopping, din-
      ing, entertainment and employment.
                                                                        LU 2-63

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
            Figure 2-12:	 Historic Architectural Resources
                                                                                                                                                                                 Historic Architectural Resource
                                                                                                                                             N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                 Significant historic building, district, event, or artifact
                                                                                                                                                                                 Downtown Woodland Historic
                                                                                                                                                                                 District
                                                                                                                                                                                 Highways Principal
                                                                                                  §
                                                                                                  ¨
                                                                                                  ¦I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                 Arterials Minor
                                                                                                                                                                                 Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                 Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                 Local Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                 Ramps
                                                                                                                                                                                 Study Area
                   W KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                 Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                                                                 Sphere Of Influence
                                                                                                              COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                             EAST ST
                                                      W WOODLAND AVE                                                                                                             City Limits
                                                                                                BEAMER ST                                                                                                                          E BEAMER ST
                         ASHLEY AVE                                                                                        THIRD ST
                                                                CALIFORNIA ST                                                         NORTH ST                LEMEN AVE
                                                                                               COURT ST
                   W MAIN ST                                                                 MAIN ST                                                                                                                                 E MAIN ST
                                                                                            LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                       CROSS ST
  COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                              V
                                                                                                                                                                                              U 113
                                      COTTONWOOD ST                                                         COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                         E GUM AVE
                                                        CALIFORNIA ST                                                                                                MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                            EAST ST
                                                                                                GIBSON RD                                                                                                                                               EG
                                                                                             EL DORADO DR                                                                                                                                 PIONEER AVE
  0                     0.25          0.5                                       1
                                                                                    Miles
  Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;
  Yolo County, 2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013;
  Dyett & Bhatia, 2013; AECOM, 2013; NPS, 1999
  X 60285491 021 5/13
LU 2-64

2.5	 Goals and Policies
                       Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                                                                                                2
Goal 2.A	 Growth and Change. Support sustainable growth through orderly, well planned
          development that provides for economic growth, strong social ties, protection
          of the environment, an enhanced quality of life, and preservation of Woodland’s
          community character and agricultural heritage. 	
          Policy 2.A.1	      Urban Limit Line. A permanent Urban Limit Line (ULL) is
                             established around Woodland to permanently circumscribe urban
                             development and comply with provisions for agricultural lands.
                             Public services and facilities shall not extend beyond the permanent
                             Urban Limit Line. The City shall take such administrative steps
                             as may be required to implement Policy 2.A.1. The City shall also
                             identify funding for implementing a permanent urban limit line,
                             including mitigation for developing on agricultural land. The City shall
                             continually reevaluate residential land use densities, housing policies,
                             and zoning to determine the potential for increased residential
                             densities for both infill sites and undeveloped land within the Urban
                             Limit Line. The City shall continually review existing non-residential
                             zoning to determine the potential for conversion to higher density
                             residential uses within the permanent Urban Limit Line. The City
                             will encourage and support appropriately located agricultural and
                             wildlife conservation easements to support implementation of the
                             permanent urban limit line.
                             This policy enacts Woodland Measure A (Ballot of June 2006), Urban
                             Limit Line, and can only be modified by the voters.
          Policy 2.A.2	      Finite Land Resources. Given that the ULL serves to make
                             land availability within the city a finite resource, maintain high
                             expectations for development.
          Policy 2.A.3	      Agricultural Mitigation. For impacts to agricultural land within
                             the ULL, require one acre to be permanently conserved for every
                             acre converted to urban development (1:1 ratio). The farmland being
                             conserved must be of the same Farmland Mapping and Monitoring
                             Program type (Prime Farmland, Farmland of Statewide Importance,
                             Unique Farmland, Farmland of Local Importance) as the farmland
                             that is being converted, or of a type of higher quality, and the
                             conserved farmland should be located outside of, but as close to the
                             Woodland Urban Limit Line as possible.
                             (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.2-1)
                                                                                                LU 2-65

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 2.A.4	    Downtown. Promote Downtown Woodland as the city’s sole civic,
                                   cultural, entertainment, and central business district that serves as
                                   the primary specialty-retail and dining, entertainment, office, arts,
                                   and government center. Support new mixed-use development in the
                                   Downtown with an emphasis on retail, entertainment, and other
                                   active uses at the ground level and residential and office uses on
                                   upper levels along Main Street. In addition, allow ground floor office
                                   uses on side streets.
                  Policy 2.A.5	    Complete and Well-Designed Neighborhoods. Promote the
                                   development of complete neighborhoods with a physical layout and
                                   land use mix that allows for a diversity of incomes; puts residents in
                                   close proximity to services and amenities; promotes walking, biking,
                                   and transit use; fosters community pride; enhances neighborhood
                                   identity; ensures public safety; and meets the needs of all ages and
                                   abilities.
                  Policy 2.A.6	    Infill Development. Encourage infill, redevelopment of and
                                   development on underutilized sites, adaptive reuse, and the
                                   restoration of historic buildings in existing urbanized areas to
                                   enhance community character, promote pedestrian- and bicycle-
                                   friendly neighborhoods, increase housing diversity, ensure integrity of
                                   historic districts, optimize city investment in infrastructure, support
                                   increased transit use, and enhance economic vitality.
                  Policy 2.A.7	    Partnerships. Partner with the State, the County and other public
                                   and private entities that control significant properties in Woodland,
                                   such as the historic courthouse, the County fairgrounds, schools,
                                   and rail lines, in order to seek opportunities for these properties to
                                   serve as catalysts for critical change.
                  Policy 2.A.8	    Gateways and Corridors. Transform the city’s main corridors
                                   to become lively, mixed use places that connect the city’s
                                   neighborhoods. Create distinctive, thriving gateway centers at
                                   I-5 and SR 113 that serve as inviting entrances to the city while
                                   maximizing the economic potential of these assets.
                                   See also Policy 3.A.13.
                  Policy 2.A.9	    Major Projects Financing Plan. Plan for and fund infrastructure
                                   improvements needed to support new growth projected in the
                                   General Plan by using the Major Projects Financing Plan.
LU 2-66

Goal 2.B	
                        Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
          Greenfield Development. Plan for future expansion in new growth areas to ensure
          that greenfield development is adequately accommodated and served by the City.
                                                                                               2
          Policy 2.B.1	       Existing Specific Plan Areas. New Specific Plans shall examine
                              impacts on the completion of infrastructure and amenities within
                              existing Specific Plan areas that are still developing.
          Policy 2.B.2	       Development in the Floodplain. No specific plan for SP-1, SP-2
                              or SP-3 may be processed until the designs for projects to provide
                              necessary 200-year flood protection have been approved and the
                              funding for construction has been secured. Any contemplated sale
                              of the City’s 900-acre property within SP-2 will require a four-fifths
                              (4/5th) vote of the City Council.
          Policy 2.B.3	       Tax Sharing. As new growth areas are annexed to Woodland,
                              advocate for favorable tax-sharing agreements that ensure that
                              the City receives the revenues necessary to support the required
                              municipal services and infrastructure required in new growth areas.
          Policy 2.B.4	       Development Agreements. Use Development Agreements
                              to maximize public benefit (beyond conditions of approval and
                              mitigation measures) from new growth in Specific Plan areas and
                              other major developments.
          Policy 2.B.5	       Coordination. Consult with other agencies and jurisdictions,
                              including Yolo County, the Yolo County Local Agency Formation
                              Commission (LAFCo), the Woodland Joint Unified School District
                              (WJUSD), the Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG),
                              the Yolo County Transportation District (YCTD), and the Yolo
                              County Resource Conservation District, as Specific Plan Areas are
                              being planned to ensure that services and infrastructure can be
                              adequately extended to serve new growth.
          Policy 2.B.6	       Other Development in Unincorporated Areas within the
                              ULL. Prior to the provision of City services to unincorporated
                              areas within the ULL, require those unincorporated properties to
                              be annexed into the City, or require a conditional service agreement
                              to be executed agreeing to annex when deemed appropriate by the
                              City.
                                                                                               LU 2-67

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    Goal 2.C	          Smart Growth, Sustainability and Regional Coordination. Promote Woodland
                       as a leader in sustainable development and support statewide and regional efforts
                       to encourage smart growth, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, fund transportation
                       improvements, conserve resources, and maintain fiscal sustainability.
                       Policy 2.C.1	        Compact Form. Promote compact development patterns, mixed
                                            land use, and higher-development intensities that conserve land
                                            resources, reduce vehicle trips, improve air quality, and facilitate
                                            walking, bicycling, and transit use. Achieving the benefits of compact
                                            development as supported in this General Plan may result in
                                            potential tradeoffs related to traffic, noise, open space, and privacy.
                                            Sensitive design and appropriate performance standards may
                                            assist in mitigating these concerns. Where growth and increased
                                            density is allowed pursuant to this General Plan, these issues are
                                            acknowledged and accepted.
                       Policy 2.C.2	        Consistency with the Climate Action Plan. Ensure that new
                                            development is consistent with the objectives and targets of the
                                            City’s Climate Action Plan.
                       Policy 2.C.3	        Alternative Transportation. Actively support and facilitate
                                            mixed-use retail, employment, schools, and residential development
                                            around existing and future transit stops, bike routes, and pedestrian
                                            paths.
                       Policy 2.C.4	        Resource Efficiency. Encourage and incentivize buildings to be
                                            constructed so that they consume less energy, water, and other
                                            resources; allow natural ventilation; use daylight effectively; reduce
                                            stormwater runoff; and facilitate the use of clean energy whenever
                                            possible. Use trees for cooling, energy conservation, and to improve
                                            air quality.
    Goal 2.D	          Economic Development. Promote economic growth and vitality by bolstering key
                       industries and encouraging balanced job growth.
    See also policies in the Economic Development Element.
                       Policy 2.D.1	        Jobs/Housing Relationship. Promote and support the
                                            development of a balance of residential, commercial, and industrial
                                            development within the city. Encourage a variety of job and housing
                                            types to provide a range of employment and housing opportunities
                                            for all city residents. Maintain a jobs to housing ratio citywide of
                                            at least 1:1 to optimize the supply and demand for both, reduce
                                            commute trips and overall vehicle miles travelled (VMT), and make
                                            communities less dependent on single occupancy vehicle trips.
LU 2-68

                      Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
          Policy 2.D.2	      Food and Agriculture Industry Cluster. Develop Woodland
                             into a premier food and agriculture industry cluster by providing
                                                                                               2
                             appropriate infrastructure, adequate land with compatible land uses,
                             and by supporting research and innovation.
          Policy 2.D.3	      Technology Sector. Grow the technology sector in Woodland
                             by leveraging the research strength at UC Davis. Establish business
                             parks in the Southern Gateway at CR 25 and SR 113 and along
                             CR 102. Encourage smaller companies and start-ups to locate in
                             incubator spaces Downtown and in areas with the Light Industrial
                             Overlay designation.
          Policy 2.D.4	      Made in Woodland. Incentivize continued support for skilled
                             handcraft “maker” businesses that help grow a diversity of products
                             with the “Made in Woodland” brand.
Goal 2.E	 Pattern and Scale. Foster a cohesive, healthy community through patterns and scales
          of development that encourage active living and neighborhood interaction.
          Policy 2.E.1	      Land Use Designations. Enact the land use designations as shown
                             in Figure 2-5 and detailed in Section 2.3 for the purposes of this
                             General Plan.
          Policy 2.E.2	      Responsiveness to Context. Encourage high-quality new
                             development that enhances and blends with the established fabric
                             of the natural, social and built environment, while allowing for
                             innovative architectural styles.
          Policy 2.E.3	      Transition Areas. Promote the sensitive design of transition
                             areas between different land uses in order to ensure compatibility,
                             and encourage a gradual and compatible shift in scale between
                             different densities and intensities of various uses. Where residential
                             development abuts farmland, a strong urban edge should be
                             maintained, avoiding very low density rural residential development
                             to promote efficiency in land use.
          Policy 2.E.4	      Bike and Pedestrian-Orientation. Create walkable, pedestrian-
                             scaled blocks that feature sidewalks and bikeways that are safe,
                             comfortable, and inviting.
          Policy 2.E.5	      View Corridors. Create attractive view corridors that frame
                             the streets with distinctive buildings, trees, and other landscaping
                             complemented by well-designed and integrated signage. At
                             community entry points, provide a clear, physical sense of arrival into
                             the community.
                                                                                                LU 2-69

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                      Policy 2.E.6	            Building Street Facades. Encourage the use of horizontal and
                                               vertical building articulation to break up building mass, create visual
                                               interest, and design to activate street level frontages.
                      Policy 2.E.7	            Public Safety and Community Design. Promote design that
                                               enhances public safety and discourages crime by providing buildings
                                               that engage the street, as well as adequate lighting and sight lines.
                      Policy 2.E.8	            Maintenance. Promote community pride through the enforcement
                                               of City nuisance and fire safety ordinances to prevent properties
                                               from becoming poorly maintained, visually run down, and/or
                                               presenting health and safety concerns.
                      Policy 2.E.9	            Community Benefits. Consider allowing new development to
                                               exceed FAR limits if it offers significant community benefit, such
                                               as the provision of publicly accessible open space, zero net energy
                                               design, the restoration and/or adaptive reuse of a historic resource,
                                               or the promotion of alternative modes of transportation.
    Woodland’s distinctive and historic places are defining characteristics of the city.
LU 2-70

Goal 2.F	
                               Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                Distinctive and Memorable Places. Through appropriate regulations, promote
                community design that produces a distinctive, high-quality built environment, with
                                                                                                         2
                form and character that reflects Woodland’s unique historic, environmental, and
                architectural context and creates memorable places that enrich community life.
                Policy 2.F.1	          Development Regulations. Promote design excellence by
                                       ensuring that development regulations clearly express both desired
                                       and intended outcomes in addition to those that may be prohibited
                                       or undesired.
                Policy 2.F.2	          Zoning. Prepare a comprehensive Zoning Code update that
                                       includes performance and/or form-based zoning regulations as
                                       appropriate. The updated Zoning Code will provide a clear and
                                       consistent set of procedures, actions, and administrative guidance to
                                       implement the Vision, Guiding Principles, goals, and policies of this
                                       General Plan while ensuring the sensitive treatment of existing non-
                                       conforming uses.
                Policy 2.F.3	          Design Review. Require design review as appropriate that focuses
                                       on achieving form and function for new, reuse and reinvestment
                                       projects to promote creativity, innovation and design quality.
                Policy 2.F.4	          Light Pollution. Control artificial lighting to avoid spill-over
                                       lighting and preserve the night sky.
                                       (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.1-4)
                Policy 2.F.5	          Glare. Control artificial lighting to prevent glare.
                                       (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.1-4)
Goal 2.G	       Existing Neighborhoods. Recognize, maintain and celebrate the unique qualities of
                Woodland’s traditional residential neighborhoods.
Goals and polices for residential development in new growth areas located on pages 2-67 to 2-70.
                Policy 2.G.1	          Distinctive Characteristics. Maintain the distinctive
                                       characteristics of neighborhoods developed in different eras,
                                       including those developed prior to WWII, post war, and in more
                                       recent decades.
                Policy 2.G.2	          Sensitive New Development. Require new construction,
                                       additions, renovations, and infill to be physically compatible with
                                       neighborhood context, historic development patterns, and building
                                       form and scale.
                Policy 2.G.3	          Neighborhood Preservation Zone. Maintain the Neighborhood
                                       Preservation zoning district to foster sensitively designed
                                       development at an appropriate density and scale in existing older
                                       neighborhood districts.
                                                                                                         LU 2-71

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 2.G.4	       Public Realm. Enhance the safety and character of existing
                                      neighborhoods by implementing public realm improvements, such
                                      as street lighting and utility undergrounding where needed, and
                                      encouraging upkeep and investment by private property owners.
                  Policy 2.G.5	       Maintenance. Foster community pride and promote neighborhood
                                      enhancement and conservation through code enforcement as well
                                      as incentivized improvement programs to facilitate on-going repair
                                      and property improvement.
    Goal 2.H	     Historic Downtown Center. Promote Downtown Woodland as a premier urban
                  location in the region with a dynamic mix of uses including shopping, dining,
                  entertainment, living, and employment ranging from innovative businesses to
                  traditional government functions. Encourage architecturally interesting buildings and
                  inviting pedestrian streetscapes that complement the city’s historic character while
                  celebrating the ingenuity of the present.
                  Policy 2.H.1	       Mixed Use. Support new mixed-use development Downtown
                                      with an emphasis on ground-level retail and dining with upper-story
                                      residential and office uses, particularly on Main Street. Encourage an
                                      active and vibrant Downtown with a 24/7 presence by allowing a
                                      mix of entertainment, retail, and cultural uses as well as residential
                                      and office uses.
                                      Also see Policies 2.A.4 and 2.A.6
                  Policy 2.H.2	       Facade Improvements. Encourage contextually appropriate
                                      building and façade improvements to promote Downtown as a
                                      pedestrian-oriented retail and services area.
                  Policy 2.H.3	       Streamlined Review. Streamline the review and permitting
                                      process for all building improvements within the Downtown.
                  Policy 2.H.4	       Public/Private Investment. Improve and enhance Downtown’s
                                      physical image and desirability as a place to invest, through public
                                      investments in streetscapes, public spaces, parking and utility
                                      infrastructure. With the absence of Redevelopment Agency funds,
                                      partner with private property owners on creative funding and
                                      financing strategies to fund needed improvements Downtown, such
                                      as Property-Based Improvement Districts (PBIDs) and Enhanced
                                      Infrastructure Financing Districts (EIFDs).
                  Policy 2.H.5	       Main Street. Continue to make enhancements to Main Street to
                                      calm traffic and improve the experience for pedestrians, cyclists, and
                                      sidewalk diners.
                  Policy 2.H.6	       Parking. Implement an overall parking strategy for Downtown
                                      through a Parking Management Plan that is consistent with the
                                      updated Downtown Specific Plan, including consolidation of smaller
                                      parking lots and district-wide management of parking resources.
LU 2-72

          Policy 2.H.7	
                        Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                              Entertainment Focus. Promote Downtown as an entertainment
                              and cultural activity center for the city, county, and region. Locate
                                                                                                     2
                              venues with regional draw for live performances and movie theaters
                              in the Downtown. Encourage the use of Main Street, Heritage Plaza,
                              Freeman Park, the Woodland Public Library, and other civic spaces
                              for community events.
          Policy 2.H.8	       Woodland Opera House. Support the preservation and use of
                              the Woodland Opera House for entertainment and civic events.
                              Refer to Section 2.4 for additional policies on Historic Preservation.
          Policy 2.H.9	       Woodland Public Library. Support the success of the Woodland
                              Public Library and use of the library and grounds as a civic asset to
                              Downtown and the greater community.
          Policy 2.H.10	      Heritage Plaza. Encourage the expansion and redesign of
                              Heritage Plaza to become a vibrant and attractive outdoor public
                              gathering place.
          Policy 2.H.11	      Local Goods and Products. Encourage the sale of local goods,
                              foods, and products that showcase Woodland’s historic and
                              emerging industries.
Goal 2.I	 Mixed-Use Corridors. Create memorable and engaging retail, residential, and mixed
          -use places along Main Street, East Street, Kentucky Avenue, and CR 102.
          Policy 2.I.1	       Building and Site Design. Require buildings located along
                              corridors be designed to define the public realm and promote
                              multimodal mobility and sidewalk activity that provides eyes on the
                              street. Key components of good design should include:
                                •	 Mix of building patterns
                                •	 Building frontages located directly adjacent to the sidewalk
                                   where appropriate, especially on West Main Street; minimal
                                   setbacks on other corridors
                                •	 Ground floor transparency to encourage activity
                                •	 Minimize driveways, curb cuts, and parking visibility
                                •	 Pedestrian-oriented elements, including public outdoor spaces
          Policy 2.I.2	       Increase Density. Within mixed-use corridors, encourage
                              replacement of older, low-scale, auto-oriented development with
                              well-designed, higher-density, new projects that offer pedestrian
                              orientation, more efficient use of land, and continued, productive
                              economic value.
                              Also see Policy 2.A.6
                                                                                                     LU 2-73

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 2.I.3	    Green Streets. Provide continuous shade trees along Woodland’s
                                   key corridors, integrate low-impact development (LID) drainage
                                   facilities to manage stormwater runoff within the public right-of-way,
                                   and include Class I or Class II bike facilities where possible.
                                   Refer to Section 3.4 for definitions of Class I and Class II bike facilities.
                  Policy 2.I.4	    West Main Street. Revitalize West Main Street as an economically
                                   viable mixed-use corridor that is supportive of the Downtown
                                   urban core. Restrict additional “strip retail” development along West
                                   Main Street in favor of higher-density residential mixed-use buildings
                                   with ground floor, neighborhood-serving retail. Encourage the
                                   reuse of existing vacant and underutilized commercial centers with
                                   horizontal and/or vertical mixed-use development.
                  Policy 2.I.5	    East Street. Explore with property owners the possibility of
                                   the adaptive reuse of distinctive, large industrial and commercial
                                   buildings along East Street. Promote redevelopment of the County
                                   Fair Mall.
                  Policy 2.I.6	    Yolo County Fairgrounds. Recognize the Yolo County
                                   Fairgrounds as an important agricultural and community facility. If an
                                   alternative site for the fairgrounds is identified along with relocation
                                   funding, support the adaptive reuse of the current site as a mixed-
                                   use development.
                  Policy 2.I.7	    Rail Relocation. Pursue opportunities to move the railroad from
                                   its current right-of-way in order to open new opportunities for
                                   public open space and revitalization along East Street. If relocation
                                   occurs, update the Zoning Ordinance or develop a new East Street
                                   master plan to maximize infill potential created by the relocated rail
                                   spur.
                  Policy 2.I.8	    Kentucky Avenue. Enhance Kentucky Avenue as a Complete
                                   Streets corridor with new opportunities for mixed-use and
                                   residential development, while maintaining its important role as
                                   an agricultural and industrial corridor. Support agriculture-related
                                   industrial businesses to locate on Kentucky Avenue, as appropriate.
                                   Refer to the Transportation and Circulation Element for additional
                                   Complete Streets goals and policies.
                  Policy 2.I.9	    CR 102. Develop CR 102 south of East Main Street as an attractive
                                   corridor with a mix of commercial, office, and residential uses
                                   that support employment growth targets. Incorporate new job-
                                   generating uses into the corridor, including medical services, offices,
                                   and business park development.
LU 2-74

Goal 2.J	
                        Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
          Commercial Centers. Promote the development of distinct, well-designed
          commercial centers that serve neighborhood residents, community members, and/or
                                                                                                  2
          the region at large.
          Policy 2.J.1	        Enhanced Design Character of Existing Centers. Encourage
                               renovation, infill, and reuse of existing commercial centers, including
                               repurposing buildings as business incubators, community spaces,
                               and/or other compatible uses. Redesign and modernization of
                               architectural treatment is encouraged as well as utilization of
                               parking lots to make the centers more pedestrian friendly, and
                               enhance the definition and character of the street frontage and
                               associated streetscape.
          Policy 2.J.2	        Design of New Neighborhood and Community Commercial
                               Centers. Facilitate the development of new neighborhood and
                               community commercial centers that feature good urban design with
                               elements such as inviting entryways, articulated building facades and
                               rooflines, attractive landscaping, shaded walkways, plazas and public
                               art.
          Policy 2.J.3	        Design of New Regional Commercial Centers. Employ high
                               quality, durable materials and best practices in sustainability in the
                               design of new regional commercial centers, promoting them as
                               desirable regional destinations. 
          Policy 2.J.4	        Commercial Center Uses. Set 60,000 square feet as the
                               maximum floorplate for a single use in a neighborhood or
                               community commercial center. Locate commercial uses with larger
                               floorplates in regional commercial centers.
          Policy 2.J.5	        Regional Commercial Uses. Generally require a minimum
                               floorplate of 50,000 square feet for regional commercial uses,
                               though exceptions may be made for smaller supportive uses, such as
                               coffee shops, banks, or food establishments. Ensure that uses within
                               regional commercial centers avoid competing directly with those
                               more likely to be found Downtown, such as specialty dining and
                               entertainment.
          Policy 2.J.6	        Multimodal Access. Require convenient, attractive, and safe
                               pedestrian, bicycle, and transit connections both within commercial
                               centers and between centers and surrounding neighborhoods and
                               other destinations.
          Policy 2.J.7	        Office Uses. Promote the incorporation of office uses in existing
                               regional commercial centers as a means of enhancing retail viability,
                               creating attractive spaces, supporting transit viability and reducing
                               vehicle trips. Limit office uses to 10 percent of the square footage
                               of each regional commercial center. Allow for the repurposing of
                               community and commercial centers to accommodate future shifts in
                               the retail and office markets, as necessary.
                                                                                                   LU 2-75

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                 Policy 2.J.8	              Transition Areas. Require commercial development to
                                            incorporate buffering and sensitive transitions or design techniques
                                            to minimize impacts on adjacent less intensive uses, particularly
                                            residential uses.
   Goal 2.K	     Employment Centers. Provide business park, industrial, medical, and public
                 employment centers that encourage a range of diverse business and employment
                 opportunities and feature multimodal commute access.
                 Policy 2.K.1	              Quality Design. Require new and renovated business parks,
                                            public buildings, and industrial properties to feature elements such
                                            as attractive entrances, articulated building facades and rooflines,
                                            attractive landscaping, and shaded walkways.
                 Policy 2.K.2	              Business Parks. Promote the development of master-planned
                                            business parks that bolster Woodland’s established agriculture and
                                            emerging technology industries and promote the city’s prominence
                                            as a major center of economic activity in Yolo County.
                 Policy 2.K.3	              Northeast Industrial Area. Promote clustering of industrial
                                            uses into areas that have common needs and impacts in order
                                            to maximize their efficiency and minimize conflicts. Provide for
                                            industrial uses that require a larger footprint on the east side of the
                                            northeast industrial area. Provide for smaller uses on the west side.
                                            See Figure 2-13.
   Figure 2-13:	      Northeast Industrial Area
                                          CHURCHILL DOWNS       AVE
                       5
                           EAST ST                                                                   COUNTY RD 102
                                                     KENTUCKY AVE
                                     Smaller lots                   PIONEER AVE       Larger lots
                                          and                                             and
                                      floor plates                                    floor plates
                                                         113
                                                                                         MAIN   ST
                                                                                  5
LU 2-76

                      Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
          Policy 2.K.4	      Light Industrial Overlay. Utilize the Light Industrial Overlay
                                                                                               2
                             designation to transition between districts of different intensity,
                             accommodate small incubator space, and promote a mix of
                             agricultural, biotechnology and emerging technology companies.
          Policy 2.K.5	      CR 102 North. As the industrial area builds out, provide enhanced
                             roadway and streetscape improvements to CR 102 North to
                             improve accessibility and the visual appearance of the eastern
                             portion of the industrial area.
          Policy 2.K.6	      Transition Areas. Require industrial development to incorporate
                             context-responsive transitions to minimize impacts on nearby land
                             uses.
          Policy 2.K.7	      Alternative Transportation Modes. Promote convenient,
                             attractive, and safe pedestrian, bicycle, and transit connections both
                             within employment centers and between centers and surrounding
                             uses.
Goal 2.L	 New Growth Areas. Encourage the creation of well-defined, balanced neighborhoods
          in new Specific Plan areas.
          Policy 2.L.1	      New Growth Area Development Considerations. The
                             General Plan contemplates growth which may occur in new Specific
                             Plan Areas. The General Plan does not prioritize or sequence
                             possible growth. Rather, approval of new Specific Plan Areas will
                             require careful analysis for consistency with all General Plan policies
                             and satisfactory resolution of site specific constraints unique to each
                             area.
          Policy 2.L.2	      Specific Plan-1A (SP-1A). Promote development of SP-1A
                             as a mixed-use residential district anchored by a research and
                             technology business park in the Southern Gateway area at CR
                             25 and SR 113. Concentrate the highest intensity of development
                             within and in close proximity to the business park area, with lower-
                             density, largely residential uses to the north. Encourage sustainable
                             development through the use of renewable energy sources and
                             water conservation tools with the goal of striving to achieve zero
                             net energy at the building and neighborhood level to the extent
                             feasible.
          Policy 2.L.3	      Specific Plan-1B (SP-1B). Encourage mixed-use residential
                             development that complements development in SP-1A, including
                             development of the Southern Gateway as a research and technology
                             business park. Encourage sustainable development through the use
                             of renewable energy sources and water conservation tools with
                             the goal of striving to achieve zero net energy at the building and
                             neighborhood level to the extent feasible.
                                                                                               LU 2-77
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 2.L.4	    Specific Plan-1C (SP-1C). Design SP-1C as an exclusively
                                   residential neighborhood containing executive homes and rural
                                   estates on larger lots.
                  Policy 2.L.5	    Specific Plan-2. Encourage SP-2 to develop as a sustainable
                                   “complete neighborhood” with a town center so that most
                                   daily needs can be met within the Specific Plan area. Encourage
                                   sustainable development through the use of renewable energy
                                   sources and water conservation tools with the goal of striving to
                                   achieve zero net energy at the building and neighborhood level to
                                   the extent feasible. Secure an alternate site for processing waste
                                   from the Pacific Coast Producers tomato processing plant prior to
                                   adoption of a Specific Plan for SP-2. If development occurs within
                                   the boundary of the odor impact area depicted in Figure 7-6, the
                                   developer must bear all costs associated with odor mitigation.
                                   No specific plan for SP-2 may be processed until the designs for
                                   projects to provide necessary 200-year flood protection have been
                                   approved and the funding for construction has been secured. Any
                                   contemplated sale of the City’s 900-acre property within SP-2 will
                                   require a four-fifths (4/5th) vote of the City Council. Maximum
                                   development capacity in SP-2 shall be consistent with the General
                                   Plan EIR growth assumptions as depicted in the FEIR Exhibit 4.2-7.
                                   See also Policy 2.B.2.
                  Policy 2.L.6	    Specific Plan-3A. Promote development in SP-3A to contain
                                   a mix of residential, commercial, office, and light industrial uses.
                                   Provide parks/greenbelts, grocery stores, community services and
                                   other amenities that benefit new residents and existing residents in
                                   nearby neighborhoods. Encourage sustainable development through
                                   the use of renewable energy sources and water conservation tools
                                   with the goal of striving to achieve zero net energy at the building
                                   and neighborhood level to the extent feasible. Require that SP-3A
                                   include within its boundaries any unincorporated residential areas
                                   (consistent with the General Plan Land Use Diagram) and include a
                                   strategy for financing any necessary infrastructure upgrades to these
                                   areas. No specific plan for SP-3 may be processed until the designs
                                   for projects to provide necessary 200-year flood protection have
                                   been approved and the funding for construction has been secured.
                                   Residential development may only occur once a Specific Plan has
                                   been adopted.
                                   See also Policy 2.B.2.
LU 2-78

                      Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
          Policy 2.L.7	     Specific Plan-3B. Allow SP-3B to continue to be primarily
                                                                                               2
                            agriculture-related industrial uses with some low-density residential
                            uses along CR 98. Require that SP-3B include within its boundaries
                            any unincorporated residential areas (consistent with the General
                            Plan Land Use Diagram) and include a strategy for financing any
                            necessary infrastructure upgrades to these areas. Sensitively design
                            transition areas to minimize compatibility concerns between
                            residential, commercial and industrial uses. Non-residential
                            development that is consistent with the Land Use Diagram may
                            develop before a Specfic Plan has been adopted.
Goal 2.M	 Neighborhoods in New Specific Plan Areas. Create distinctive and sustainable new
          neighborhoods.
          Policy 2.M.1	     Compact Form. Promote the development of compact, complete
                            neighborhoods that locate services and amenities within walking
                            and biking distance of neighborhood residents, reducing the need to
                            travel by car.
          Policy 2.M.2	     Mixed Uses. Require neighborhood design that incorporates a mix
                            of residential and non-residential development that addresses the
                            basic daily needs of residents and employees. Each new growth area
                            must incorporate some new employment-generating uses.
          Policy 2.M.3	     Housing. Design neighborhoods to include a mix of housing types
                            at a range of densities and affordability levels that accommodate
                            residents at all stages of life. Residential uses must acheive an overall
                            minimum average density of eight dwelling units per gross acre
                            across the Specific Plan.
          Policy 2.M.4	     Pedestrian and Bike Mobility. Design streets to facilitate
                            pedestrian and bicycle mobility in order to reduce automobile
                            dependence and vehicle miles travelled. Utilize a traditional street
                            grid with walkable blocks. Integrate a seamless greenbelt/trail
                            system that provides recreational and transportation benefits.
          Policy 2.M.5	     Efficiency. Strive for net-zero energy development by encouraging
                            buildings to be constructed so that they consume less energy, water,
                            and other resources; allow natural ventilation; use daylight effectively;
                            and facilitate the use of clean energy whenever possible.
          Policy 2.M.6	     Green Building. Encourage sustainable, “green” building practices
                            and construction techniques so that structures are designed, built,
                            and renovated in a sustainable and resource-efficient manner.
          Policy 2.M.7	     Characteristics of Older Neighborhoods. Incorporate the best
                            characteristics of older neighborhoods, such as an orthogonal street
                            grid with smaller blocks, front porches, shallower front setbacks, a
                            variety of architectural styles, unique lighting and monument features
                            to create a sense of place.
                                                                                               LU 2-79

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                       Policy 2.M.8	         Variety and Quality. Ensure that new residential development
                                             provides variability and high quality design to distinguish individual
                                             homes from one another and create identifiable neighborhoods.
                       Policy 2.M.9	         Lifestyle Housing. Promote housing design that serves various
                                             lifestyles, needs, and affordability levels, through strategies such as
                                             smaller house styles, compact layouts, and cost-effective design
                                             techniques.
    Goal 2.N	          Open Space System. Create a comprehensive and connected system of parks,
                       greenbelts and open space.
    Refer to the Public Facilities and Services Element for additional goals and policies on parks, greenbelts, and
    recreation facilities. Refer to the Safety Element for goals and policies on flooding and flood protection.
                       Policy 2.N.1	         High-Quality Park System. Provide a high-quality, diversified
                                             public park system that provides a variety of recreational
                                             opportunities for all City residents.
                       Policy 2.N.2	         Greenways and Greenbelts. Develop a system of greenways and
                                             greenbelts that link existing and future parks and open space where
                                             possible and provide the opportunity for linear, multi-use trails.
                                             Require a system of greenways and/or greenbelts as a component of
                                             new Specific Plan areas.
                       Policy 2.N.3	         City Connected. Create connections between components of
                                             the open space system, including the Sports Park and Community
                                             Center facilities as well as a perimeter walking path along the ULL.
LU 2-80
Goal 2.O	
                                Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                 Preservation and Adaptive Reuse. Preserve community character and historic
                 buildings while attracting new infill development and investment in existing
                                                                                                            2
                 neighborhoods.
Refer to Section 2.3 for additional goals and policies regarding the Downtown Historic District.
                 Policy 2.O.1	         Neighborhood Preservation Overlay District. Preserve the
                                       Neighborhood Preservation Overlay zoning district to ensure that
                                       new development in historic neighborhoods is well-designed and
                                       appropriately scaled.
                 Policy 2.O.2	         Adaptive Reuse. Promote adaptive reuse of vacant and/
                                       or underutilized historic buildings through public and private
                                       investment.
                 Policy 2.O.3	         Relocation of Historic Buildings. Where feasible and
                                       appropriate, encourage the relocation of reusable historic
                                       buildings within or into historic neighborhoods as a means
                                       of historic preservation. Relocation is only permitted upon
                                       execution of an agreement covering reuse provisions and
                                       approval of a replacement project.
                                       (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.6-1a)
Goal 2.P	        Historic Programs and Requirements. Preserve, maintain, and celebrate sites and
                 structures that serve as significant, visible reminders of the city’s social, architectural
                 and agricultural history through adherence to federal, state and local programs and
                 requirements.
                 Policy 2.P.1	         Historic Resources Inventory. Maintain and regularly update
                                       an inventory of the city’s Historic Resources that includes all
                                       historically and architecturally significant buildings, sites, landscapes,
                                       signs, and features within the city limits.
                 Policy 2.P.2	         Environmental Review. Require that environmental review
                                       be conducted for alterations and/or demolition of buildings
                                       designated as, or potentially eligible for designation as, historic
                                       structures as required by Chapter 12A of the Municipal Code
                                       and CEQA regulations.
                                       (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.6-1a)
                 Policy 2.P.3	         Historic Neighborhood Design Criteria. Establish design
                                       guidelines that ensure that new residential construction, additions,
                                       repairs, and remodels in historic neighborhoods are contextual and
                                       preserve the historic nature of the neighborhood.
                                                                                                             LU 2-81

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                       Policy 2.P.4	          California Historical Building Code. Train local building officials
                                              to use the California Historical Building Code as a tool to foster
                                              appropriate and efficient rehabilitation of historic buildings.
                       Policy 2.P.5	          Certified Local Government (CLG) Program. Become a
                                              Certified Local Government (CLG), through the State Office of
                                              Historic Preservation, to assist historic preservation programs in
                                              Woodland.
    Goal 2.Q	          Historic Education and Awareness. Promote community awareness and
                       appreciation of Woodland’s history and architecture.
                       Policy 2.Q.1	          Education. Work with Woodland schools and local history
                                              groups to provide opportunities for education about Woodland’s
                                              architectural history and resources.
                       Policy 2.Q.2	          Historic Markers. Continue to promote the Woodland Historic
                                              Landmarks program and develop a model for historic markers and
                                              signs for historic sites and buildings.
                       Policy 2.Q.3	          Awards. Continue to formally recognize private and public
                                              quality rehabilitation and restoration work through ceremonies
                                              (e.g., Heritage Home awards, Preservation Award, Certificates of
                                              Appreciation for commercial and public building rehabilitation work).
                       Policy 2.Q.4	          Workshops. Coordinate with the Woodland Public Library and
                                              the Historic Preservation Commission to hold occasional public
                                              workshops, lectures, and slide shows on historic preservation and
                                              restoration.
                       Policy 2.Q.5	          Promotion of Historic Resources and Events. Continue
                                              promoting historic resources and preservation events, such as the
                                              annual “Stroll Through History” program.
                       Policy 2.Q.6	          Historic Museum. Encourage the formation of a historic museum
                                              or facility in or near the Downtown that celebrates local and
                                              regional historic resources.
    Preservation of historic homes and buildings greatly contributes to Woodland’s unique charm and character.
LU 2-82

3 Transportation and
  Circulation Element
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   3.1	 Introduction and
                                                 Purpose
                                   Mobility and accessibility are important aspects of the City of
                                   Woodland’s small-town character. The city has remained relatively
                                   compact compared to other suburban communities in the Sacra-
                                   mento region, making transit, walking, and bicycling viable choices
                                   for travel. However, automobiles are the primary mode of travel in
                                   the city. As the city looks forward in the next 20 years, increased
                                   choice and opportunity with regard to alternative methods of trav-
                                   el will be its focus.
                                   The Transportation and Circulation Element emphasizes the de-
                                   velopment of new and modified infrastructure that promotes
                                   increased transportation choices to serve existing and new de-
                                   velopment. Specifically, it promotes an integrated, multimodal
                                   transportation system to reduce air pollution and greenhouse gas
                                   (GHG) emissions, reduce the need for costly roadway improve-
                                   ments, and allow residents and business the opportunity to oper-
                                   ate, recreate and move through the city efficiently without an au-
                                   tomobile whenever possible. In addition, streets, roads, and other
                                   thoroughfares represent the public face of the city and provide an
                                   opportunity to improve its beauty, convenience, and safety.
                                   Attractive, pedestrian friendly sidewalks along Main Street encourage walking
                                   Downtown.
TC 3-2

                                                           Transportation and Circulation Element
                                                                                                  3
    The Transportation and Circulation
    Element is organized as follows:
    •	 Section 3.1: Introduction and Purpose. Introduces the
         topics covered in this Element and outlines the Element’s rela-
         tionship to State law and the Visioning Statement and Guiding
         Principles.
    •	 Section 3.2: Streets and Roadways Network. Discusses
         the overall planning and development of the city’s circulation
         system, balancing the needs of all modes of travel through com-
         prehensive network design. This section presents a circulation
         diagram as well as descriptions of street typologies.
    •	 Section 3.3: Walkability. Promotes safe, walkable communi-
         ties in the city for residents to enjoy.
    •	 Section 3.4: Bikeways. Encourages a comprehensive city-
         wide bikeway network to facilitate increased bicycling.
    •	 Section 3.5:Transit. Promotes effective transit service.
    •	 Section 3.6: Other Transportation Topics. Addresses
         parking, the movement of goods by rail or trucks, air transpor-
         tation, and transportation funding.
    •	 Section 3.7: Goals and Policies.
Although automobiles are the primary form of travel in Woodland, the small
town environment makes public transportation, walking, and bicycling viable
options.
                                                                                                  TC 3-3

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                             Relationship to State Law
                                             State law (Government Code Section 65302(b)) requires general
                                             plans to include a Circulation Element that contains the following
                                             key topics identified in Table 3-1 below. State law provides that
                                             the General Plan can address these topics in any format and is
                                             required to address them only to the extent that they are relevant
                                             in the Planning Area.
      Table 3-1:	       Circulation Topics Required by State Law
                                                              Addressed in this      Location if not addressed
     Required Topic
                                                              Element                in this Element
      General location and extent of existing and              Yes
      proposed major thoroughfares, correlated with the
      land use element
      General location and extent of existing and              Yes
      proposed transportation routes, correlated with
      the land use element
      General location and extent of existing and              Yes                    Note: There are no
      proposed terminals, correlated with the land use                                existing or planned air,
      element                                                                         rail, or marine terminals
                                                                                      in the City of Woodland.
                                                                                      However, this Element
                                                                                      addresses a proposed bus
                                                                                      terminal.
      General location and extent of existing and              No                     There are no existing
      proposed military airports and ports, correlated                                or proposed military
      with the land use element                                                       airports or ports in the
                                                                                      Planning Area.
      General location and extent of existing and              No                     Addressed in the Public
      proposed other local public utilities and facilities,                           Facilities and Services
      correlated with the land use element                                            Element
      Plan for a balanced, multimodal transportation           Yes
      network
TC 3-4
Complete Streets
                                                               Transportation and Circulation Element
                                                                                                                        3
The California Complete Streets Act of 2008 requires cities that
are making significant updates to the Circulation Element of their
General Plan to develop it for a balanced, multimodal transporta-
tion network that meets the needs of all users of roadways, in-
cluding motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists, children, persons with dis-
abilities, seniors, movers of commercial goods, and users of public
transportation. The Complete Streets Act is premised on the no-
tion that a balanced, multimodal transportation network will serve
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, make the most efficient use
of transportation infrastructure, and improve public health by en-
couraging physical activity via shifting short trips in the automobile
to biking, walking, and the use of public transit.
Complete Streets provide safe routes for motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists, children, persons with disabilities, seniors,
movers of commercial goods, and users of public transportation.
Relationship To Visioning Statement and Guiding
Principles
The Transportation and Circulation Element reflects many of the
values expressed in the Visioning Statement and Guiding Principles
but most closely reflects the following excerpt from the Vision
Statement:
“Woodland is a healthy community with livable neighborhoods, a thriving
downtown, well maintained infrastructure, excellent schools and recre-
ational amenities connected by a seamless network of trails and paths.”
                                                                                                                           TC 3-5

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   In addition, the Transportation and Circulation Element most di-
                                   rectly supports the following Guiding Principles:
                                     •	 Orderly Development: Promote new growth while achiev-
                                        ing an orderly pattern of community development, consistent
                                        with economic, social, fiscal, and environmental needs.
                                     •	 Mobility Options: Coordinate land use and transportation
                                        planning to provide a range of attractive and viable transporta-
                                        tion options such as bicycle, pedestrian and transit.
                                     •	 Health and Recreation: Provide all residents with opportu-
                                        nities to live an active, healthy, and green life style.
                                     •	 Environmental Stewardship: Foster a sustainable commu-
                                        nity for the next generation and protect and improve the qual-
                                        ity of the natural environment.
TC 3-6

3.2	 Streets and Roadway
                                                       Transportation and Circulation Element
                                                                                                         3
              Network
This section discusses the overall planning and development of
the city’s circulation system to increase multi-modal accessibility. It
also includes a commitment to plan for “Complete Streets.”
Complete Streets
Complete Streets are streets designed, operated, and maintained
to accommodate access and travel for all travel modes including
pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, and transit users, across all age
groups, income groups, and abilities. The City of Woodland sup-
ports Complete Streets to improve safety, promote better public
health, improve the convenience of choices amongst travel options,
and increase efficiency of travel.
The General Plan establishes a commitment to a balanced, multi-
modal transportation network as a whole. While each individual
street does not need to provide for all modes of travel, consid-
eration to all roadway users will be prioritized through compre-
hensive street design using both functional classification and street
typology.
Functional Classification
The city’s roadways are categorized using the following classifica-
tions based on function.
  •	 Principal Arterial Streets: Provide mobility for high traffic
     volumes between various parts of the City. They typically link
     freeways to collector streets and local streets and generally
     have higher speeds and more access control. Principal arterials
     within the City may have up to four travel lanes.
  •	 Minor Arterial Streets: Provide mobility for high traffic vol-
     umes between various parts of the city. They typically have
     lower speeds and less access control than a Principal Arterial
     street due to the intensity of the development in the urban
                                                                        Woodland’s system of arterials, col-
     environment. Minor arterials within the City may have up to        lectors, and local streets provide con-
     four travel lanes.                                                 nectivity between neighborhoods,
                                                                        employment centers, and other
                                                                        destinations.
                                                                                                          TC 3-7

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                •	 Collector Streets: Provide for relatively short distance travel
                                                   between and within neighborhoods, and generally have lower
                                                   speeds and traffic volumes than arterials. Driveway access to
                                                   collectors is limited less than on arterials but may still be dis-
                                                   couraged. Collectors within the city have two travel lanes.
                                                •	 Local Streets: Provide direct roadway access to abutting
                                                   land uses and serve short distance trips within neighborhoods.
                                                   Traffic volumes and speed limits on local streets are low, and
                                                   these roadways have no more than two travel lanes.
                                                •	 Alleys: Alleys or “rear lanes” serve as accessible rights-of-
                                                   ways for public and private vehicles, bikes, and pedestrians; and
                                                   as service access to parking lots and businesses.
                                             Street Typology
    Interstate 5 runs east to northwest      Street typologies expand upon the functional classification and
    through Woodland’s Planning Area         take into account street context, land use context, and travel mode
    and is a principal statewide connec-     prioritization. This typology ensures that the application of street
    tor. Proximity to I-5 is a key asset for
                                             standards consider a street’s relation to surrounding land uses, ap-
    Woodland’s industrial area.
                                             propriate travel speeds, and the need to accommodate multiple
                                             travel modes and user abilities. The typology also gives the city di-
                                             rection when faced with prioritizing transportation improvements
                                             for competing modes of travel. The city’s streets are classified in
                                             the following street types. Table 3-2 describes the street typolo-
                                             gies appropriate for each functional classification and their priori-
                                             tized modes of travel.
                                                •	 Residential Streets: Designed to move all modes of travel
                                                   through residential neighborhoods and local areas of the city.
                                                   Provide property access and multi-modal mobility by empha-
                                                   sizing walking and biking. On-street parking serves adjacent
                                                   land uses.
                                                •	 Mixed-Use Streets: Provide access in and to the city’s
                                                   downtown core along with retail and mixed land uses along
                                                   neighborhood centers and corridors. Designed with on-street
                                                   parking, narrower travel lanes, and speeds to promote safe pe-
                                                   destrian and bicycle movement.
                                                •	 Commercial Streets: Provide access to the city’s retail and
                                                   employment centers. Generally service commercial buildings.
                                                   Because street design and vehicle speeds are less desirable for
                                                   pedestrians and bicyclists, landscaped strips separating bicycle
                                                   and walking facilities should be considered in these corridors if
                                                   alternative routes are not available.
TC 3-8

 •	 Industrial Streets: Designed to connect people and busi-
    nesses within the city’s industrial areas and accommodate large
                                                                     Transportation and Circulation Element
                                                                                                            3
    vehicles such as trucks. Because street designs accommodate
    heavy vehicles with large turning radii, bicycle and pedestrian
    facilities should be carefully designed only in key corridors and
    separated from the street wherever feasible.
Table 3-2:	       Street Typology
                                                                         Mode Priority
                      Street Type                       High                                   Low
 Principal          Commericial
   Arterial
                    Industrial
      Minor         Residential                                           Equal Priority
   Arterial         Mixed-Use                                             Equal Priority
                    Commericial                                           Equal Priority
                    Industrial
 Collector          Residential                                           Equal Priority
                    Mixed-Use                                              Equal Priority
                    Commericial                                            Equal Priority
                    Industrial
        Local       Residential
                    Mixed-Use
                    Industrial
                 Equal Priority: Recognize the importance of all transportation modes.
                                                                                                            TC 3-9

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    (Left) A hostile pedestrian environment that has not attracted quality development.
    (Right) A vital pedestrian, retail street. Off-peak parking and a row of trees and planters buffer the sidewalk from traffic.
    Storefronts, awnings, and other architectural details provide an attractive human scale.
                                                 Context Sensitive Street Design
                                                 The City’s approach to transportation decision-making and design
                                                 takes into consideration the built and natural environments and
                                                 context through which the city’s streets and roads pass. The pro-
                                                 cess emphasizes that transportation facilities should fit the physical
                                                 settings and preserve scenic, aesthetic, historic and environmental
                                                 resources, while maintaining safety and mobility. Residential streets
                                                 will be designed or modified to encourage drivers to slow down
                                                 to maximize safety, convenience, and the comfort of pedestrians,
                                                 bikers, and local drivers. Commercial and mixed use streets will be
                                                 designed or modified to maximize on-street parking, pedestrian
                                                 access, and to allow vehicle occupants to view store windows and
                                                 signage as they pass by.
                                                 Level of Service (LOS) Standards
                                                 Level of Service (LOS) is a qualitative description of intersection
                                                 performance based on the average delay that vehicles experience
                                                 during peak travel hours. LOS can range from “A” representing
                                                 free-flow conditions to “F” representing congested conditions
                                                 with long delays. LOS definitions are shown in Table 3-3.
TC 3-10

  Table 3-3:	Level of Service Definitions
                                                                        Transportation and Circulation Element
                                                                                                               3
 Level of Service (LOS)           Description
  A                                Free flow, insignificant delay
  B                                Stable operation, minimal delay
  C                                Stable operation, acceptable delay
  D                                Approaching unstable/tolerable delay
  E                                Unstable operation, significant delay
  F                                Forced flow, excessive delay
Source: 2000 Highway Capacity Manual, Transportation Research Board, 2000
Tradeoffs
With a commitment to Complete Streets and a desire to accom-
modate other users such as pedestrians and bicyclists, it is particu-
larly important that the vehicle level of service (LOS) policy and
threshold, commonly evaluated to determine the size and design
of the roadway system, not conflict with other community values.
This approach requires recognizing the following tradeoffs associ-
ated with different LOS thresholds, which ensures that the policy
will represent clear community priorities and provide specific ex-
ceptions when other community values are considered more im-
portant than LOS.
LOS Policy Tradeoffs:
 1.	 Costs – Because LOS policies influence the size and type of
     transportation infrastructure investment, maintaining a higher
     LOS (e.g. LOS A, B, or C) may be an inefficient use of public
     funds when considering the cost to build, operate, and main-
     tain the roadway network.
 2.	 Safety – Higher LOS thresholds are associated with higher
     vehicle speeds for peak and non-peak hours, which increases
     the potential that collision between vehicles and bicyclists or
     pedestrians could be fatal.
                                                                                                               TC 3-11

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                    3.	 Sustainable Transportation Modes – Traditional LOS pol-
                                        icy measures driver comfort and convenience, which means
                                        that considerations for pedestrians or bicyclists using the same
                                        facility are not incorporated. Negative impacts to pedestrians
                                        and bicyclists include increased crossing distances for pedes-
                                        trians and bicyclists at intersections, resulting from roadway
                                        widening.
                                    4.	 Physical Space – The goal of an efficient transportation net-
                                        work is to increase the capacity for person-trips, not just vehi-
                                        cle-trips. Maintaining a higher LOS policy typically focuses on
                                        moving vehicles through the network instead of people.
                                    5.	 Air Quality and Greenhouse Gasses – LOS thresholds
                                        influence travel speeds and potentially influence induced travel
                                        effects, both of which, can result in higher levels of air pollutant
                                        and greenhouse gas emissions.
                                   The policies below seek to address these tradeoffs and promote
                                   a transportation network that accommodates multiple competing
                                   interests.
                                   Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT)
                                   With a shift in emphasis away from LOS, VMT is the State pre-
                                   ferred alternative performance metric recommended to describe
                                   the overall amount of travel in the city based on distance and is
                                   directly related to fuel consumption, air pollution and greenhouse
                                   gas emissions. VMT is defined as the total mileage traveled by all
                                   vehicles. Although VMT relates specifically to autos, it is able to
                                   capture the effects of development patterns such as land use mix
                                   and density along with transit, bike, and pedestrian infrastructure
                                   improvements by reflecting their impacts on vehicle trip genera-
                                   tion and trip lengths. The City will use a combination of LOS and
                                   VMT metrics to ensure the efficient movement of people and
                                   goods as well as a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
                                   Efforts to reduce VMT may include implementing transportation
                                   demand management (TDM) strategies such as road or parking
                                   pricing, commute trip reduction programs, transit system improve-
                                   ments, or upgrading conventional streets to Complete Streets.
                                   Reducing VMT is consistent with the city’s desire to promote bik-
                                   ing, walking, and transit usage as viable transportation alternatives
                                   to driving.
TC 3-12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        	Transportation and Circulation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 3-1:	Level of Service Exceptions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¨        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Level of Service Exception Segments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LOS C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LOS F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                              Level of Service Exception Intersections
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !      LOS E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kentucky Ave
                                                                                                                                                       County Road 98
N:\2014Projects\3244_CityofWoodland_GeneralPlanRemainder\Graphics\Draft\GIS\MXD\Roadway Network\GP_Figures\Fig3-1_LOSexceptions.mxd
                                                                                                                                                                                                         W Woodland Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Beamer St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 East St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        West St                                                                                Lemen Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Court St
                                                                                                                                            Hwy 16                                                                                                                                                                     Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ! !                                                                                           E Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lincoln Ave                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cross St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Far nh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Third St                            E Gum Ave                                                                                    am                    Maxwell Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          College St
                                                                                                                                                                                     Cottonwood St
                                                                                                                                                                        Ashley Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                     California St                                                                                                                                  Bourn Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Branigan Ave
                                                                                                                                      County Road 24                                                                                  Gibson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                      County Road 24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pioneer Ave                                       County Road 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Harry Lorenzo Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Coloma Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      El Dorado Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Matmor Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             113                                      Farmers Central Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     County Road 99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E Heritage Pky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            County Road 25A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 3-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TC    3-13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Level of Service Exceptions

           City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 3-2:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 3-2:	Citywide Circulation Diagram
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Circulation Diagram
                                                                                                  4 (4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Freeway
                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   State Highway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Freeway Ramp - Planned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Principal Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Principal Arterial - Planned
                                                                                                                                                                                     4 (4)                                                                                                                                                                                                               2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Minor Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   County Road 102
                                                                                                                                         2 (2)                                                                                                                                                                    2 (2)
                                       2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Minor Arterial - Planned
                                                                2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4 (4)
                                                   2 (2)                2 (2)                                       2 (2)                                         2 (2)                             2 (4)                                                    5 (5) 2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Collector
                                                                                                                                                 Kentucky Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                        2 (2)
                                                                                      2 (2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Collector - Planned
                                                                                                                         2 (2)
                                       2 (2) 2 (2) 2 (2)                                        2 (2)                                                                        2 (2)                                       4 (4)                                                                                  2 (2)
                                                                                                            W Woodland Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 (4)                                                                                                                       Local
                                                    2 (2)                 2 (2)                                  2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Beamer St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4 (4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 (4)       Existing Lanes (Future Lanes)
                                                                                                                                                          2 (2)                                 2 (2)                                                                    2 (2)                                                                                       2 (2)
                                                                                                                                        2 (2)                                                                                                                 2 (2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                City Boundary
                                       2 (2)                   2 (2)                 2 (2)                                                                                   2 (2)                                       4 (4)                                                                                                                                                                         2 (4)
                                                                                                                                   West St
                                                                                                                  2 (2)                                                                         2 (2)                                     Lemen Ave                                         4 (4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2 (2)              2 (2)                                         2 (2)               0 (2) 4 (4)
                                                               2 (2)                                            4 (4)
                                                                                                                                                   Court St
                                                                                                                                               2 (2)                    2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      * Road diets will be considered for:
            Hwy 16                                       2 (2)        2 (2)                                                  2 (2)                                                 4 (4)
                                2 (2)              4 (4)        4 (4)                                           4 (4)                4 (4)        2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                         2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                               2 (2)         2 (2)                                                        4 (4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4 (4)                4 (4)      4 (4)                4 (4)                                              4 (4)                                    4 (4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E Main St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2 (2)             2 (2)                                    - West Gibson (Cottonwood to
                                                                                                                                                         2 (2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4 (4)                                                                                 0 (4)
                                                   2 (2) 2 (2) 2 (2) 2 (2)                                             2 (2) 2 (2) 2 (2)                                   2 (2) 4 (4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      College Street)
                                       2 (2)                                                                     2 (2)                         Lincoln Ave
                                                               2 (2)                2 (2)
                                                                                                                             2 (2)                                   2 (2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0 (4) 0 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      - West Court (Cottonwood to West
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4 (4)               4 (4)                            4 (4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       East St
                                                                                                                                                         2 (2)                                                                                                2 (2)                                                                                        2 (2)     Far n                                                                                                            0 (2)       0 (2)               Street)
                                                                                                                                   Cross St                                                                                                                                                                                     4 (4)
                                                              2 (2)                                              2 (2)                      2 (2)                      2 (2)                                                                                                                                                                                             ham                       4 (4)                                                   Maxwell Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ave                        Bronze Star Dr                                                       0 (2)                                    - West Main Street (County Road 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0 (2)                                             0 (4)
                                       2 (2)                                                                                                                                2 (2)                                        4 (4)                                                                                                                                                                             2 (2)                                                                                                      to Cleveland
                                                                                                                                                                                             Third St                               E Gum Ave                                               6 (6)                                                            2 (2)            2 (2)                              2 (2)
                                                               2 (2)                2 (2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 (2)                                                        2 (2)       4 (4)                                                                                                          Street)
                                                                                                                                                                        College St
                                  County Road 98
                                                                                                            2 (2)                                                                                             2 (2)                                   2 (2)                   2 (2)                                                                                                                                  Maxwell Ave
                                                                                                                                       2 (2)
                                                                                Cottonwood St
                                                           Ashley Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                2 (2)                                                                                                                                         4 (4)                                                                                                                                                                   - East Street (Kentucky Avenue to
                                                                                                        California St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4 (4)                                                                                                                                                                        4 (4)                                                                                                            Gibson Road)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Bourn Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2 (2)                                                                                      Branigan Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2 (2)
      County Road 24                                                                                                                             Gibson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                               2 (2)                                       County Road 24
                                                     2 (2)              2 (2)                                           4 (4)                                 4 (4)                      4 (4)                 4 (4)                        4 (4)                  4 (4)                    4 (4)      4 (4)                    4 (4)                                    4 (4)                                                                 0 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      * Note:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Matmor Rd
                                                              2 (2)                 2 (2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2 (4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 (2)                                                                                                                                                                                                    The number of lanes shown represents
                                                                                                                                      2 (2)                                                                2 (2)        2 (4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pioneer Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Harry Lorenzo Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 (2)
                                      2 (2)                                      2 (2)                                                                                         2 (2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the ultimate size of the roadway.
                                                                                                                                                                                              Coloma Way
                                                                                                                                                 El Dorado Dr
                                                                                                                                                                2 (2)                   2 (2)                           2 (2)                                2 (2)                                                                                                                                  2 (4)                                                                     0 (2)                                   However, the City may provide fewer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sports Park Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 (2)                                  2 (2)                     113                                              0 (2)                     Farmers Central Rd                                                                                                                                           lanes than indicated so long as the width
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2 (2)                          2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of the right-of-way is maintained.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Meikle Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 (2) Pioneer Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0 (2)            0 (2)                                                                   2 (4)             0 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0 (2)                        0 (2)                                                                  2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4 (4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0 (2)                                                                                                          2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               New N-S Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 (2)
                                                                                                                                County Road 99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 New E-W Rd                                                                                                                                                                           E Heritage Pky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0 (2)                                                                             2 (2)                2 (2)                            2 (2)                                                    2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Parkland Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Marston Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2 (2)                                                                     0 (2)                                              0 (2)           2 (2)                           2 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0 (2)
                                                                                                                                                       County Road 25A                                                                                                                                                              0 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2 (4)            2 (4)            2 (4)                       2 (2)                                                             0 (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0        0.25       0.5                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Data Source: Fehrs & Peers, 2016; City of Woodland, California,
TC 3-14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2013; Yolo County, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
3.3	 Walkability
                                                           Transportation and Circulation Element
                                                                                                               3
The General Plan promotes safe, walkable communities in the city
for residents to enjoy by encouraging walking as a form of travel
to improve the quality of life for Woodland residents and visitors.
Walking is an important link between other modes of transporta-                   Refer to the Healthy Community
tion, and can have positive environmental, social equity, health, and             Element for additional discussion
economic impacts on the community. Promoting walkability re-                      on healthy living.
flects the community’s desire to encourage healthy active lifestyles
and maintain Woodland’s unique small town charm.
The built environment and community design can influence walk-
ing behavior. Creating a truly viable pedestrian system involves
more than laying down a sidewalk or installing a signal. It requires
paying attention to the smallest details such as aesthetics, shading
or paving materials. The walking environment should be secure,
                                                                                  Refer to the Land Use, Com-
pleasant, open and inviting, not sterile and vacant, to encourage
                                                                                  munity Design, and Historic
people to walk. Woodland residents look for opportunities to
                                                                                  Preservation Element for more on
walk and bicycle both to recreate and socialize. The City’s policies              streetscape design.
respond by encouraging changes in the built environment that will
increase walking. This includes building more sidewalks and trails,
making the streetscape more pedestrian friendly, creating better
connectivity between destinations and increasing pedestrian safety.
The General Plan promotes safe, walkable communities and aims to improve pedestrian paths and connectivity in
Woodland.
                                                                                                               TC 3-15

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                           3.4	 Bikeways
                                           The General Plan encourages a comprehensive citywide bikeway
      Refer to the Healthy Community       network to facilitate increased bicycling. In addition to supporting
      Element for additional discus-       recreation and an active healthy lifestyle, the Plan seeks to present
      sion on active transportation and
                                           biking as a viable mode for all purposes, especially commuting to
      healthy living.
                                           work or school. Figure 3-3 shows existing bike facilities.
                                           Bicycle facilities consist of the following classifications:
                                              •	 Class I Bikeway – A bicycle or multi-use path that is sepa-
                                                 rated from vehicle traffic.
                                              •	 Class II Bikeway – An on-street striped lane designated for
                                                 one-way bicycle traffic. A bike lane typically provides at least 5
                                                 feet in width for bicycle travel.
                                              •	 Class III Bikeway – A marked on-street bike route that
                                                 promotes shared use with motor vehicle traffic. Typically bike
                                                 routes are shared paved services marked with signage on
                                                 streets with a low vehicle volume.  
    The bicycle networks in Woodland aim to provide safe and comfortable options for transportation and recreation.
TC 3-16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              	Transportation and Circulation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 3-3:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 3-3:	Existing Bike Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bicycle Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Existing Facilities
                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Class I Bikeway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Class II Bike Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Class III Bike Route
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Proposed/Future Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Class I Bikeway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       County Road 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Class II Bike Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Class III Bike Route
                                                                                                Kentucky Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Class I and Class II
                                                                   W Woodland Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yolo County Bike System
                                                                                                                                               Beamer St                                                                                                                                                                                        City Boundary
                                                                                  West St                                                                          Lemen Ave                                                                                                                                                        * Note:
                                                                                                  Court St                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Class I is off street path
      Hwy 16                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E Main St
                                                                                                                                                                           Main St                                                                                                                                                  Class II is on street, signed and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    marked lane
                                                                                                             Lincoln Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Class III is on street, signed only
                                                                                                                                                     East St                                                                                                                                                                        Class I and Class II is off street path
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Far n
                                                                                                Cross St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ham
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ave                              Bronze Star Dr                             and on street lanes
                                                                                                                                 Third St                      E Gum Ave
                                                                                                                    College St
                 County Road 98
                                               Cottonwood St
                                  Ashley Ave
                                                               California St                                                                                                                           Bourn Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Branigan Ave
County Road 24                                                                                  Gibson Rd                                                                                                                                                                                 County Road 24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pioneer Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Harry Lorenzo Ave
                                                                                                                                  Coloma Way
                                                                                                El Dorado Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                     Matmor Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                 113                                     Farmers Central Rd
                                                                               County Road 99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E Heritage Pky
                                                                                                      County Road 25A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0        0.25      0.5                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Data Source: City of Woodland Bicycle Master Plan, 2017;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fehrs & Peers, 2016; Dyett & Bhatia, 2016     TC     3-17
        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
          This page intentionally left blank.
TC 3-18
3.5	 Transit
                                                             Transportation and Circulation Element
                                                                                                                     3
The General Plan promotes an effective transit system that sup-
ports the travel needs of those without access to a vehicle and                        Refer to the Sustainability,
those who choose to live and work in areas where land use den-                         Conservation, and Open Space
sity and intensity are supportive of transit. The Plan also seeks to                   Element for additional discussion
support and enhance the relationship between the city and the                          on the City’s efforts to reduce
                                                                                       greenhouse gas emissions and
Yolo County Transportation District (YCTD). Continued improve-
                                                                                       combat climate change.
ments to the transit system in Woodland will further the city’s
efforts to reduce VMT and reduce air pollution and greenhouse
gas emissions.
The Yolobus provides local routes within the City of Woodland, as well as intercity connections to Downtown Sacramen-
to, the Sacramento Airport, and other Yolo County destinations.
                                                                                                                      TC 3-19

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                         3.6	 Other Transportation
                                                       Topics
                                         There are a number of additional transportation topics that are vital
                                         to the success of Woodland’s transportation network. Each of these
                                         is briefly introduced below and further expanded upon in the goals
                                         and policies that follow.
                                         Parking
                                         The General Plan balances the need for adequate parking for exist-
                                         ing and new development while protecting walk and bike friend-
                                         ly environments, and reducing costs and environmental impacts.
                                         Parking lot design and placement will reduce the visual impacts in
                                         the community while parking standards will be adjusted over time
                                         to promote multimodal neighborhoods.
                                         Goods Movement
                                         The Plan facilitates the safe and efficient movement of goods via
                                         rail and trucks and focuses on minimizing the impact of rail and
                                         trucks on the community, particularly residential neighborhoods.
                                         Air Transportation
                                         The Plan supports the operation of air transportation facilities,
                                         focusing on the City’s partnership with supporting agencies like
                                         Yolo County and SACOG (functioning as the ALUC) to achieve
                                         their goals.
                                         Transportation Funding
                                         Funding is needed for the construction, maintenance, management,
                                         and operation of the transportation system. Federal and State
                                         funding will continued to be pursued for projects that serve local
    An efficient goods movement system   and regional travel needs. The City strives to balance transporta-
    is critical to supporting the ware-  tion funding needs with economic development and livable com-
    housing and distribution centers lo- munities, such that the level of service standards of this Plan may
    cated in Woodland’s industrial area. not always be achievable.
TC 3-20

3.7	 Goals and Policies
                                                  Transportation and Circulation Element
                                                                                               3
Goal 3.A	 Multimodal Transportation System. Develop and maintain a multi-modal
          transportation system that provides for the efficient movement of people and
          goods, supports vibrant neighborhoods and districts, and reduces air pollution and
          greenhouse gas emissions.
          Policy 3.A.1	       Vehicle Level of Service (LOS) Standard. Strive to develop and
                              manage the roadway system to maintain LOS D or better as defined
                              in the latest edition of the Highway Capacity Manual (Transportation
                              Research Board) during weekday AM and PM peak hour conditions
                              with the following exceptions described below and mapped on
                              Figure 3-1.
                              A.	LOS C – Kentucky Ave from East Street to County Road 		
                              98. This level of service is required to accommodate the mix of 		
                              commercial/industrial truck traffic with residential driveways.
                              B.	LOS E – Freeway ramp terminal intersections and E. Gum
                              Avenue from Bourn Drive to Pioneer Avenue.
                              C.	LOS F – LOS F is allowed for the following roadway segments 		
                              where the City finds that the improvements or other measures 		
                              required to achieve the LOS standard are unacceptable because 		
                              of their impact on other community values.
                                     •	 Main Street from 6th street to Cleveland St
                                     •	 Maxwell Ave from Farnham Avenue to County Road 102
                              (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.13-1b)
          Policy 3.A.2	       Rail Relocation. Continue to partner with other jurisdictions in
                              Yolo County to assess the feasibility and the economic, social, and
                              environmental value of relocating the north-south Union Pacific rail
                              line to the east of city limits.
          Policy 3.A.3	       Repurpose Existing Rail Right-of-Way. Investigate alternative
                              transportation uses for existing rail rights-of-way when railroads
                              consider their abandonment. Collaborate with Yolo County and
                              adjacent cities to reuse these corridors for non-motor vehicle
                              circulation.
          Policy 3.A.4	       Reduce Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT). Require new
                              development projects to achieve a 10 percent reduction in VMT
                              per capita or VMT per service population compared to the General
                              Plan 2035 VMT performance, or a 10 percent reduction compared
                                                                                               TC 3-21

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                              to baseline conditions for similar land use when measuring
                                                              transportation impacts for subsequent projects and making General
                                                              Plan consistency findings. Reducing peak period VMT in particular is
                                                              desirable due to the added benefit of minimizing severe congestion
                                                              and reducing emissions. Use of VMT reduction strategies such as
                                                              those in the chart below (taken from Quantifying Greenhouse
                                                              Gas Mitigation Measures, CAPCOA, 2010) or similar professional
                                                              research documents is encouraged.
                                                              (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.13-1c)
                       Transportation Measures (Five Subcategories) Global Maximum Reduction (all VMT):                   Global Cap for Road
                                                                                                                          Pricing needs further
              Urban = 75%; Compact Infill = 40%; Suburban Center or Suburban with NEV= 15%; Suburban = 10%                        study
          Transportation Measures (Four Categories) Cross-Category Max Reduction (all VMT):       Max Reduction = 15%
                                                                                                    overall; Work VMT =   Max Reduction = 25%
           Urban = 70%; Compact Infill = 35%; Suburban Center or Suburban with NEV= 15%;            25%; School VMT =           (all VMT)
                                                Suburban = 10%                                               65%
        Land Use/Location          Neighborhood/           Parking Policy/    Transit System          Commute Trip           Road Pricing             Vehicles
          Max Reduction:        Site Enhancement               Pricing         Improvements             Reduction            Management
                                                                                                   (assumes mixed use)
           Urban = 55%;           Max Reduction           Max Reduction =    Max Reduction =                               Max Reduction =
          Compact Infill =      without NEV = 5%;               20%                 10%             Max Reduction =               25%
          30%; Suburban           with NEV = 15%                                                    25% (work VMT)
          Center = 10%;
          Suburban = 5%
           Density (30%)        Pedestrian Network         Parking Supply   Network Expansion         CRT Program           Cordon Pricing      Electrify Loading
                                        (2%)               Limits (12.5%)          (8.2%)            Required = 21%              (22%)                 Docks
                                                                                                        work VMT
                                                                                                     Voluntary = 6.2
                                                                                                        work VMT
          Design (21.3%)          Traffic Calming        Unbundled Parking  Service Frequency/         Transit Fare           Traffic Flow      Utilize Alternative
                                        (1%)                Costs (13%)        Speed (2.5%)       Subsidy (20% work      Improvements (45%      Fueled Vehicles
                                                                                                            VMT)                  CO2)
        Location Efficiency    NEV Network (14.4)         On-street Market   Bus Rapid Transit     Employee Parking            Required         Utilize Electric or
               (55%)              <NEV Parking>            Pricing (5.5%)          (3.2%)            Cash-out (7.7%        Contributions by      Hybrid Vehicles
                                                                                                        work VMT)                Project
          Diversity (30%)       Car Share Program         Residential Area         Access          Workplace Parking
                                       (0.7%)             Parking Permits      Improvements       Pricing (19.7% work
                                                                                                            VMT)
            Destination           Bicycle Network                           Station Bike Parking  Alt Work Schedules
        Accessibility (20%)      <Lanes> <Parking>                                                   & Telecommute
                                 <Land Dedication for                                               (5.5% work VMT)
                                        Trails>
        Transit Accessibility       Urban Non-                                 Local Shuttles        CRT Marketing
               (25%)              motorized Zones                                                   (5.5% work VMT)
           BMR Housing                                                       Park & Ride Lots            Employer
              (1.2%)                                                                                    Sponsored
                                                                                                   Vanpools/Shuttles
                                                                                                   (13.4% work VMT)
        Orientation Toward                                                                              Ride Share
         Non-auto Corridor                                                                        Program (15% work
                                                                                                            VMT)
         Proximity to Bike                                                                        Bike Share Program
                Path
                                                                                                  End of Trip Facilities
                                                                                                  Preferential Parking
                                                                                                           Permit
                                                                                                  School Pool (15.8%
                                                                                                       school VMT)
                                                                                                    School Bus (5.3%
                                                                                                       school VMT)
TC 3-22                  Implementation Program 3.8 After final adoption of SB 743 CEQA Guidelines changes and any
                         associated technical advisory recommendations by the State of California, the City will assess the
                         VMT reduction goal contained in Policy 3.A.4. The assessment should consider substantial evidence
                         presented by the State in recommending any alternative VMT reduction goals as CEQA thresholds
Policy 3.A.5	
                                   Transportation and Circulation Element
               Transportation Demand Management (TDM). Utilize TDM
               tools and programs (e.g. alternative work schedules, telecommuting,
                                                                                   3
               ridesharing, or parking pricing) to encourage and create incentives
               for the use of alternative travel modes.
Policy 3.A.6	  Emerging Technologies. Accommodate next generation
               technology and advancements into the City’s vehicle fleet and into
               the community transportation network.
Policy 3.A.7	  Street Grid Network and Density. Promote the use of grid
               and modified grid street patterns in new residential, commercial, or
               mixed-use developments that propose to construct new streets.
               Modified grids may include combinations of grid and curvilinear
               streets. Greenbelts may intersect the street grid to create an
               interconnected trail network that encourages biking and walking.
               The density of new streets should be similar to the existing
               residential neighborhoods in Woodland that have approximately nine
               centerline miles of arterials and collectors per square mile.
               Refer to the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation
               Element for additional policies on the layout of new residential,
               commercial, and mixed-use developments. Refer to the Public Facilities and
               Services Element for additional policies on greenbelts.
Policy 3.A.8	  Six Lane Roads. Prohibit the expansion to, or construction of,
               six-lane roads to mitigate projects that would cause or exacerbate
               LOS E or F conditions. Auxiliary lanes beyond a four lane road cross
               section are allowed.
Policy 3.A.9	  Road Diets. Investigate road diets within the existing built-out
               portion of the city including, but not limited to, West Gibson
               (Cottonwood to College Street), West Court (County Road 98 to
               Cleveland Street), West Main Street (Cottonwood to West Street),
               and East Street (Kentucky Avenue to Gibson Road). A road diet is
               generally described as removing travel lanes from a roadway and
               utilizing the space for other uses and travel modes.
Policy 3.A.10	 Overcome Barriers and Remove Gaps. Eliminate barriers and
               gaps in the existing roadway, bikeway, and pedestrian networks by
               doing the following:
                 •	 Pursue funding to construct grade-separated crossings of
                    freeways, rail lines, and other barriers to improve connectivity.
                 •	 Construct new pedestrian and bike paths in existing
                    neighborhoods and strive to ensure that bike and sidewalk
                    networks within communities are at least as efficient (e.g. miles
                    traveled, connectivity, etc.) as the network for motorists.
                                                                                   TC 3-23

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                     •	 Remove barriers to pedestrian travel, such as utility poles, as
                                        feasible.
                                     •	 Prioritize the construction of the SR 113 bike and pedestrian
                                        overcrossing at Sports Park Drive and redesign of the Gibson
                                        Road/SR 113 overpass to provide safer and more convenient
                                        connectivity between the west and east areas of town.
                                     •	 New development must demonstrate adequate bicycle
                                        and pedestrian accessibility from key parts of the city and
                                        eliminate gaps, which may require off-site improvements, where
                                        appropriate at the discretion of the City.
                  Policy 3.A.11	   New Development. Require all new development to provide
                                   convenient bicycle and pedestrian environments and access through
                                   building orientation, site layout, traffic management, and connections
                                   to transit service and local commercial and community facilities.
                                   Development must provide appropriate pedestrian amenities such
                                   as street lighting, benches, arcades, canopies, shade trees, art, and
                                   seating areas.
                                   Refer to the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation
                                   Element for additional policies on new development and streetscape
                                   design.
                  Policy 3.A.12	   Transportation Evaluation. Evaluate projects for potential
                                   impacts to traffic operations, traffic safety, transit service, bicycle
                                   facilities, and pedestrian facilities for the purpose of assessing the
                                   timing and phasing of traffic improvements.
                  Policy 3.A.13	   SR 113/I-5 Interchange. Pursue funding to construct the
                                   connection of SR 113 to I-5 to reduce the use of local streets for
                                   this connection and continue to ensure the necessary right-of-way is
                                   secured for the selected route.
                  Policy 3.A.14	   Regional Transportation Planning. Continue the City’s
                                   cooperative participation in the activities and plans of the State,
                                   Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG),Yolo County,
                                   Yolo County Transportation District, and surrounding jurisdictions.
                  Policy 3.A.15	   Designate County Road 102, north of I-5, as a State
                                   Highway. Coordinate with Caltrans to consider including County
                                   Road 102 north of I-5 as part of the state highway system.
TC 3-24

Goal 3.B	
                                                          Transportation and Circulation Element
                   Complete Streets. Provide complete streets that accommodate driving, walking,
                   bicycling, and public transit and that are designed to enable safe, attractive,
                                                                                                         3
                   comfortable access and travel for users of all ages and abilities.
Refer to the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element for additional discussion and
policies on street design.
                   Policy 3.B.1	      Complete Street Requirements and Green Streets. To the
                                      extent feasible, all new street construction and reconstruction
                                      shall be designed to achieve complete streets. Designs should
                                      accommodate mobility for all users, including bicyclists, pedestrians,
                                      transit vehicles, and motorists, appropriate to the function and
                                      context of the facility. The needs of all roadway users including
                                      vulnerable populations such as young children, seniors, and people
                                      with disabilities, should be considered when determining roadway
                                      widths and other barriers to travel, especially near schools, parks,
                                      senior centers, community centers, and other activity hubs. Require
                                      street design to incorporate adequate landscaping, including street
                                      trees and landscaped medians and/or parkway strips, in order to
                                      increase shade, minimize runoff, and create a comfortable and
                                      visually attractive environment.
                   Policy 3.B.2	      Design Standards. Ensure that design standards, including
                                      subdivision regulations that apply to new roadway construction,
                                      reflect the best available design guidelines to effectively implement
                                      Complete Streets.
                   Policy 3.B.3	      Connectivity and Balance. Preserve and continue to develop a
                                      comprehensive, integrated, and connected network of streets that
                                      balance walking and bicycling with transit, automobiles, and trucks.
                   Policy 3.B.4	      Retrofit. Strive to retrofit existing streets into more complete
                                      streets, prioritizing improvements on roadways providing access
                                      to services, schools, parks, civic uses, as well as in the downtown
                                      and along mixed use corridors. Consider all modes and users in
                                      decisions made affecting retrofit projects and strive to remove
                                      existing barriers to safe and connected travel.
                   Policy 3.B.5	      New Developments. Require new developments to provide
                                      interconnected street networks with walkable blocks that allow and
                                      encourage active multimodal transportation.
                   Policy 3.B.6	      Right of Way. Ensure adequate rights-of-way to accommodate all
                                      users and balance the allocation of street right-of-way for all modes.
                   Policy 3.B.7	      Minimal Driveways and Curb Cuts. Strive to minimize the
                                      number of driveways and curb cuts along streets to limit unsafe
                                      conditions and enhance the experience of walking and bicycling.
                                                                                                         TC 3-25
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                      Policy 3.B.8	        Accessibility. Endeavor to ensure that all streets are safe and
                                           accessible to people with disabilities and others with limited
                                           mobility.
                      Policy 3.B.9	        Roundabouts. Consider roundabouts as an intersection traffic
                                           control option with demonstrated air quality and safety benefits,
                                           where deemed feasible and appropriate.
                      Policy 3.B.10	       School Safety. Partner with schools to ensure a high level of
                                           vehicle, bicycle, and pedestrian safety adjacent to school facilities.
    Goal 3.C	         Roadway Functional Classification and Street Typology. Provide an efficient,
                      interconnected street system that identifies which modes of travel should be
                      accommodated on each street based on its unique geographic setting, adjacent land
                      uses, and functional classification.
                      Policy 3.C.1	        Roadway Network. Plan, design, and regulate the development
                                           of roadway network presented in the Circulation Diagram shown
                                           in Figure 3-2. Prioritize modes of travel on the roadway network
                                           consistent with Table 3-2.
    Goal 3.D	         Residential Streets. Protect residential areas from high-volume and high-speed traffic
                      and its effects, and promote bicycling and walking on residential streets.
    Refer to the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element for additional standards on the
    design of residential neighborhoods.
                      Policy 3.D.1	        Through-traffic. Design local streets that primarily serve
                                           residential neighborhoods to discourage through-traffic, achieve
                                           desired traffic speeds, and maintain pedestrian and bike connectivity.
                      Policy 3.D.2	        Street and Sidewalk Maintenance. Promote street, alley, and
                                           sidewalk maintenance to encourage safe use; have a funding plan in
                                           place for improvements.
                      Policy 3.D.3	        Traffic Calming. Implement traffic-calming design and devices,
                                           as funding allows, in existing and new residential areas where
                                           appropriate to reduce vehicle speeds and preserve neighborhood
                                           livability.
                      Policy 3.D.4	        Impacts on Residential Neighborhoods. Consider the effects
                                           of new development on local streets in residential areas and require
                                           new development to mitigate significant impacts on residential
                                           neighborhoods. Developers shall finance and install pedestrian
                                           pathways, bikeways, and multi-purpose paths in new development,
TC 3-26
                                                           Transportation and Circulation Element
                                       in order to facilitate and enhance pedestrian and bike usage, as
                                       appropriate.
                                                                                                          3
Goal 3.E	        Comprehensive Pedestrian System. Provide a comprehensive, and integrated
                 pedestrian system that encourages walking and creates an enjoyable way to experience
                 Woodland.
Refer to the Land Use, Community, Design, and Historic Preservation Element for additional goals and poli-
cies regarding pedestrian-oriented streetscape design. Refer to the Healthy Community Element for additional
goals and policies on promoting active lifestyles.
                 Policy 3.E.1	         Pedestrian Promotion. Promote walking by providing appropriate
                                       facilities, programs, and information. Support neighborhood walk-to-
                                       school efforts.
                 Policy 3.E.2	         Safe and Comfortable Sidewalk Design. Develop safe and
                                       pleasant sidewalks in compliance with adopted design standards
                                       to accommodate all users, including persons with disabilities, and
                                       complement the form and function of the land uses adjacent to each
                                       street segment.
                 Policy 3.E.3	         Off-Street Pedestrian Paths. Continue to develop off-street
                                       pedestrian paths for access to schools, recreation facilities, and
                                       neighborhood services in existing and future neighborhoods in the
                                       city.
                 Policy 3.E.4	         Interconnected Network. Require new development to create
                                       complete pedestrian networks with linkages such as walkways,
                                       paseos, and shared-use paths that interconnect pedestrian facilities.
                 Policy 3.E.5	         Walkable Downtown. Continue to enhance the pedestrian
                                       experience in the Downtown and make streetscape improvements,
                                       such as street trees, street furniture, public art, and curb extensions,
                                       to encourage walking. Evaluate, and when appropriate implement,
                                       all-way stops on Main Street in the Downtown.
                 Policy 3.E.6	         Mid-block Pedestrian Crossings. Provide mid-block pedestrian
                                       crossings, where feasible, in areas with high pedestrian traffic to
                                       create more direct walking routes.
                 Policy 3.E.7	         Lighting. Maintain adequate pedestrian-scale lighting near sidewalks,
                                       trails, and parking lots to improve visibility of pedestrians and
                                       provide a safe walking environment.
                 Policy 3.E.8	         Active Design. Design buildings so that the architecture enhances
                                       and encourages pedestrian travel. Provide clear internal pedestrian
                                       routes and avoid “blank walls” to maintain a visually engaging walking
                                       environment.
                                                                                                          TC 3-27

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    Goal 3.F	        Comprehensive Bicycle System. Provide a comprehensive and integrated bicycle
                     system that facilitates bicycling as a viable mode of travel for short trips, commute
                     trips, and recreation.
    Refer to the Land Use, Community, Design, and Historic Preservation Element for additional policies regarding
    connectivity. Refer to the Healthy Community Element for additional goals and policies on promoting active
    lifestyles.
                     Policy 3.F.1	        Bikeway Master Plan. Maintain a Bikeway Master Plan (BMP)
                                          to reflect current best practices for bike facilities and programs as
                                          well as bikeway changes to accommodate the cycling public. Figure
                                          3-3 represents the planned routes in the BMP at the time of this
                                          General Plan update, but any future update to the BMP is considered
                                          the City’s official bikeway plan. In the future, transition the BMP
                                          to an Active Transportation Plan that considers all forms of active
                                          transportation.
                     Policy 3.F.2	        Bikeway Network. Promote the development of a comprehensive
                                          system of recreational and commuter bicycle routes that provide
                                          safe and convenient connections between the city’s: major
                                          employment and housing areas; existing and planned bikeways; and
                                          schools, parks, retail shopping, and residential neighborhoods.
                     Policy 3.F.3	        Bicycle Parking. Encourage the development of convenient and
                                          secure bicycle parking and establish minimum parking standards at
                                          employment centers, schools, recreational facilities, transit terminals,
                                          commercial businesses, the Downtown core area, and other
                                          locations where people congregate.
                     Policy 3.F.4	        Bicycle Facilities. Require residential, commercial, and industrial
                                          developments to include bicycle lanes or pathways in accordance
                                          with the Bikeway Master Plan or Specific Plans when constructing
                                          new roadways or upgrading existing streets.
                     Policy 3.F.5	        Bicycle Safety Education. Promote bicycle safety education for
                                          children and adults. Develop partnerships with WJUSD,Yolo County
                                          HHSA, and the Bike Campaign to develop programs that encourage
                                          children to bike safely to school.
                     Policy 3.F.6	        Bicycle and Transit Integration. Work with YCTD to integrate
                                          public transportation systems and facilities with bike networks and
                                          accommodations.
TC 3-28

          Policy 3.F.7	
                                                 Transportation and Circulation Element
                             Regional Coordination. Cooperate with surrounding
                                                                                               3
                             jurisdictions and SACOG in designing and implementing a regionally-
                             connected bikeway system.
          Policy 3.F.8	      Woodland-Davis Bikeway. Work with Davis and Yolo County
                             in the provision of safe and well-designed bikeway routes on rural
                             roads between Woodland and Davis. Pursue grant funding to
                             implement the Woodland-Davis Bikeway project.
          Policy 3.F.9	      Phasing. Ensure that bikeways connecting to the existing bikeway
                             system be provided in the first phase of all new growth areas.
Goal 3.G	 Effective Transit System. Promote a transit system that serves as a viable alternative
          to the automobile for those without access to a vehicle and those that choose to live
          and work in areas where land use density and intensity are supportive of transit.
          Policy 3.G.1	      Transit Services. Work with YCTD to plan and implement transit
                             services that are timely, cost-effective, and responsive to growth
                             patterns and existing and future transit demand.
          Policy 3.G.2	      Right-of-way Preservation. Consider the need for future transit
                             right-of-way in reviewing and approving plans for development.
                             Rights-of-way may either be exclusive or shared with other vehicles.
          Policy 3.G.3	      Transit Accommodations for All Users. Consider the transit
                             needs of all residents, workers, students, and visitors including
                             seniors, low-income, disabled, and transit-dependent persons in
                             making decisions regarding transit services.
          Policy 3.G.4	      Demand-Responsive Service. Continue to support YCTD’s
                             efforts to provide demand-responsive service (“paratransit”) and
                             other transportation services for those unable to use conventional
                             transit.
          Policy 3.G.5	      YCTD Service Planning. Coordinate with YCTD in the bus
                             service planning process to ensure that routes serve areas with
                             greatest demand and that intercity and inter-regional bus service is
                             responsive to local needs.
          Policy 3.G.6	      Express Bus Service. Partner with UC Davis and YCTD to
                             evaluate feasibility of establishing express bus service between
                             Woodland and Davis - particularly to key transit hubs on the UC
                             Davis Campus and the Amtrak Station.
          Policy 3.G.7	      Transit Shelters/Stops. Work with YCTD to ensure all bus
                             stops are well designed and maintained. Higher utilized stops shall
                             incorporate special design features such as shelter structures,
                             lighting, secure bike parking, enhanced pavement, landscaping, and
                             artwork.
                                                                                               TC 3-29

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                    Policy 3.G.8	      Transit in Downtown. Continue to emphasize the central
                                       role of the Downtown in transit planning including establishing a
                                       transit hub in or near Downtown, consistent with the 2016 YCTD
                                       Woodland Transit Study. Consider the market and social demand for
                                       frequently-stopping, smaller-scale transit service in the Downtown.
                    Policy 3.G.9	      Bike and Pedestrian Connections. Ensure transit stops are
                                       connected to an integral part of the city’s pedestrian and bicycle
                                       network.
                                       Refer to the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation
                                       Element for additional policies on pedestrian- and bicycle-oriented design.
                    Policy 3.G.10	     Private Transit. Encourage privately-owned transit systems, such
                                       as taxicabs, Transportation Network Companies (Uber/Lyft, etc.),
                                       employer shuttles, and private bus companies to provide convenient
                                       transportation options.
    Goal 3.H	       Managed Parking. Provide the minimum amount of parking necessary to serve
                    existing and new development throughout the city while balancing competing
                    community values.
    Refer to the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element for additional policies and guid-
    ance on parking placement and parking lot design.
                    Policy 3.H.1	      Parking Footprint. Strive to reduce the amount of land devoted
                                       to parking through such measures as development of consolidated
                                       parking facilities/structures, the application of shared parking for
                                       mixed-use developments, car share programs, alternative investment
                                       in bike and pedestrian facilities, and the implementation of
                                       Transportation Demand Management plans to reduce parking needs.
                    Policy 3.H.2	      Shared Parking. Encourage the use of shared parking facilities
                                       and programs as conditions of approval in mixed-use and transit
                                       oriented neighborhoods and districts.
                    Policy 3.H.3	      Parking Lot Design. Require that parking lots be designed to
                                       minimize heat island effects, have significant tree canopies with
                                       ample landscape areas designed to pre-treat storm water runoff
                                       where feasible, and ensure pedestrian access.
                    Policy 3.H.4	      Parking Downtown. Adopt and maintain a Downtown Parking
                                       Management Plan that maximizes the utilization of the parking
                                       resources and balances the needs of shoppers, tenants, and
                                       employees with all modes of travel. Monitor supply and utilization
                                       to identify deficiencies and opportunities for optimizing use of
                                       parking. As Downtown develops, use parking pricing to discourage
                                       parking congestion and improve parking utilization.
TC 3-30

          Policy 3.H.5	
                                                 Transportation and Circulation Element
                              Priority Parking Locations. Promote priority parking in safe and
                              convenient locations for employee car pools, park-and-ride lots,
                                                                                                 3
                              electric/clean vehicle, and cyclists.
          Policy 3.H.6	       Parking Standards. Reduce minimum parking requirements
                              and set maximums over time, particularly for mixed use and
                              transit oriented developments, to promote walk and bike friendly
                              environments throughout the city.
          Policy 3.H.7	       Electric/Alternative Fuel Vehicle Parking. Require new large
                              commercial and retail developments, large employment centers,
                              high-use public buildings, and parking structures to provide parking
                              for alternative fuel vehicles including charging stations for electric
                              vehicles. Require electric vehicle charging outlets in garages of all
                              new single family residential homes.
          Policy 3.H.8	       Parking Lot Placements. Strongly discourage the design and
                              construction of parking lots along street frontages except in auto-
                              oriented areas where they shall be well designed to reduce their
                              visual impact and maximize pedestrian and bicycle compatibility and
                              safety.
Goal 3.I	 Safe and Efficient Movement of Goods. Plan and maintain a transportation system
          that provides for the safe and efficient movement of goods.
          Policy 3.I.1	       Truck Route Designation. Designate routes for trucks within the
                              city to minimize the impact of truck traffic on residential and mixed
                              use neighborhoods and coordinate with Yolo County to develop a
                              system of truck routes for adjacent areas to the city.
          Policy 3.I.2	       Truck Traffic on Residential Streets. Continue to enforce the
                              City ordinance restricting through truck traffic on residential streets.
          Policy 3.I.3	       Railroad Freight Services. Assist public and private agencies in
                              integrating railroad freight services into regional transportation and
                              economic development strategies.
          Policy 3.I.4	       Rail Development Plans. Participate in regional coordination
                              efforts to ensure rail service to the industrial area and maintain an
                              updated truck route map.
          Policy 3.I.5	       Rail Relocation. Support the ongoing efforts to relocate the
                              California Northern and Yolo Shortline railroads towards the east of
                              the city and northeast of the industrial areas.
                                                                                                 TC 3-31
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    Goal 3.J	     Air Transportation Facilities. Support the continued operation of local air
                  transportation facilities while ensuring compatibility between urban development in
                  Woodland and aircraft operations.
                  Policy 3.J.1	        Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan. Ensure consistency with
                                       the Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) for Sacramento
                                       International Airport.
                                       Also see policies regarding overflight notification requirements in the Land
                                       Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element.
                  Policy 3.J.2	        New Airports and Land Strips. Discourage the development of
                                       new airports or landing strips that would adversely affect planned
                                       development within the Urban Limit Line.
    Goal 3.K	     Transportation Funding. Pursue funding to construct, maintain, and operate
                  the transportation system for all travel modes to achieve and maintain the City’s
                  transportation goals.
                  Policy 3.K.1	        Fee Assessments. Assess fees through the Major Projects
                                       Financing Plan (MPFP), on new development, sufficient to cover
                                       the fair share portion of that development’s impacts on all modes
                                       of the transportation system. Exceptions may be made when new
                                       development generates significant public benefits and alternative
                                       sources of funding for the improvements can be obtained to offset
                                       foregone revenues.
                  Policy 3.K.2	        Industrial Area. Consider a variety of funding sources to address
                                       transportation infrastructure maintenance needs in the industrial
                                       area including user fees for businesses or the establishment of a
                                       maintenance district.
                  Policy 3.K.3	        Bicycle Facilities. Utilize grant monies, license fees, development
                                       impact fees and fines, along with capital improvement monies to
                                       help fund the development and installation of bikeways and bicycle
                                       parking facilities.
                  Policy 3.K.4	        Transit Infrastructure. Require new development to pay a fair
                                       share of capital improvements related to transit service.
                  Policy 3.K.5	        New Funding Sources. Seek new and innovative transportation
                                       funding and financing sources.
TC 3-32

4 Economic
  Development Element
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                             4.1	 Introduction and
                                                           Purpose
                                             Woodland’s economy plays a crucial role in the physical develop-
                                             ment of the Planning Area and the City’s ability to support imple-
                                             mentation of General Plan policies and programs. The General
                                             Plan’s goals are closely tied to a strong economic development
                                             strategy, the City’s economic success, and its fiscal health. Econom-
                                             ic development is a key part of defining a long-term framework
                                             for sustainable growth, providing a source of jobs and livelihood,
                                             and also providing for the wants and needs of residents, visitors,
                                             and businesses. The City of Woodland is committed to economic
                                             development and fiscal sustainability.
                                             The Economic Development Element of the General Plan contains
                                             goals and policies that will enable the City to direct local resources
                                             to retain, relocate, expand, and assist local businesses and attract
                                             new industries that will increase the City’s tax base and economic
                                             diversity. This Element provides policy direction for fostering de-
                                             velopment and revitalization to support a vibrant downtown; pro-
                                             moting growth in key target areas; providing jobs for the growing
                                             population; creating opportunities for supply of retail goods and
                                             services that will be needed by the community and patronized by
                                             regional travelers as well as business to business opportunities; and
                                             enhancing the City’s ability to provide public services for current
                                             and future residents. This Element builds on the existing condi-
                                             tions and demographic trends that were discussed in the 2013
                                             General Plan Economic and Fiscal Background Report and the Oppor-
                                             tunities and Challenges, Issues and Options report.
    Woodland is known as a center for agricultural technology and food production.
ED 4-2

The Economic Development Element is
                                                                  Economic Development Element
                                                                                               4
organized as follows:
•	 Section 4.1: Introduction and Purpose. Introduces the
    topics covered in this Element and outlines the Element’s rela-
    tionship to State law, and the Visioning Statement and Guiding
    Principles.
•	 Section 4.2: Economics of Woodland. Presents an over-
    view of the Woodland economy, current and projected em-
    ployment, and jobs-housing relationship.
•	 Section 4.3: The City’s Role in Economic Growth. Out-
    lines the roles of the City of Woodland in promoting economic
    growth.
•	 Section 4.4: Fiscal Sustainability, Land Use, and Infra-
    structure. Provides an overview of the City’s fiscal base and
    explains the relationship between fiscal sustainability, land uses,
    infrastructure, and economic growth.
•	 Section 4.5: Business and Job Growth. Presents strategies
    to attract and retain businesses and promote job growth and
    diversification in Woodland.
•	 Section 4.6: Tourism in Woodland. Describes tourism in
    Woodland and associated benefits for the community and the
    City, and provides strategies to increase tourism in Woodland.
•	 Section 4.7: Developing Strong Partnerships. Describes
    the benefits of strong partnerships and key organizations and
    institutions the City can partner with to realize benefits for
    the Woodland economy and community.
•	 Section 4.8: Goals and Policies.
Relationship to State Law
While the inclusion of economic development is not required as a
mandated Element of a General Plan, California Government Code
Section 65303 indicates that a General Plan may include additional
elements that a community considers important to the physical
development of the city.
                                                                                               ED 4-3

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   Relationship to Visioning Statement and Guiding
                                   Principles
                                   The Economic Development Element connects to many of the
                                   values contained in the Woodland Community Vision, but it most
                                   directly relates to the following statements:
                                     •	 Woodland is a healthy community with livable neighborhoods,
                                        a thriving downtown, well-maintained infrastructure, excellent
                                        schools, and recreational amenities.
                                     •	 The city is the region’s center of agricultural technology and
                                        food production and is recognized globally as a leader in sus-
                                        tainable agriculture.
                                     •	 The community is prosperous and fiscally sound, offering abun-
                                        dant employment opportunities to its diverse and creative
                                        workforce.
                                     •	 Woodland has become a destination for visitors seeking to ex-
                                        perience its unique agricultural, historical, recreational, cultural
                                        and entertainment amenities.
                                   While the Economic Development Element’s broad scope relates
                                   to many of the Guiding Principles, this Element most directly sup-
                                   ports the following:
                                     •	 Economic Development: Foster economic growth and di-
                                        versification with a range of employment opportunities for all
                                        residents.
                                     •	 Historic Downtown: Strengthen the historic downtown dis-
                                        trict as the City’s center of shopping, dining, entertainment, and
                                        employment.
                                     •	 Quality and Character: Retain and enhance Woodland’s
                                        quality of life, its distinctive identity and small-town character-
                                        istics.
ED 4-4

4.2	 Economics of
                                                                 Economic Development Element
                                                                                                         4
              Woodland
Overview of Economy
Situated in the heart of Yolo County, Woodland’s economy has
historically been based on agriculture. Since the mid-1800s, crop
production has thrived in the area due to the abundance of fer-
tile soil, plentiful water, and a temperate Mediterranean climate.
Today, Yolo County remains a leader in sustainable and diversified
agricultural production. Many productive farms surround the city,
producing vegetable crops, organic produce, seeds, and nursery
stock. This is reflected by the city’s diverse range of agriculture
and food-related industries, as shown in Figure 4-1. Woodland and
the surrounding unincorporated area is also home to one of the
highest concentrations of seed research technology in the world.
Twelve miles south of Woodland, the University of California, Da-
vis is home to world-renowned agriculture and bio- and nano-
technology programs that support research and development ef-
forts for cutting-edge, cost-effective farming advancements. Today
the primary drivers of the Woodland economy are agriculture and
value-added food processing, manufacturing, warehousing and dis-
tribution, retail and professional services, health care, and govern-
ment.
Woodland’s location is key and continues to add value to the city’s
development, industry, and economy. Woodland is favorably situ-
ated within the region and is well served by a variety of transpor-
tation modes including multiple freeways, rail and close proximity
to air travel. The city has easy access to major north-south and
east-west highway routes, as it sits at the intersection of Interstate
5 and State Route 113, which connects the city with Interstate 80       Historically, the agricultural industry
just 12 miles to the south. Genessee Wyoming Railroad (operat-          has been one of the largest contribu-
ing as California Northern Railroad) and Sierra Northern Railroad       tors to Woodland’s economy, and
                                                                        the General Plan contains policies to
(operating as Yolo Shortline Railroad for freight) provide freight
                                                                        continue supporting this important
services to many of Woodland’s industrial developments. Wood-           sector of the local economy.
land is also in close proximity to Sacramento International Airport
(eight miles south of Woodland) and the Port of West Sacramento
(20 miles south of Woodland), which handles a variety of bulk and
break-bulk cargoes.
                                                                                                          ED 4-5

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                             Due to its proximity to agriculture, farming, UC Davis, food and
                                             agriculture industry, and major transportation facilities, Woodland
                                             has become an increasingly important manufacturing and distribu-
                                             tion center in the region and the West Coast. Development and
                                             industry in the city has responded to regional demand for space to
                                             process, store, distribute, and transport goods. As a result, Wood-
                                             land is a significant industrial real estate sub-market in the Sac-
                                             ramento region. Additionally, as one of the county’s population
                                             centers and the County Seat, other significant economic sectors in
                                             Woodland include professional and government services. The city
                                             is also home to Woodland Community College (WCC) and a num-
                                             ber of large medical facilities, which drive health and educational
                                             services in the local economy.
                                             As of 2014, the city’s largest employers included the County of
                                             Yolo, Target Distribution Center, Woodland Joint Unified School
                                             District (WJUSD), Woodland Healthcare (Dignity Healthcare Sys-
                                             tem), Walgreens Distribution, and Rite Aid Distribution Center.
                                             There are approximately 3,500 business permits issued annually
                                             in Woodland, of which 2,100 are issued to business establishments
                                             located in Woodland. The greatest number of business permits
                                             is in the Trade, Transportation, & Utilities sector, followed by the
                                             Professional & Business Services (legal, architecture and engineer-
                                             ing, and business support) and Other Services (repair and main-
    Woodland’s location has also made        tenance, personal services, social and civic organizations) sectors.
    it a hub for manufacturing and
    distribution.
                                             Current and Projected Employment
                                             The California Department of Finance estimated that there were
                                             about 26,000 jobs in Woodland in 2013. Sacramento Area Council
                                             of Governments (SACOG) projected that Woodland’s employment
                                             would grow to a total of about 31,600 jobs by 2035, representing
                                             an increase of 5,600 jobs. SACOG categorizes employment pro-
                                             jections by the land use categories that would support the jobs,
                                             such as industrial, service, office, and medical. For both 2014 and
                                             2035, SACOG projected that the largest and most important em-
                                             ployment sectors in Woodland would be the industrial, office, and
                                             service sectors; together, these sectors account for nearly 60 per-
                                             cent of jobs in Woodland in 2014 and 2035, as shown in Figure 4-2.
                                             Overall, SACOG anticipates that the percentage of employment in
                                             the industrial, medical, government, and service sectors will slightly
    The Gateway Commercial Center is         decrease between 2014 and 2035. Office, retail, and restaurant/din-
    one of the largest new retail develop-   ing related jobs will increase slightly over the period.
    ments in Woodland and expansion
    of this area as a regional retail desti-
    nation is planned.
ED 4-6

                              Economic Development Element
Figure 4-1:	Food and Agriculture Businesses in Woodland
                                                           4
                                                         ED 4-7
 City of Woodland General Plan 2035
   This page intentionally left blank.
ED 4-8
                                                                     Economic Development Element
Figure 4-2:	Employment Estimates and Projections By Sector, 2014 and 2035
                                      2014                                     2035
                                                                                                      4
      Source: SACOG, 2013; BAE, 2013.
    This General Plan plans for a total of 45,340 jobs in Woodland by
    2035. This total is greater than the 2012 SACOG projection of
    31,600 jobs by 2035 to reflect the community’s goal to increase
    Woodland’s job base in the coming decades; a larger buildout
    projection for jobs provides Woodland with greater flexibility in
    achieving that goal. This jobs total also reflects the anticipated
    addition of new industries and businesses in Woodland on sites
    designated for commercial, office, and industrial uses on the Gen-
    eral Plan Land Use Diagram (presented in the Land Use, Commu-
    nity Design, and Historic Preservation Element), such as the new
    Southern Gateway business park.
    Jobs-Housing Relationship
    Jobs-housing relationship is a useful tool for examining issues re-
    lated to the local economy, commuting, vehicle miles traveled, and      Jobs-housing balance is the
    sustainable community design. It is especially useful for exploring     relationship between the
    whether an area is providing enough jobs for its residents. Jobs-       number of jobs to the number
    housing balance examines the relationship between the number            of dwelling units expressed as
    of jobs and the number of dwelling units within a specified area or     a ratio.
    region, and it is typically expressed as a ratio. Because most house-
    holds have more than one wage earner, a desirable jobs-housing
    balance is often defined as a ratio greater than 1:1 but less than
    2:0. Ratios below 1:1 suggest that residents are required to com-
    mute to jobs outside of their area of residence, and ratios greater
    than 2:0 suggest that companies are not able to house their work-
                                                                                                       ED 4-9

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                             ers within the jurisdictions, so workers commute in to the area
                                                             for their jobs. Theoretically, a balanced jobs-housing relationship
                                                             would reduce the need for people to commute in or out of town
                                                             for work. In reality, the match of education, skills, and interests
                                                             is not always accommodated within the boundaries of one com-
                                                             munity, and regional interdependencies often result in inter-city
                                                             commuting.
                                                             The jobs-housing relationship can also be used to examine whether
                                                             an area is planning to provide local jobs at the same pace as hous-
                                                             ing, an aspect known as jobs-housing phasing. It is common for
                                                             housing to be developed first in a community, with local employ-
                                                             ment opportunities often developed later. In addition, there can
                                                             be market interest and pressure in converting land designated for
                                                             commercial uses to residential uses, which can reduce the number
                                                             of sites available for local employment opportunities and further
                                                             skew the jobs-housing ratio in a community.
                                                             Another aspect of the jobs-housing relationship is the jobs-hous-
    The jobs to housing match                                ing match, or fit, which examines the relationship between em-
    compares wages to housing                                ployment wages and housing prices. It can be used to determine
    prices.                                                  whether the people who work in an area can generally afford to
                                                             live in that area and to match workforce needs to the availability of
                                                             housing types and prices in an area.
                                                             Table 4-1 shows existing and projected jobs to housing ratios for
                                                             Woodland. The existing jobs-to-housing ratio is 1.30, and at build-
                                                             out in 2035, it is expected to increase to 1.67.
       Table 4-1:	              Jobs-Housing Balance
                                                                                         2013                    2035 Buildout
       Jobs                                                                           26,000                           45,340
       Housing Units                                                                  20,000                           27,000
       Jobs/Housing Ratio                                                               1.30                              1.67
    Source: US Census Bureau; California Department of Finance; Dyett & Bhatia, 2016.
ED 4-10
4.3	 The City’s Role in
                                                                  Economic Development Element
                                                                                                   4
             Economic Growth
While a significant level of economic development activity occurs
in the private sector, the City will continue to work to ensure its      The City is a liaison to
policies provide a framework to support economic growth in the           connect businesses with
community. Overall, Woodland possesses many assets that make it          resources and to act as a
attractive to business and industry. Looking ahead, the City intends     catalyst for development in
to continue taking an active role in supporting local businesses         strategic segments.
and expanding and attracting additional industries and business
establishments. Towards this end, the City is a liaison to connect
businesses with resources and facilitators to address barriers to
entry, growth, and expansion, as well as act as a catalyst for devel-
opment in strategic market segments for the Woodland economy.
Additionally, to achieve its fiscal sustainability goals, the City will
continue to promote development that results in economic and
fiscal benefits to the City, enhances community character and the
public realm, and supports necessary infrastructure improvements.
The Economic Development Element sets goals and policies for
long-term economic growth. This Element is implemented by a
separate Economic Development Strategy (last comprehensively
updated in 2002), which is appropriate for further defining and im-
plementing goals and policies and establishes nearer-term goals. A
coordinated Economic Development Strategy with a robust policy
platform is essential for Woodland to support its community de-
velopment objectives – such as a creating a diverse economic base,
providing adequate levels of public services, maintaining essential
infrastructure, and providing community amenities. A managed
program of fiscal development, strategic public improvements, and
balanced land uses will help maximize resultant community ben-
efits.
Through 2035, the planning horizon year for this General Plan, the
City of Woodland is expected to add about 19,300 new residents,
for a total of 75,000 residents. In order to support this population,
the City will need to increase employment opportunities and ex-
pand its employment base in concert with the evolution of indus-
trial trends. While many jobs will “naturally” arise from the ser-
vices needed to support this growing population (such as schools,
retail and personal services, police and fire protection, and others),
                                                                                                   ED 4-11

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   additional jobs in other sectors – appropriate for workers with a
                                   range of skill types – will also be necessary. Though its location
                                   in the Sacramento region offers many advantages to job creation,
                                   the City recognizes that it is also a competitive environment. Many
                                   cities in the region possess similar assets, including central location,
                                   available inexpensive land, and freeway and rail access; therefore,
                                   Woodland must build upon its unique strengths and differentiate
                                   itself from its neighbors to attract additional targeted industries,
                                   businesses, and jobs.
ED 4-12

4.4	 Fiscal Sustainability,
                                                                  Economic Development Element
                                                                                                         4
              Land Use, and
              Infrastructure
Fiscal Base
The City of Woodland strives to provide high quality services for
residents and businesses while also maintaining a fiscally sustain-
able budget. The City’s entire adopted budget for FY 2015-16 was
about $158 million, of which about 28 percent is the General Fund,
the City’s primary discretionary funding source. The General Fund        City residents treasure Downtown
                                                                         Woodland for its charm, local busi-
gets the majority of its money from property taxes and property-         nesses, and historic character. They
based revenues; economically sensitive revenues such as sales tax,       also want to see the area become
business license tax, transient occupancy tax, etc; interest and fees    livelier, with more opportunities for
such as ambulance fees; and parking and traffic fines. The balance       entertainment and a greater mix of
of the City budget is comprised of other funding sources such as         uses.
grants, special tax revenue (like parks, libraries and paramedic ser-
vices) and fees for specific services (marina berth fees, garbage and
sewer fees, building permits, etc). Revenue generated from these
sources must be spent on very specific services. For example, the
City cannot use revenue collected from sewer fees to fund police
officers.
Challenges in maintaining fiscal sustainability stem from the fact
that the majority of revenues used to provide public services are
derived from sources that are very susceptible to economic chang-
es over which the City has little control. For instance, broader
economic recessions result in declines in sales tax revenue and,
often, property values. When coupled with fixed-cost budget con-
straints, rising personnel costs, and long-term liabilities, generating
adequate funding to meet operating expenses and ongoing needed
maintenance is challenging. The General Plan’s role as a long term
planning document is to ensure that land uses are planned and
allocated in a way that can positively contribute to the City’s tax
base over time, and to establish achievable and sustainable stan-
dards for level of service.
                                                                                                          ED 4-13

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                        Promoting Development That Results In Fiscal
                                        Benefits For Woodland
                                        Land use and public policy priorities in the General Plan have
      The Land Use, Community           broad implications for Woodland’s economic and fiscal well-being.
      Design, and Historic Preservation This General Plan focuses on improving Woodland’s quality of life
      Element goals and policies work   by deploying strategic land use policies to enhance the quality of
      hand in hand with the Economic    life and promote economic prosperity. Through the framework
      Development Element.              established in this General Plan, the City will approach, analyze,
                                        and evaluate land use and physical development decisions holis-
                                        tically, rather than as distinct or independent actions. Individual
                                        decisions about land use and physical development will be made
                                        with an understanding of their broader impacts, as one decision
                                        about a land use change or development project can contribute to
                                        a variety of outcomes and create a range of impacts across the city
                                        as a whole. For example, an over-emphasis on creating additional
                                        capacity for revenue-generating land uses, such as “big box” retail,
                                        will not necessarily improve the City’s long-term fiscal health if
                                        household incomes do not support growth in consumer demand
                                        or if new store sales “cannibalize” existing retail areas. A balanced
                                        and integrated approach to planning future land use and investing
                                        in public services and facilities that improves quality of life for ex-
                                        isting and future residents is the best way to ensure viable growth
                                        and the City’s economic and fiscal sustainability.
                                        The relative benefit or burden that a use places on the City is an
    The relative fiscal benefit         important consideration in the allocation and prioritization of fu-
    or burden that a use places         ture development. For uses that provide particularly high net fiscal
    on the City is an important         benefits – such as commercial uses – Woodland needs to preserve
    consideration.                      an adequate inventory of development opportunity sites, which
                                        must be balanced with the need to create and maintain community
                                        character and seek to achieve a healthy jobs-housing relationship.
                                        There are three critical sources of revenue for the City that are
                                        directly supported by land use policy: property tax revenue, sales
                                        tax revenue, and transient occupancy tax.
                                           •	 Property Tax Revenue. Property taxes are the foundational
    Property taxes are the                    source of revenue for Woodland’s General Fund. The City’s
    foundational source of                    property tax revenues increase as property values rise due
    revenue for the City’s General            primarily to reinvestment and new development activity. Over-
    Fund.                                     all, Woodland receives approximately a 17 percent on average
                                              share of the 1 percent ad-valorem property tax collected by
                                              the County within the City limits. However, the City’s actual
ED 4-14

   share of a particular parcel’s property tax is determined by
   the Tax Rate Area (TRA) within which the parcel is located;
                                                                Economic Development Element
                                                                                                 4
                                                                       The City’s share of a parcel’s
   therefore, the geographic distribution of growth will affect the    property tax is dependent
   City’s portion of future property tax revenues. As shown in         upon the tax rate area (TRA)
   Figure 4-3, TRAs with lighter shades of yellow signal that a        within which the parcel is
   lower proportion of property tax revenues are remitted to           located.
   the City, and darker shades of red indicate a higher proportion
   of tax revenues. The City receives nearly double the underly-
   ing property tax within the downtown core area than growth
   within the recently approved new growth areas. For this rea-
   son, the General Plan supports increased development inten-
   sity in areas with darker shades of red, especially in Downtown
   and along the East Street and Main Street corridors.
   It is important to note that the TRAs shown in Figure 4-3 only
   apply to areas within the city limits and do not include areas
   that are currently unincorporated but within the city’s Sphere
   of Influence and Urban Limit Line. As new growth areas are
   annexed to Woodland, property tax sharing agreements with
   the County will be negotiated. While the City will certainly
   advocate for as favorable of an agreement as possible, it is likely
   that the property tax revenue of new growth areas will not be
   as high as areas that are more central to Woodland.
•	 Sales Tax Revenue. Sales taxes are currently the highest
   source of revenue for Woodland’s General Fund. Ultimately,          Sales taxes are currently the
   overall sales tax generation is a function of the amount of tax-    highest source of revenue for
   able goods purchased in the city, and the General Plan includes     the City’s General Fund.
   strategies to generate additional sales tax revenues. However,
   sales taxes are a volatile source of revenue because they de-
   pend on the local retail economy, which can rapidly change,
   especially as more and more retail purchases are made on the
   internet. The General Plan supports an increase in the number
   of residents who live in Woodland, which will increase the base
   of retail demand within the city and generate new local sales
   taxes. In addition, the General Plan supports an increase in the
   amount of retail commercial development, especially stores
   and restaurants, to increase the capture of expenditures and
   sales taxes from local residents and regional shoppers. Lastly,
   the General Plan increases the amount of industrial or office
   space in the city. As the City successfully attracts additional in-
   dustrial or office uses that sell taxable products to other end-
   users in Woodland (i.e. business to business sales), the City
   may realize new sales tax revenues and point-of-sale industrial
   development.
                                                                                                  ED 4-15

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                           •	 Transient Occupancy Tax. Transient occupancy taxes (TOT)
      Section 4.6 of this Element             are a significant source of revenue for Woodland’s General
      outlines the General Plan strategy      Fund.The TOT is established by local Ordinance No. 669, which
      for increasing tourism and hotel        states that transient occupants must pay the city 10 percent of
      occupancy.                              the cost of the unit rental per overnight stay in Woodland’s ho-
                                              tels and motels. It also encourages increased occupancy rates
                                              and provides for an increase in overall capacity with more ho-
                                              tel rooms, both of which would increase TOT revenues for
                                              Woodland. Currently there are 729 hotel/motel taxable rooms
                                              in Woodland. There is also a proposed extended stay project
                                              that has been approved by the Planning Commission, and City
                                              Council has entered into a Development Agreement for this
                                              project located in Historic Downtown Woodland.
                                         Focus Areas for Economic Growth
                                         The City’s Economic Development Strategy includes focusing eco-
      More detail on the specific char-
                                         nomic growth in key areas around the community, including areas
      acteristics, economic potential,
                                         that provide a higher proportion of tax revenues as illustrated in
      and planned land uses for these
                                         Figure 4-3. These areas are listed below.
      areas is found in the Land Use,
      Community Design, and Historic       •	 Downtown
      Preservation Element.
                                           •	 Main Street Corridor (East & West)
                                           •	 East Street Corridor
                                           •	 Kentucky Avenue Corridor
                                           •	 CR 102 Corridor
                                           •	 Northeast Industrial Area
                                           •	 Spring Lake Specific Plan Growth Area
                                           •	 SP-1 Growth Area and Southern Gateway
                                           •	 SP-2 Growth Area
                                           •	 SP-3 Growth Area
ED 4-16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Economic Development Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 4-3:	Tax Rate Areas, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                City Share of Property Tax Revenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <15%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15-20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20-25%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            >25%
                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                           CHURCHILL DOWNS AVE                                                                                                                              No Tax Increment Rate Data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Urban Limit Line
                     KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                          KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                             EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                        PALM AVE                                                                                                                                                        COUNTY RD 102
                                                         WOODLAND AVE
     PEDRICK RD                                                                WEST ST                CLEVELAND ST
                                                                                                                                  COLLEGE AVE
                                                                  BEAMER ST                                                                                                                                                                       BEAMER ST
                          ASHLEY AVE
                                                           CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                        3RD ST
                                         COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                          ELLIOT ST
                                                                                                                                                                                         LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                     NORTH ST
                                                                                         COURT ST
                  MAIN          ST                                               MAIN        ST                                                                                                         MAIN   ST                                                                               MAIN   ST
                                                                                                                                              LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                            THOMAS ST             MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                               EAST ST
                                                                                         CROSS ST                                                                                                                                                                                        M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RN
                                                                              WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FA
PEDRICK RD
                                                                                                                      PENDEGAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E   AV E
                                            HWOOD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AV
                                       S OUT      DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GU
                                                                                                                                COLLEGE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        GUM AVE
                                                                                                                                                       3RD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PIONEER AVE
                         ASHLEY AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BRANIGAN AVE
                                       COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                             GIBSON RD                                                                                                                                                                   GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                                                   M A WAY
                                                                                                                                                                O  L
                                                                                                                                                         CO
                                                                                          EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FARMERS CENTRAL RD
Property taxes are the foundational source of
revenue for the Woodland General Fund. The                                                                                                                                                                                                           ND AVE
City’s actual share of a particular parcel’s property                                                                                                                                                                                              KL A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA
tax is determined by the Tax Rate Area (TRA)                                                                                                                                                                                                         R
within which the parcel is located. TRAs with
darker shades of red indicate that a higher                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HERITAGE PARKWAY
proportion of tax revenues go to the City. The
City receives almost double the underlying tax
from parcels within the downtown core area than                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0        1/4       1/2               1
it receives from parcels within recently approved                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MILES
new growth areas.
Note: TRAs shown only apply to areas within the
City. As new growth areas are annexed to
Woodland, property tax sharing agreements with                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SOURCE: City of Woodland, 2016; Dyett & Bhatia, 2016.
the County will be negotiated.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ED 4-17

 City of Woodland General Plan 2035
   This page intentionally left blank.
ED 4-18
Development Approval Process
                                                                   Economic Development Element
                                                                                                            4
The City of Woodland has a direct role in how efficiently and ef-
fectively development applications are processed in the city. While
a number of agencies and utilities are involved in approving and
processing development within the city limits, the City of Wood-
land is the lead agency on the process. As a result, for proposed
projects that are consistent with the General Plan, the City can
add value to industrial and other types of development through a
clearly defined entitlement process. Ensuring an efficient and effec-
tive development process for projects that are consistent with the
General Plan is a key strategy for supporting the expansion of local
industries and development.
Maintaining and Enhancing Infrastructure and
the Public Realm
Infrastructure improvements can be targeted to facilitate or expe-
dite certain developments, or to ensure that infrastructure capac-
ity does not become an impediment to growth. The City of Wood-
land has structured its budget and operations such that much of
the infrastructure capital requirements and some operating cost
requirements related to serving new development are funded by
developer fees and exactions. However, while new growth pays for
public infrastructure needs generated by that growth, Woodland
needs to continue to maintain and enhance existing infrastructure
and the public realm. For example, roads, bikeways, and parks and
open spaces are needed to serve residents and ensure the city
remains an attractive location for new private investment. Since
the City’s ability to pay for public works and services is in part
determined by its fiscal health, these roles are closely intertwined.
There are four infrastructure projects that are critical to Wood-
land’s economic success. The first project is a long-term, compre-          These and other infrastructure
hensive solution to flooding challenges in the northeastern and             projects are discussed in the Pub-
eastern portions of the city. Potential flooding from Lower Cache           lic Facilities and Services Element.
Creek and Yolo West Bypass floodplains poses a threat to devel-
opment in those areas. A comprehensive solution is required to
remove constraints on the northeast industrial area and capitalize
on the city’s opportunities in food and agriculture-related indus-
trial activity, which is linked to the surrounding region’s agricultural
production, as well as the city’s transportation access for regional
distribution functions.
                                                                                                            ED 4-19

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                         The second infrastructure project concerns water supply in
                                         Woodland. The Davis-Woodland Water Supply Project, a partner-
                                         ship between the City of Woodland, City of Davis, and the Univer-
                                         sity of California, Davis to secure use of surface water from the
                                         Sacramento River, in order to avoid overdrafting the aquifer with
                                         the expected increase in water demand from future growth. This
                                         project launched in mid-2016 to provide a cleaner and more sus-
                                         tainable source of water to support existing and future additional
                                         “wet” industries, such as food processing, in Woodland.
                                         The third infrastructure project concerns the wastewater collec-
                                         tion system near Downtown, which is currently near capacity. The
                                         General Plan prioritizes implementing improvements to the City’s
                                         wastewater collection system to facilitate growth and accommo-
    Infrastructure improvement projects  date infill development at increased densities near Downtown.
    are essential to accommodate new
    growth in Woodland.
                                         An additional infrastructure project that will need to be addressed
                                         in the very near future and years to come is broadband telecom
                                         infrastructure. In the twenty-first century, broadband telecommu-
                                         nications infrastructure is as essential to the activities, quality of
      Broadband internet service poli-
                                         life, and productivity of residents, businesses, and organizations as
      cies are contained in the Business
                                         water and electricity. The City considers broadband to be a major
      and Job Growth section of this
                                         utility that is essential to Woodland’s economic success.
      Element, as well as the Public
      Facilities and Services Element.
ED 4-20

4.5	 Business and Job
                                                                        Economic Development Element
                                                                                                                 4
              Growth
Stimulating business and job growth are some of the City’s key
strategies to strengthen the local economy. Local businesses are
an important source of jobs in the community. Retaining existing
and attracting new business is key to providing greater disposable
income in a community. Increased disposable income then creates
a larger market for retail locally, supporting new retail and com-
mercial development and creating opportunities to recapture sales
and associated tax revenue that are currently lost to retail centers
in surrounding communities.
The retention and expansion of existing business establishments
and firms is key to maintaining employment and a stable tax base
and ultimately to attracting new business and promoting job
growth. The City engages in a retention and expansion program
that uses a systematic approach to gather information from the lo-
cal business sector, identify and address immediate problems, and
develop local government programs and policies that promote a
diversified, stable local economy.
Business attraction and formation is considered a longer-term
economic development tool than retention and expansion pro-
grams. This is because the time needed to complete an attraction
project tends to be several years and because there are relatively
few major facilities to attract at any particular time. Through nu-
Monsanto recently expanded its research facility west of Woodland. Growth in the agricultural technology industry and
proximity to UC Davis represent an opportunity for the city for development of similar business/research park uses in
Woodland.
                                                                                                                  ED 4-21

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                merous studies and plans, including the Economic Development
                                                Strategy and the Downtown Specific Plan, the City has identified
                                                retention and attraction of its primary economic base – food and
                                                agricultural industries – as desirable and economically viable for
                                                Woodland. Many of the General Plan policies are focused on sup-
                                                porting growth in this specialized economic base for the city.
                                                The City has also demonstrated a strong interest in diversifying
                                                Woodland’s economic base over the planning horizon of the Gen-
                                                eral Plan. A diversified economic base is desirable because it can
                                                be less sensitive to fluctuations in the wider regional economy
                                                and can foster more robust economic growth over the long term.
                                                Woodland’s economic base would benefit from growth in the
                                                knowledge economy, which is based on production and services of
                                                knowledge-intensive activities, such as technological or scientific
                                                advances and professional services. Firms and businesses in the
                                                knowledge economy rely on intellectual capabilities, rather than
                                                solely on physical inputs or natural resources. As such, firms and
                                                businesses in the knowledge economy depend on highly skilled
                                                and creative workers. The City has identified the biotech industry
                                                as one sector of the knowledge economy with strong potential
                                                for growth in Woodland—a knowledge-based industry that builds
                                                directly on the City’s existing strength in food and agriculture tech-
                                                nology.
    Woodland’s assets, such as freeway, rail, and airport access, have attracted manufacturers and industrial uses. Job growth
    and diversification is an emphasis of the City’s economic development efforts.
ED 4-22

There are a number of factors that the City can directly or indi-
rectly influence to enhance the perception of Woodland as a com-
                                                                   Economic Development Element
                                                                                                          4
petitive location for business. These include differential economic
factors including cost of land, fees, and tax rates; ease of doing busi-
ness; availability of suitable sites; the reputation of the city among
its existing companies; and available financing. Communities with a
high quality of life and a vibrant urban core can also increase their
competitive edge in attracting businesses and workers, especially
in the knowledge economy; thus, strengthening Woodland’s down-
town core and providing high-quality community services are im-
portant components to the City’s economic development strategy.
The City will increase its ability to grow and attract high-wage em-
ployers by investing in relevant education and training to increase
the number of well-educated workers.
The quality and types of utilities available in a city, from water to
telecommunications, also play a role in increasing a community’s            The Public Facilities and Services
competitive edge and supporting economic growth. In particular,             Element contains goals and poli-
in the coming years, the quality of broadband internet service will         cies to support development of
play a critical role in affecting the activities and productivity of        broadband internet service.
businesses, workers, and residents in Woodland. The City needs to
have affordable, abundant bandwidth available to the whole com-
munity that does not constrain innovation, economic growth, or
social progress.
Whether the City becomes a provider/installer and maintains a
Broadband Enterprise Fund, or businesses continue to rely on the
private sector, this General Plan prioritizes and considers broad-
band internet service as a major utility affecting the City’s econom-
ic success. Zoning, construction, permitting, rights-of-way manage-
ment, and other traditional municipal activities will affect what kind
of broadband networks Woodland will have in the years ahead.
The Yolo County Broadband Strategic Plan was completed in 2015,
establishing the basic framework for a Broadband Implementa-
tion Plan. An implementation priority of this General Plan is to
determine how to implement the installation and management of
a Broadband Telecom Infrastructure System, to ensure that all its
residents and enterprises will have affordable, abundant bandwidth.
                                                                                                           ED 4-23

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                          4.6	 Tourism in
                                                       Woodland
                                          Expanding tourism by creating and enhancing cultural, entertain-
                                          ment, and recreational activities and facilities in Woodland pro-
                                          vides an opportunity to attract visitors and strengthen the local
                                          economy. Activities and special events sponsored by various spe-
                                          cial interest, cultural, and ethnic groups are encouraged to cre-
                                          ate a regional draw of individuals to the community. Additionally,
                                          recreational, entertainment, and cultural facilities and activities for
    The Opera House is a unique ameni-    youth can improve the quality of life for the Woodland community
    ty that attract tourists to Woodland. and attract tourists.
                                          Promoting Woodland as a tourist and convention center (business
                                          center) destination can lead to additional economic activity in the
                                          city and provide additional revenue for the City through increased
                                          sales tax revenue. Marketing of Woodland’s historical character,
                                          community events like the annual Stroll Through History event,
                                          and attractions including the Opera House, Gibson House Muse-
                                          um, the California Agriculture Museum, and Train Depot Museum
                                          are important parts of this effort. Additionally, music and art in
    The Historic Hotel Woodland is a      public places can create a vibrant atmosphere and attract local
    designated National Historic Land-    residents and visitors to the area for casual occasions, in addition
    mark.                                 to special events. As discussed in Section 4.7, Woodland partners
                                          with the Yolo County Visitor’s Bureau (YCVB) to promote Wood-
       Refer to the Land Use, Com-        land as a tourism destination, which increases the city’s transient
       munity Design and Historic         occupancy taxes (TOT).
       Preservation Element for more on
       Woodland’s historic resources.     Hotels are a commercial use that has potential for growth in
                                          Woodland. The local business sector and the local residential base
                                          both attract visitors whose destination is Woodland. In addition,
                                          Woodland is one of the closest cities to Sacramento International
                                          Airport and can draw visitors looking to stay overnight near the
                                          airport. Increases in travelers passing through Woodland en route
                                          to other destinations can create additional demand for hotels.
                                          Building upon interest in local attractions, such as the Woodland
                                          Opera House, the California Agriculture Museum, and other en-
                                          tertainment and cultural amenities, would also help in this regard.
    The California Agriculture Museum     As a result, over the planning period, an increase in demand for
    is a popular local attraction.        hotels is expected.
ED 4-24

4.7	 Developing Strong
                                                               Economic Development Element
                                                                                            4
              Partnerships
Partnerships with local organizations, businesses, and neighbor-
ing communities can help to strengthen the Woodland “brand,”
foster public/private partnerships, and promote associations with
research and higher educational institutions, as well as regional or-
ganizations in industries that will attract businesses to Woodland.
Partnerships between local businesses and Woodland Community
College (WCC) can help ensure that Woodland has a workforce
trained for jobs that are available locally. Other key partners in-
clude: Woodland Chamber of Commerce, Greater Sacramento
Area Council (GSAC), the Yolo County Virtual One-Stop Shop
(Workforce Innovation Occupation Agency), Sacramento Metro-
politan Chamber (Sac Metro Chamber), Los Rios Community Col-
lege, YCVB, and others. More details on key partnerships with the
Chamber of Commerce, UC Davis, Yolo County One-Stop Shop,
YCVB, Next Economy/Valley Vision/AgPlus, SACOG, GSAC, Nor-
CalWTC, and AgStart are discussed below.
  •	 Woodland Chamber of Commerce. The mission of the
     Woodland Area Chamber of Commerce is to foster an eco-
     nomic climate in which business, industry, and agriculture will
     flourish. In addition, the Woodland Chamber has four objec-
     tives: coordination of commerce, industry and the professions;
     stimulating activities that lead to development of human and
     economic resources; developing creative leadership and effec-
     tive coordination of all interested parties when solving com-
     munity problems; and creating a broad understanding and ap-
     preciation of the great opportunities that Woodland has to
     offer. The City works closely with the Chamber on many proj-
     ects that serve to stimulate economic activity and growth op-
     portunities. Additionally, the Chamber of Commerce partners
     with the City in its business retention and expansion program,
     serves as the local Visitor Center, and provides programs and
     events to assist existing and prospective businesses.
  •	 UC Davis. UC Davis Seed Biotechnology Center has an ini-
     tiative called Seed Central to energize the seed industry clus-
     ter surrounding UC Davis. It seeks to ensure that the region
     retains its preeminence in the rapidly growing field of com-
     peting seed and ag-biotech hubs, to attract more innovative
                                                                                            ED 4-25

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                      companies to the region, and to bring science to market faster.
                                                      A number of the world’s largest and leading seed companies
                                                      already have a presence in Woodland. Seed production, as
                                                      well as the research and development activity surrounding it,
                                                      could be a significant opportunity for economic growth, which
                                                      Woodland should seek to leverage through partnership with
                                                      UC Davis and Seed Central.
                                                   •	 Yolo County One-Stop Shop. The Yolo County One-Stop
                                                      Shop is a collaboration between the Yolo County Department
                                                      of Health and Human Services and the State Employment De-
                                                      velopment Department (EDD), acting as the managing agency
                                                      of the Workforce Innovation Opportunity Agency. This collo-
                                                      cation of departments offers a unique opportunity for employ-
                                                      ers and job seekers to make “one stop” in their pursuit of
                                                      fulfilling their employment needs. The agency also administers
                                                      a powerful online tool designed to assist job seekers or stu-
                                                      dents in searching for the right job, and help employers who
                                                      are looking for the best job candidates. The agencies also offer
                                                      a tremendous amount of employment data and statistics for
                                                      the region.
                                                   •	 Yolo County Visitor’s Bureau. The Yolo County Visitor’s
                                                      Bureau (YCVB) is a countywide (except for the City of West
                                                      Sacramento) nonprofit marketing collaboration that was cre-
                                                      ated to encourage visitation and market Yolo County as a tour-
                                                      ism destination. The City works with the YCVB to specifically
                                                      promote Woodland to the broader area and population. Ad-
                                                      ditionally, the YCVB maintains websites, such as www.visityolo.
                                                      org and www.discoveryolo.org, assists with the management
                                                      of Yolo County events, and produces many helpful brochures,
                                                      maps, and pamphlets with helpful information about Woodland
                                                      and Yolo County and all it has to offer.
    Partnership with hoteliers is beneficial in helping promote Woodland’s assets and attracting tourism to the city.
ED 4-26

•	 Small Business Development Center/Sacramento
   Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce/Davis Chamber
                                                                Economic Development Element
                                                                                             4
   of Commerce. Woodland is part of the Capital Region Small
   Business Development Center (SBDC), which provides free
   consultation to businesses in a variety of areas. The local office
   for the SBDC is located at the Davis Chamber of Commerce.
   Woodland partners with the Sacramento Metropolitan Cham-
   ber of Commerce to put on an annual business walk to keep
   the City apprised of the current business climate and trends
   over time.
•	 Greater Sacramento Area Economic Council (GSAC).
   The Greater Sacramento Area Economic Council is an organi-
   zation created and led by CEOs from the Sacramento region
   to retain, attract, grow, and create sustainable businesses in the
   region’s six counties, including El Dorado, Placer, Sacramento,
   Sutter, Yolo, and Yuba. GSAC works directly with local govern-
   ments to strengthen the region’s job-creating capacity; it also
   collaborates with regional partners to market and promote the
   region to attract quality business to the area and strengthen
   ties with companies already in the area. GSAC works region-
   ally on economic issues, including identifying and building the
   infrastructure necessary to attract businesses and employees
   to the area. The City of Woodland is a member of GSAC and
   will continue to partner with the organization to strengthen
   the city’s economy by attracting businesses and developing its
   workforce.
•	 Next Economy/Valley Vision/AgPlus. The Next Economy
   initiative is a private-sector partnership and effort to chart
   a course of action for the six-county Sacramento region to
   create a diversified, robust, and sustainable economy. The ini-
   tiative identifies a number of targeted business industries for
   the region as well as goals to support industries. The Next
   Economy Capital Region Prosperity Plan, in which the City is
   a participant, was developed to accelerate job creation and
   new investment in the Sacramento region through a number of
   programs and strategies. Given Woodland’s current positioning
   within a center of business activity related to the agriculture
   and food sectors, the City is well-positioned to take a leader-
   ship position within the region’s agriculture and food cluster
   in particular.
•	 SACOG. The Rural Urban Connections Strategy (RUCS)
   is a SACOG project that aims to be an environmental and
   economic sustainability strategy for the region’s rural areas.
                                                                                             ED 4-27

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                            To that end, SACOG is developing data and tools to assist
                                            rural area stakeholders to help their communities thrive. As a
                                            hub for surrounding agricultural areas, with many established
                                            agriculture-related businesses, Woodland has the opportunity
                                            to attract additional economic activity related to agricultural
                                            production on nearby farmlands, whether providing products
                                            and services to support agricultural production, or through
                                            value-added processing of crops grown in the area. Woodland
                                            will continue to partner with SACOG, as the results of the
                                            RUCS research will potentially help Woodland to better un-
                                            derstand these opportunities and how to strengthen the local
                                            economy by supporting the regional agricultural economy.
                                         •	 Northern California World Trade Center (NorCal-
                                            WTC). The Northern California World Trade Center is part
                                            of the International World Trade Centers Association and fa-
                                            cilitates integration of Northern California businesses into the
                                            global marketplace. NorCalWTC is leading implementation of
                                            the California Capital Region Export Plan to identify and acti-
                                            vate the best opportunities to expand exports from the region
                                            and stimulate economic growth. The California Capital Region
                                            Export Plan was developed as part of the Next Economy Capi-
                                            tal Region Prosperity Plan. Woodland is currently a leading in-
                                            dustrial submarket in the region and more growth is expected
                                            in the coming years, and the City will continue to partner with
                                            NorCalWTC to identify export expansion opportunities, as
                                            well as other business opportunities, in Woodland.
                                         •	 AgStart. Originally part of the Sacramento Regional Technol-
                                            ogy Alliance, AgStart is located in Downtown Woodland and
                                            helps agricultural entrepreneurs start their own businesses.
                                            AgStart offers incubator co-working space for start-ups and
                                            early stage food and agriculture companies. It hosts a num-
                                            ber of events and initiatives, including mentoring opportuni-
                                            ties, and its other services range from basic advisory consulta-
                                            tions to business development and investment opportunities.
    Vibe Analytics prototype at Agstart.    UC Davis’ World Food Center, large regional law firms, local
                                            governments, industry exports, and others in the ag-tech field
                                            are involved in advising and supporting AgStart. The City of
                                            Woodland has assisted AgStart by providing funding and help-
                                            ing it find a suitable location in Downtown and will continue to
                                            support agricultural entrepreneurship in Woodland.
ED 4-28

4.8	 Goals and Policies
                                                                        Economic Development Element
                                                                                                           4
Goal 4.A	          Economic Growth. Support a wide range of economic activity in Woodland that
                   capitalizes on the city’s location, strengthens the City’s tax base, and supports and
                   enhances quality of life.
                   Policy 4.A.1	        Economic Development Strategy. Periodically update the
                                        City’s Economic Development Strategy and ensure the City has
                                        appropriate resources in place for implementation. Focus economic
                                        development efforts on projects and programs that will maximize
                                        long-term net revenues to the City and diversify the City’s economic
                                        base. Establish priorities for use of City funding to fulfill economic
                                        development VVobjectives, including construction of critical public
                                        infrastructure that will reduce barriers to job growth and business
                                        investment.
                   Policy 4.A.2	        Predictable Business Environment. Support a predictable
                                        and welcoming business environment in Woodland by improving,
                                        streamlining, and consistently applying regulatory and permit
                                        processes, and striving to keep regulatory and permit costs as low as
                                        financially feasible.
                   Policy 4.A.3	        Additional Funding. Identify, pursue, and capture federal, State,
                                        and other grants for economic development, marketing, workforce
                                        training, and incentives to recruit new businesses.
                   Policy 4.A.4	        Anticipating Economic Trends and Shifts. Identify and plan for
                                        potential economic and market trends such as growing automation,
                                        the impacts of e-commerce, the downsizing of retail sales areas, the
                                        migration of stores to mixed use walkable corridors, and the impact
                                        of millennials on employment and purchase preferences.
Goal 4.B	          Fiscal Sustainability. Achieve fiscal sustainability while providing core public services
                   and maintaining public facilities and infrastructure.
See also policies in the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element
                   Policy 4.B.1	        Public Service Standards. Ensure adequate funding through the
                                        Capital Improvement Program and General Fund revenues to build
                                        and maintain necessary public infrastructure.
                                        See also policies in the Public Facilities and Services Element.
                   Policy 4.B.2	        Efficiency of Public Services. Ensure that public services are
                                        being delivered as efficiently as possible. Strive to provide exemplary
                                        public service.
                                                                                                           ED 4-29

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                     Policy 4.B.3	          Fair Share. Require new development to pay its fair share of
                                            needed public facilities and infrastructure improvements, as well as
                                            for operations and maintenance, through impact fees, assessment
                                            districts, and other mechanisms as appropriate.
                     Policy 4.B.4	          Fiscal Management. Continue to implement responsible fiscal
                                            management practices.
                     Policy 4.B.5	          Budget for Maintenance. Balance ongoing operating costs, paying
                                            off internal debt, and building reserves with the need to plan and pay
                                            for regular, basic maintenance and replacement of public equipment,
                                            infrastructure, and property.
                     Policy 4.B.6	          Equitable Payment of Services. Equitably distribute the burden
                                            for services between all areas of the city.
    Goal 4.C	        Strategic Land Uses and Development. Recognize the important roles that land
                     uses and development play in the City’s economic success and fiscal health. Consider
                     economic benefits and costs and long-term community needs in land use decisions,
                     and reserve sites for designated uses.
    See also goals and policies in the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element.
                     Policy 4.C.1	          Strategic Catalysts. Undertake strategic initiatives to attract
                                            new retail and commercial development in key locations in focus
                                            areas for economic growth, especially in areas that provide a high
                                            proportion of tax revenue to the City (as identified in Figure 4-3).
                                            Strategic initiatives may include: promoting catalyst projects at key
                                            locations to stimulate private investment; encouraging quality retail
                                            and restaurant uses to locate near existing successful areas; and
                                            building on synergies that could occur between complementary
                                            businesses.
                     Policy 4.C.2	          Infill Development. Incentivize infill and redevelopment,
                                            particularly in areas that provide the City with higher proportions
                                            of tax revenue (see Figure 4-3), that makes use of existing
                                            infrastructure and services.
                     Policy 4.C.3	          Development Permit Process. Promote the advantages of
                                            General Plan consistency, including California Environmental
                                            Quality Act (CEQA) streamlining potential, to development project
                                            applicants.
                     Policy 4.C.4	          Development Incentives. Adopt development incentives for
                                            projects that provide a substantial benefit to the community, such as
                                            providing large numbers of primary wage-earner jobs.
ED 4-30

Policy 4.C.5	
                                               Economic Development Element
               Strategic Land Inventory. Maintain an adequate amount of
               land properly zoned, consistent with the General Plan, and ready
                                                                                  4
               to be expeditiously developed, redeveloped, and/or revitalized
               for economic development and job creation purposes. The land
               inventory should include parcels of a range of sizes, locations, and
               job-supporting land use designations in order to support a wide
               variety of industries and development needs.
Policy 4.C.6	  Monitor Trends. Monitor economic trends to identify emerging
               industries, new market opportunities, and the performance and mix
               of businesses to allow the City to be proactive and adjust to market
               changes.
Policy 4.C.7	  Annexation Agreements. For lands annexed to Woodland,
               negotiate annexation agreements with the County that ensure
               the City of Woodland will receive the necessary revenues to
               support the services and infrastructure maintenance needs of the
               development proposed on lands to be annexed.
Policy 4.C.8	  Retail Base. Enhance the city’s retail base through land use and
               development policies to support businesses that generate sales
               tax revenue, serve the needs of the local residents, and attract
               visitors from outside of the community. Promote and develop a
               clean, visually inviting and safe shopping environment, recognizing
               its importance in enhancing retail trade. Prepare zoning and
               development standards that accommodate the shifts in the
               downsizing of retail stores; the preference for walkable, mixed use
               corridors; and the need for on-street parking.
Policy 4.C.9	  Importance of Agricultural Industry. Recognize the importance
               of agriculture-related business and industries to the City and region,
               and support the continuation and development of agriculture and
               agriculture-related enterprises in and around Woodland by:
                  •	 Accommodating agriculture-related industries in Industrial and
                     Business Park districts;
                  •	 Promoting locally-grown and produced agricultural goods and
                     value-added foods and beverages, and the image of Woodland
                     and Yolo County as an agricultural region; and coordinating with
                     the County on agriculture-supporting policies and programs,
                     including ag-technology accelerators, agricultural processing
                     facilities, and flood control and water management.
Policy 4.C.10	 Provide Infrastructure. Strive to provide necessary major street
               infrastructure and utility capacities, including broadband internet
               service, for properly zoned land, consistent with the General
               Plan, so this land can be efficiently and effectively developed in a
               timely manner. Ensure the City’s public works, public utilities, and
                                                                                  ED 4-31

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   capital improvement plans are aligned to support the economic
                                   development objectives in the General Plan.
                                   See also goals and policies in the Public Facilities and Services Element.
                  Policy 4.C.11	   Comprehensive Flood Solution. Continue to work with Army
                                   Corps of Engineers and responsible State and regional agencies to
                                   identify and implement a comprehensive flood solution to reduce
                                   risk of flooding in Woodland, especially in the northeast industrial
                                   quadrant and eastern portion of the city.
                                   See also policies in the Public Facilities and Services Element.
                  Policy 4.C.12	   Water Supply and Infrastructure. ASR programs support
                                   completion of the Davis-Woodland Water Supply Project, Aquifer
                                   Storage and Recovery wells, and related local facilities to ensure
                                   water supplies are available to serve current and future water needs
                                   in Woodland.
                                   See also policies in the Safety Element.
                  Policy 4.C.13	   Industrial Park Infrastructure. Ensure infrastructure in the
                                   areas designated for industrial uses on the Land Use Diagram is well
                                   maintained and has capacity to serve expanded business growth
                                   aligned with Woodland’s economic strengths as a center for food
                                   and agriculture processing and technology.
                  Policy 4.C.14	   Downtown Utility Infrastructure. Advance improvements to
                                   ensure that the utility infrastructure serving Downtown has capacity
                                   to accommodate new infill growth at increased densities and
                                   intensity of use.
                                   See also policies in the Public Facilities and Services Element.
                  Policy 4.C.15	   Education and Training. Increase the opportunities for educating
                                   and training the workforce to meet the demands of employment by
                                   working with employers and business educators.
                  Policy 4.C.16	   Safety and Security. Maintain a high level of safety and security
                                   for the benefit of residents, visitors, employers, and employees. Tools
                                   and techniques should include good lighting, policing of public spaces
                                   and places, and encouraging an abundance of “eyes on the street” by
                                   maximizing opportunities for living, working, recreating, and shopping
                                   within the observable proximity of fellow citizens in the public
                                   realm.
ED 4-32

Goal 4.D	
                                                            Economic Development Element
          Support Businesses in Woodland. Facilitate retention, expansion, attraction, and
          formation of businesses in Woodland that will serve Woodland residents, increase job
                                                                                              4
          creation, and meet the city’s economic development objectives.
          Policy 4.D.1	      Business Expansion and Attraction Program. Periodically
                             update and continue to administer the City’s programs aimed
                             at expanding existing businesses and attract new businesses
                             to Woodland, particularly in the food, agriculture, and biotech
                             industries.
          Policy 4.D.2	      Marketing. Continue to market Woodland as a desirable business
                             location, targeting core industries and emerging technologies aligned
                             with the research strengths at UC Davis.
          Policy 4.D.3	      Branding. Create effective city branding that focuses on
                             Woodland’s suite of physical assets; housing, educational, and
                             entrepreneurial opportunities; and safety and security.
          Policy 4.D.4	      Information on Woodland’s Economy. Make current
                             information pertinent to the Woodland economy available to the
                             public, such as the city’s demographics, employment and market
                             statistics, future plans, and population growth.
          Policy 4.D.5	      Targeted Incentive Program. Develop a package of incentives,
                             such as City loans, expedited permit review and approval, and
                             floor area bonuses, to consider offering to targeted industries and
                             businesses that locate in Woodland. Ensure that the long-term
                             benefits accrued to the City ultimately exceed the value of the
                             incentive package provided.
          Policy 4.D.6	      Consult with Business Community. Actively and regularly solicit
                             the views of the business community in matters affecting Woodland’s
                             economic climate and development.
          Policy 4.D.7	      Business Licenses and Fees. Require all businesses and persons
                             that do business with the City of Woodland to have a business
                             license, and establish business license fees that are competitive with
                             neighboring jurisdictions, ensuring that Woodland benefits from
                             economic activity taking place within its borders.
          Policy 4.D.8	      Home Businesses. Encourage home-based businesses compatible
                             with the surrounding neighborhoods, in accordance with the Zoning
                             Ordinance, and support opportunities for alternative employment
                             forms and incubators for small businesses.
          Policy 4.D.9	      Broadband Internet Service as Economic Development
                             Strategy. Recognize the critical role that the quality of broadband
                             internet service plays in Woodland’s economy and the city’s ability to
                                                                                               ED 4-33

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                      attract and retain businesses, workers, and residents across diverse
                                      sectors of the economy.
                                      See also policies in the Public Facilities and Services Element.
    Goal 4.E	     Promote Job Growth and Diversification in Woodland. Promote expansion,
                  attraction, and formation of jobs in Woodland across diverse economic sectors.
                  Policy 4.E.1	       Job Expansion through Business Expansion. Encourage the
                                      expansion and attraction of diverse businesses and industries that
                                      create and increase the quality and amount of stable, year-round
                                      jobs available locally.
                  Policy 4.E.2	       Workforce Development. Cultivate a skilled, educated, and well-
                                      trained workforce by supporting school and college programs that
                                      produce increased educational attainment and relevant job skills that
                                      appeal to existing and future businesses.
                                      See also policies in the Developing Strong Partnerships Section of the
                                      Economic Development Element.
                  Policy 4.E.3	       High-Quality Community. Support high-quality community
                                      services and facilities for existing and future residents as a key
                                      economic development strategy, and promote them in the city’s
                                      marketing campaigns to showcase Woodland’s high quality of life as
                                      part of its competitive edge.
                                      See also policies in the Public Facilities and Services Element.
                  Policy 4.E.4	       A Vibrant Downtown for Economic Growth. Recognize that a
                                      vibrant urban environment in Downtown Woodland can serve as an
                                      important economic development strategy by attracting businesses,
                                      workers, and residents to the community. Invest in and maintain
                                      Downtown infrastructure, and support Downtown businesses.
                                      See also policies in the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic
                                      Preservation Element.
    Goal 4.F	     Tourism in Woodland. Promote tourism as part of Woodland’s economic base.
                  Policy 4.F.1	       Comprehensive Tourism Management Program. Develop and
                                      maintain a comprehensive tourism and visitor attraction program to
                                      define the city’s target market, and identify and implement strategies
                                      to promote tourism in Woodland.
                  Policy 4.F.2	       Special Facilities. Develop and expand tourism in Woodland by
                                      attracting, developing, and expanding public and private recreational
                                      and entertainment venues and facilities for visitors of all ages,
ED 4-34

                                                            Economic Development Element
                                                                                                 4
                             including youth; by building on Woodland’s existing unique facilities,
                             such as the Woodland Opera House, the California Agriculture
                             Museum, the Sports Park and Community and Senior Center, and
                             the Yolo County Fairgrounds; and by capitalizing on the historic
                             character of the city.
          Policy 4.F.3	      Provide Overnight Accommodations. Encourage provision of
                             quality hotel facilities in Woodland in visitor-serving areas, such as
                             Downtown and East Main Street, and work with owners of motels
                             to upgrade existing facilities in the right locations, and at a scale
                             appropriate to the city’s character, to enhance the quality of visitor-
                             serving areas.
          Policy 4.F.4	      Special Events. Encourage, sponsor, and increase the number
                             and quality of special events and recreational programs that are
                             attractive to both visitors and residents.
          Policy 4.F.5	      Marketing and Programming Coordination. Work with
                             owners, managers, and employers of retail, entertainment, dining,
                             hotel, and recreation businesses in developing a cooperative
                             marketing and programming approach.
          Policy 4.F.6	      Agricultural Tourism. Respect and promote the city’s culture
                             of agriculture by supporting historical agriculture attractions.
                             Local historical facilities in Woodland are encouraged to promote
                             community programs and events which recognize the importance
                             of Woodland’s agricultural history. Examples include the California
                             Agriculture Museum, the Yolo Archives, and the Gibson Mansion.
Goal 4.G	 Strong Partnerships. Foster strong working relationships and continue to partner
          with businesses and employers, non-profit and private sector organizations, higher
          education and training institutions, and other public agencies in Woodland and in
          the region on economic development efforts.
          Policy 4.G.1	      Regional Coordination. Strive to coordinate economic
                             development efforts with the efforts of the Chamber of Commerce,
                             Greater Sacramento,Yolo County, other Yolo County cities, the
                             University of California at Davis, Woodland Community College
                             (WCC), and other economic development organizations.
          Policy 4.G.2	      Strategic Partnerships for Biotech and Seed Industry. Foster
                             partnerships with educational institutions, private sector entities,
                             and public agencies—such as UC Davis and Next Economy—to
                             support biotech, agricultural, and seed industries in Woodland;
                             ensure that adequate land, infrastructure, and amenities are available
                             in Woodland to attract potential businesses associated with these
                             industries.
                                                                                                  ED 4-35

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 4.G.3	    Fostering Businesses through UC Davis. In accordance with
                                   ongoing regional efforts, develop and administer programs to
                                   facilitate and foster entrepreneurial business efforts by UC Davis
                                   graduates and others.
                  Policy 4.G.4	    Business Incubators/Accelerators. Support public-private
                                   partnerships to incubate and accelerate the growth of new
                                   companies, especially in locally strong sectors such as agricultural
                                   technology.
                  Policy 4.G.5	    Industry-Education Partnerships. Facilitate partnerships
                                   between area businesses and educational and training institutions
                                   to provide training programs that will enable the labor force to
                                   meet the needs of business and industry and to improve the match
                                   between emerging job opportunities and training programs.
                  Policy 4.G.6	    K-12 Education. Support WJUSD and its efforts to provide the
                                   highest quality educational facilities and programming, and market
                                   these successes as part of the City’s business recruitment program.
                  Policy 4.G.7	    Buy Local. Educate the community and promote and market the
                                   benefits of a “Buy Local” campaign.
ED 4-36

5 Public Facilities and
  Services Element
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   5.1	 Introduction and
                                                  Purpose
                                   City development is dependent on a comprehensive network of
                                   public facilities and services. Each type of service has a unique set
                                   of opportunities and constraints and must adapt to growth and
                                   change differently.
                                   The purpose of the Public Facilities and Services Element is to
                                   provide a policy framework for the City to manage infrastructure
                                   and services, identify areas for improvement, and ensure that pub-
                                   lic utilities and services meet the needs of the community as the
                                   city grows. More specifically, the Public Facilities and Services Ele-
                                   ment addresses the planning, provision, and maintenance of police
                                   and fire services; parks and recreational facilities and programs;
                                   schools; water, recycled water, wastewater, drainage/stormwater,
                                   solid waste systems; and other public facilities.
                                   The Woodland community takes great pride in the diversity and quality of its
                                   parks and recreation activities.
PF 5-2
The Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                         Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                5
is organized as follows:
•	 Section 5.1: Introduction and Purpose. Introduces the
    topics covered in this Element and outlines the Element’s rela-
    tionship to State law, and the Visioning Statement and Guiding
    Principles.
•	 Section 5.2: Police. Describes police services in Woodland,
    response times, and service standards.
•	 Section 5.3: Fire and Emergency Medical Services. De-
    scribes fire and emergency medical services in Woodland, re-
    sponse times, and international service organization rating.
•	 Section 5.4: Parks and Recreation. Presents existing parks
    and recreational facilities and programs, planning improve-
    ments, and current standards and deficiencies.
•	 Section 5.5: Schools. Provides an overview of existing ed-
    ucational facilities in Woodland, including public and private
    schools and higher education. Describes current unmet facility
    needs and joint use agreements for facilities.
•	 Section 5.6: Public Utilities. Discusses potable water, in-
    cluding water supply and water demand. Provides an overview
    of current capacity and planning improvements of Woodland’s
    wastewater collection and facilities. Describes existing storm
    drainage facilities, planned improvements, and low impact de-
    velopment, and presents solid waste collection and disposal in
    Woodland. Also presents other utilities, including natural gas
    and telecommunications such as broadband technology.
•	 Section 5.7: Goals and Policies.
Relationship to State Law
While Public Facilities and Services is not a mandated element,
it does include a number of topics that are required to be ad-
dressed in general plans, according to State law, as shown in Table
5-1. State law (Government Code Section 65302(a)) requires gen-
eral plans to address land uses for education, public buildings and
grounds, and solid and liquid waste disposal facilities. In addition,
Government Code Section 65302(g) requires that they address
the protection of the community from any unreasonable risks.
This includes consideration of police, fire, and emergency medical
services. Open space for outdoor recreation is another required
                                                                                                PF 5-3

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                             subject that is discussed in this Element.Water supply and demand
                                             is also required to be included in the general plan (Government
                                             Code Section 65302(d)) and is addressed in this Element. Water
                                             quality is discussed in the Sustainability, Conservation, and Open
                                             Space Element.
      Table 5-1:	        Land Use Topics Required by State Law
     Required Topic                                                               Addressed in this Element
      Police and Fire Services                                                     Yes
      Open space for outdoor recreation, including:                                Yes
        •	 Areas of outstanding scenic, historic, and cultural value
        •	 Areas particularly suited for park and recreation purposes
        •	 Access to lakeshores, beaches, rivers, and streams
        •	 Areas that link major recreation and open space land such as
           utility easements, river banks, stream banks, and scenic highway
           corridors
      Education                                                                    Yes
      Public Buildings and Grounds                                                 Yes
      Solid and Liquid Waste Disposal Facilities                                   Yes
      Water Supply and Demand                                                      Yes
      Stormwater Management                                                        Yes
      Public Utilities and Facilities                                              Yes
                                             Relationship to Visioning Statement and Guiding
                                             Principles
                                             The Public Facilities and Services Element reflects several values
                                             expressed in the community’s Visioning Statement and Guiding
                                             Principles, including providing a “well-maintained infrastructure”
                                             and “excellent schools.” In addition, the Element directly supports
                                             the following Guiding Principles:
                                               •	 Public Services: Provide realistic, supportable and appro-
                                                  priate levels of public service that are sustainable and fiscally
                                                  sound.
                                               •	 Safety: Ensure that Woodland remains a safe place to live, pro-
                                                  tected from natural and manmade hazards.
                                               •	 Quality Education: Foster quality educational and enrich-
                                                  ment opportunities.
PF 5-4

5.2	 Police
                                                               Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                      5
Law enforcement services are provided by the City of Woodland
Police Department. The Department has a staff of 79 paid employ-
ees, including 64 sworn patrol officers and 15 non-sworn support
personnel. The City of Woodland Police Department is located at
1000 Lincoln Avenue, as shown on Figure 5-1.
The Police Department currently staffs four full time beats in the
northeast, northwest, southwest and southeast quadrants of the
city. An additional fifth beat covering Downtown is staffed during
the daytime. However, given calls for service under existing condi-
tions, the Police Chief has expressed that this fifth beat should be
staffed full-time. Ultimately to adequately cover existing develop-
ment plus the anticipated buildout of Spring Lake and future devel-
opment in SP-1 and SP-3, the City would require six police beats,
staffed continuously. Development in SP-2 would require a seventh
police beat, staffed continuously. Beyond this, additional staff and
policing resources will be needed to account for workload and to
meet response time standards.
Response Time Standards
The Police Department dispatches police personnel based on pri-
ority level, Priority One being the highest. Priority One calls are
major crimes or incidents “In-Progress”, requiring immediate dis-
patch. Priority Two calls are minor crimes or incidents “In-Prog-
ress” or just occurred within 10 minutes. Priority Three calls are
Woodland’s Police Department provides law enforcement services for the
community.
                                                                                                      PF 5-5

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                      any major crimes or incidents that are not “In-Progress.” Prior-
    Police dispatch calls are based                   ity Four calls are any minor crimes or incidents that are not “In-
    on priority level.                                Progress.” Lastly, Priority Five calls are the lowest priority call (e.g.
                                                      follow up on a cold case) that police personnel deal with as time
                                                      permits.
                                                      Standards for response times are based on the dispatch time (mea-
                                                      sured from the start of the call) until the first unit’s arrival. The
                                                      Police Department’s response time standard is five minutes for
                                                      Priority One calls, six minutes for Priority Two calls, 25 minutes
                                                      for Priority Three calls, 40 minutes for Priority Four calls and 45
                                                      minutes for Priority Five calls. As shown in Table 5-2, in 2015, the
                                                      Police Department’s average actual response time for Priority
                                                      One, Two, and Three calls was about two or three minutes longer
                                                      than the department’s standard, while response times for Priority
                                                      Four and Five calls were well within the response time standard.
                                                      In contrast to the other calls, Priority Five calls have a much lower
                                                      response time because officers are often responding to pending
                                                      calls with higher priorities, so Priority Five calls are often closed at
                                                      the dispatch level.
       Table 5-2:	                Police Department Response Times, 2015
                                                                               Policy Department           Average Actual Re-
     Priority Level
                                                                              Standards (minutes)      sponse Time (minutes)
       Priority One                                                                           5:00                      7:30
       Priority Two                                                                           6:00                      9:26
       Priority Three                                                                        25:00                     28:00
       Priority Four                                                                         40:00                     30:25
       Priority Five                                                                         45:00                      4:52
    Source: City of Woodland Police Department, 2016.
PF 5-6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 5-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 5-1:	Safety Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Safety Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                       N EAST ST
                                                  SP-3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Police Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fire Stations
                                                                                                                         I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Planned Fire Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Yolo County Sheriff's Office
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Yolo County Juvenile Hall
                  W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E KENTUCKY AVE
                                            Wayne
                                            Cline
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Principal Arterials
                                                                    Schneider
                                             Park                      Park
                                                                                                                                        COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                       EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N PIONEER AVE
                                                                   W WOODLAND AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Minor Arterials
                                                                                                  C.B.                                                              Beamer
                                                                                                 Swim
                                                                                                 Center
                                                                                                                                                                      Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Collectors
                                                                                                                       BEAMER ST                                                                                                                                                 E BEAMER ST                                                                                                               Ramps
                                                                                                              Clark     Pedroia
                                                                             CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                               Field
                                         Harris
                                          Park
                                                                                                                         Fields
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Existing and Planned Parks,
                                                                                                              Fire                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Open Space, & Recreational
                                                                                                             Station                                                                                           LEMEN AVE                                                                                                                                                                                   Facilities
                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                         COURT ST
                                                                                                                                                       Heritage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           City Limits
                 W MAIN ST                                                                                                                                                   Freeman
                                                                                                                 MAIN ST                                Plaza                  Park                                                                                                    E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           New Specific Plan Boundary
                                                                                                                  LINCOLN AVE
                            ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Woodland                                                                                                                                                                                           Spring Lake Specific Plan Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Police                                                                                                                                                                    I -5
                                                                                                                          City
                                                                                                                          Park                                                                          Department                                     Fire                                                                                                                                                Urban Limit Line
                                                                  CROSS ST                                                                                                                                                                            Station
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FA R
                                                                                             Woodland                                                                                                           Campbell
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Storz         3
                                         John                                                Cemetery                                                                                                                                      Pond                                                                     NH
                                         Ferns                                                                                                                                                                    Park
                                          Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Klenhard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E      AM
                                                                                                                                                                THIRD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Park        AV
                                                  COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                      E GUM AVE                                                                                        UM                 AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EG
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Buchignani
                                                                                                                                                                           Everman
                                                                                                   WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Field
                                                                                                                                                                             Park
                                                                                                                                                                                     EAST ST
                                                                                                                                  Southland                                                                                                                                                                                   Pioneer
                                                                                                                                     Park                                                                                                                                                      BRANIGAN AVE                     Park
                  Streng Pond
                      Park                                                                                             GIBSON RD                                                                                                                                                               E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Yolo County
                                                                                                              Fire                                                                                                                                                                                   Sheriff's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PIONEER AVE
                                                                  Woodside
                 Douglass
                                                                  Park                                       Station                                                                                                                                                                                  Office
                                         EL DORADO DR
                  Park                                                                                          2                                                                                  Prudler
                                                                                                                                                                              Tredway
                                                                                                                                                                                Park               Mini Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Yolo County
                                                                                                                                                     Crawford
                                                                                                                                                       Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Spring Lake                                                                                                                Juvenile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FARMERS CENTRAL RD                                             Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sports
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Community
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Park                                                 Planned
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fire                                           Jack
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                              SP-1                                                                                                                                                                       Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Slaven
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Spring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SP-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Central                   E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rick
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gonzales Heritage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      113                                                        MARSTON DR                           Sr Park  Park                               Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Regional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0            0.375          0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SPRING LAKE                  Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SPECIFIC PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PF 5-7
  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
PF 5-8
Service Standards
                                                          Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                 5
The Police Department does not have service standards based
on population. Rather, the department determines staffing needs
based on the amount of uncommitted time per officer, number of
calls for service per officer per day, and number of major crimes
assigned to detectives per day. Patrol officers should average a min-
imum of 40 percent of unobligated patrol time per shift. Currently,
they average 15 percent unobligated time. As the city continues
to develop, the average unobligated patrol time should never drop
below 15 percent, and the Police Department should take active
steps to achieve the 40 percent standard.
                                                                                                 PF 5-9
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                      5.3	 Fire and Emergency
                                                     Medical Services
                                      The Woodland Fire Department provides fire and emergency
                                      medical services (EMS) in the Planning Area. In 1982, the City of
                                      Woodland Fire Department merged with the Springlake Fire Pro-
    The Woodland Fire Department has
    served and protected the Planning
                                      tection District, and it now protects an area of 56 square miles,
    Area since 1982.                  which includes 41 square miles of rural area located north, east,
                                      and south of the city limits.
                                      As shown on Figure 5-1, the City of Woodland Fire Department
                                      operates three fire stations, with an engine company at each one:
                                      101 Court Street (Station #1), 1619 West Street (Station #2), and
                                      1550 Springlake Court (Station #3). The Department operates a
                                      ladder truck out of Station #3 that is utilized for suppression ac-
                                      tivities, air support, technical rescue, and light support. Currently,
                                      the Fire Department provides service to the Springlake Fire Pro-
                                      tection District from the three existing fire stations located in
                                      Woodland. The Fire Department is staffed with 45 personnel and
                                      is assisted by a part-time administrative staff person. Currently, the
                                      Fire Department is only staffed to meet National Fire Protection
                                      Association (NFPA) standards for low hazard fires, and they cur-
                                      rently rely heavily on their mutual aid partners for support to meet
                                      NFPA standards for higher risk fire incidents.
                                      Land use decisions, such as the location and density of new devel-
    Land use decisions, such as       opment, bear a significant relationship to the adequacy and cost of
    the location and density of       fire protection. To help maintain adequate response times, the Fire
    new development, bear a           Department has identified a need for additional fire stations in the
    significant relationship to       city.To serve the Spring Lake Specific Plan area, a fourth fire station
                                      is planned for the Spring Lake Specific Plan area on a one-acre site,
    the adequacy and cost of fire
                                      as part of the Spring Lake Center that will adjoin the Central Park;
    protection.                       alternatively, fire services could be provided by relocating an exist-
                                      ing station to serve the Spring Lake Specific Plan area, instead of
                                      constructing a new station in the area. In addition, as SP-3 develops,
                                      it may be necessary to relocate one of the City’s existing fire sta-
                                      tions in order to improve coverage in the northern area of the city.
                                      A fifth station will need to be added in the SP-2 area to service the
                                      substantial new population on the east side of the city.
PF 5-10

Response Time Standards
                                                                                        Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                                                                           5
The Fire Department establishes response time standards for its
services, measured from the time the unit leaves the station to
the time the unit arrives at the scene. In alignment with NFPA
1710 standards, the Fire Department’s standards are a 60 second
turnout time for EMS calls and an 80 second turnout time for fire
and special operations.The first engine should have a travel time of
four minutes or less for a fire suppression incident and eight min-
utes or less for the deployment of an initial full alarm assignment.
For an emergency medical incident, travel time should also be four
minutes or less. NFPA standards require that the Fire Department
meet these response time standards 90 percent of the time. In
2015, as shown in Table 5-3, the Fire Department met the NFPA
standard for deployment of an initial full alarm assignment nearly
94 percent of the time, arrival at an emergency medical incident
81 percent of the time, and arrival at fire suppression incidents 70
percent of the time.
     Table 5-3:	              Fire Department Services Standards
                                                                                                                        Percentage of Services that
  Service                                                Time Standard
                                                                                                                          Achieve the Time Standard
     Emergency Medical Service Call                       60 seconds turnout time, at least                                                        Unknown
                                                          90% of the time
     Fire and Special Operations                          80 seconds turnout time, at least                                                        Unknown
     Response                                             90% of the time
     Arrival at Fire Suppression                          4 minutes or less travel time of                                                               70.0%
     Incident                                             the first arriving engine, at least
                                                          90% of the time
     Deployment of an Initial Full                        8 minutes or less travel time of                                                               93.6%
     Alarm Assignment                                     the first arriving engine, at least
                                                          90% of the time
     Arrival at Emergency Medical                         4 minutes or less travel time, at                                                              81.0%
     Incident                                             least 90% of the time
     Dispatch Call Answering Time1                        15 seconds or less, at least 95%                                                                   n/a
                                                          of the time, and 40 seconds or
                                                          less, at least 99% of the time
     Dispatch Call Processing Time1                       60 seconds or less, 90% of the                                                                     n/a
                                                          time; and 90 seconds or less,
                                                          99% of the time
Notes:
1. 	    While the City has a time standard for Dispatch Call Answering and Processing Times, Dispatch is a separate entity and the City has limited control over its
        performance.
Source: City of Woodland, 2016.
                                                                                                                                                            PF 5-11

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                        Insurance Service Organization (ISO) Rating
                                        Fire departments are rated by ISO’s Public Protection Classifica-
                                        tion (PPC) program. The program uses the Fire Suppression Rat-
                                        ing Schedule (FSRS), which is comprised of a long list of elements a
                                        community may use to fight fires effectively. Each element is given
                                        a point score. Using the point scores and various formulas, ISO
                                        derives a PPC rating. On a scale of 1 (exemplary fire protection) to
                                        10 (not meeting minimum criteria), Woodland scored a 3 for areas
    The City of Woodland Fire           inside the city limits and 8B for areas in the Springlake Fire Protec-
    Department has been able to meet    tion District, which means that the community provides superior
    response time standards. New
                                        fire-protection services and fire-alarm facilities but lacks the water
    facilities may need to be developed
    in order to serve new growth.       supply required of scores 8 and lower. The Fire Department will
                                        continue to strive to maintain a rating of 3 or better.
PF 5-12

5.4	 Parks and Recreation
                                                            Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                   5
Parks and recreation activities foster community interaction and a
sense of community involvement. Woodland’s diverse population
has varied parks and recreation interests. The City seeks to pro-
vide an opportunity for all segments of the population to enjoy an
integrated system of passive and active recreation facilities.
Park Classifications
The City provides its residents with several types of parks and
recreation facilities, which are classified as follows:
  •	 Mini Parks/Plazas: A small park that provides a neighbor-
     hood amenity of passive recreation to small neighborhood ar-
     eas. Mini parks and plazas typically range from 0.1 to 2.5 acres.
     These parks may have picnic areas, play structures, open lawn
     and trees, paved areas, and contribute to giving green space
     to neighborhood streets that would ordinarily be developed
     all in residential lots. Small hardscaped plazas with seating ar-
     eas, fountains, public art, or similar amenities may also function
     as mini parks or plazas in the Downtown, along corridors, or
     other mixed use environments.
  •	 Neighborhood Park: A small, mostly passive recreation area
     that serves an individual neighborhood with a range of about
     one-half mile (10-minute walking distance). They typically
     range in size from 2.5 to 15 acres. Neighborhood parks may
     have informal multi-use turf areas, a pair of full-court basketball
     courts, a pair of tennis courts, toddler and youth play areas
     (separated), group or individual picnic areas, restrooms, and/or
     a youth sport practice field (multi-use turf area).
  •	 Community Park: A large, mostly passive recreation area
     dominated by open turf, shade trees, picnic areas, plazas, trails,
     and playgrounds. Community parks typically range in size from
     15 to 25 acres. These parks serve multiple neighborhoods, and
     may have areas for basketball, tennis, handball, bocce, horse-
     shoes, shuffleboard, or other similar activities. A community
     focal point or point of interest is common and suggested in a
     community park, such as a swimming pool, water feature, dog
     park, or amphitheater. Community parks may have a single or
     pair of active sport fields for competition and/or practice but
     do not have a concentration of active sports fields, and may
     contain community recreation buildings parking and restroom
     buildings.
                                                                                                   PF 5-13

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                  •	 Community Sports Park: A large, active, concentrated
                                                     youth and/or adult sports-oriented park, with lighted fields and
                                                     courts, parking areas, restrooms, concessions buildings, main-
                                                     tenance buildings, group picnic areas, bike and pedestrian trails,
                                                     dog park, and toddler and youth playgrounds.
                                                  •	 Recreational Facilities: A single or multi-active recreational
                                                     feature such as a swimming pool or ballfield complex with re-
                                                     strooms. May also include a parking lot.
                                                  •	 Linear Park/Greenbelts: A landscaped, linear shaped open
                                                     area used for recreation and non-motorized transportation.
                                                     Greenbelts may have playgrounds, open turf or planted areas,
                                                     shade trees, plazas, and picnic areas connected by continuous
                                                     bike/walking paths.
                                                  •	 Open Space: Minimally-maintained, undeveloped areas set
                                                     aside for passive uses, scenic beauty, and relief from developed
      Refer to the Sustainability, Conser-           areas, and should contain and be accessible by a trail system.
      vation, and Open Space Element                 May be part of a habitat conservation easement area and/or in-
      for greater detail on open space               clude environmental education facilities. Also includes storm-
      in Woodland.                                   water detention basins, which assist in containing peak storm
                                                     flows and are publicly accessible when dry.
                                               Existing Facilities and Recreation Programs
                                               The City of Woodland owns and operates numerous parks and
                                               recreation facilities, with programming of park resources and
                                               maintenance of facilities provided by the Community Services De-
                                               partment. The City has nine mini parks/plazas, 15 neighborhood
                                               parks, one community sports park, and six recreational facilities, in-
                                               cluding the 13-acre Woodland Community and Senior Center. The
                                               City also owns a 154-acre undeveloped park site known as Wood-
                                               land Regional Park, which is located just beyond new residential
                                               development along County Road 102 (CR 102) and County Road
                                               25 (CR 25) on the east side of Woodland. This site has significant
    The Woodland Sports Park provides          habitat value and the majority will be protected through a habitat
    space for youth and adult athletic
                                               conservation easement. Improvements will be made to provide
    teams and tournaments.
                                               public access via a trail network on the site, including parking and
                                               structures to support public use of the property consistent with
                                               the conservation easement. The former borrow pit will be con-
                                               verted to a stormwater runoff/detention pond and improved to
                                               enhance the habitat value of the property.1
    1	 Woodland Regional Park has remnants of an old waste fill site and is populated with Special-Status species.
PF 5-14

                                                         Public Facilities and Services Element
There is limited linear park space in Woodland today. The most
developed areas for linear greenbelts are located within the Spring
                                                                                                          5
Lake Specific Plan area, approved in 2001. Otherwise, there are ar-
eas that include wider sidewalks (such as CR102, a portion of the
east side of County Road 98, and the greenbelt south of Kentucky
Avenue), where walking, biking, and running is facilitated; however,
this system is incomplete. Where feasible, linear trails, paths, and
greenbelts throughout the city should connect and be linked to re-
gional bike routes in order to create an integrated system of trails.
Safe linkages for pedestrian and biking use on a more regional scale
are highly encouraged, such as an off-street linked path between
Woodland and Davis.
Altogether, Woodland contains a total of approximately 408 acres
of parks and recreation facilities. This total includes about 139
acres of developed parkland, 246 acres of undeveloped parkland
(including undeveloped parks and stormwater detention basins),
and 24 acres of other facilities. The City also anticipates that ad-
ditional parkland will be created as part of future development.
Woodland’s current inventory of parks and recreation facilities is
listed in Table 5-4 and shown in Figure 5-2.
The Community Services Department provides recreation pro-
grams to more than 50,000 Woodland residents annually. Examples
of programs include youth sports, adult sports, youth and adult             For more detail on recreation pro-
aquatics classes, senior services, youth and adult enrichment pro-          grams and community facilities,
grams and various other leisure and recreation opportunities.               refer to the Healthy Community
Priorities for recreation programs in the coming years include              Element.
increasing use of existing programs and facilities by expanding con-
tract classes, art classes, and teen programs. For more detail on
recreation programs and community facilities, refer to the Healthy
Lifestyles Element.
Planned Improvements to Parks and Recreation
Facilities
The City plans additional park development as part of the Spring
Lake Specific Plan (SLSP), which at buildout will include more than
4,000 new housing units. Jack Slaven Park (8 acres) is the first of
the neighborhood parks to be developed in Spring Lake, which will
total 30 acres of parkland when fully developed.
Moreover, for any new future master or specific plan area, parkland
will be required to support residential development. The precise
                                                                         Jack Slaven Park is the first to
amount, type, and location of the new parkland would be deter-           be developed in the Spring Lake
mined during the planning process, and it must be consistent with        Specific Plan area and includes a
the parkland requirements in this General Plan.                          water play feature.
                                                                                                          PF 5-15

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
      Table 5-4:	      Parks and Recreation Facilities
     Park or Recreation Facility Name       Facility Location               Acreage
      Mini Parks/Plazas
      Beamer Circle                          Palm Avenue                        0.5
      Heritage Plaza and Parking Lot         713 Main Street                    0.7
      Heritage Park                          Summerset (Spring Lake Area)       1.0
      Jeff Roddy Park                        264 Mallard Drive                  0.5
      North Park (Small Park)                313 Redwing Drive                  0.3
      North Park L&L (Small Unnamed Park)    Cardinal Drive and Robin Drive     0.3
      Traynham Park                          313 Redwing Drive                  1.1
      Tredway Park                           1701 Sixth Street                  1.2
      Woodland West                          412 Dove Drive                     0.4
      Subtotal Mini Parks/Plazas                                                6.0
      Neighborhood Parks
      Beamer Park                            810 Hollister Road                 2.3
      Campbell Park                          701 Thomas Street                  5.6
      Christiansen Park                      202 Beamer Street                  2.0
      City Park                              629 Cleveland Street               3.9
      Cline Park                             223 Teton Place                    3.8
      Crawford Park                          1733 College Street                8.3
      Everman Park                           929 Cottage Drive                  3.4
      John Ferns Park                        750 W. Southwood Drive             9.3
      Freeman Park                           1001 Main Street                   2.3
      Harris Park                            100 Imperial Street                3.1
      Jack Slaven Park                       1705 Miekle Drive                  8.0
      Pioneer Park                           1925 Branigan Avenue              10.0
      Rick Gonzales Sr Park                  2109 Miekle Avenue                 7.0
      Schneider Park (Greenbelt Park)        179 Schuler Ranch Drive            3.2
      Southland Park                         1310 College Street                4.0
      Spring Lake Park                       1904 Shellhammer Drive             2.0
      Woodside Park                          1615 Cottonwood Street             8.2
      Subtotal Neighborhood Parks                                             86.4
      Community Sports Parks
      Sports Park (developed areas)          2001 East Street                  17.6
      Subtotal Community Sports Parks                                         17.6
PF 5-16
    Table 5-4:	              Parks and Recreation Facilities
  Park or Recreation Facility Name
                                                                                           Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                Facility Location
                                                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                                                                          Acreage
    Recreational Facilities
    Camarena / Pedroia Field                                                      202 Beamer Street                                                               3.7
    Clark Field                                                                   70 Beamer Street                                                               3.5
    Community and Senior Center                                                   2001 East Street                                                             12.9
    Community Swim Center                                                         155 N. West Street                                                             2.8
    Harris Field                                                                  Ashley Avenue                                                                  2.4
    Klenhard Park                                                                 1771 East Gum Avenue                                                            7.2
    Subtotal Recreational Facilities                                                                                                                          32.5
    Linear Park
    Spring Lake (Greenbelts)                                                      Various, within Spring Lake                                                    5.0
    Subtotal Linear Park Facilities                                                                                                                             5.0
    TOTAL DEVELOPED PARKLAND                                                                                                                                147.5
    Undeveloped Parkland
    Prudler Mini Park                                                             East Street and Sports Park Drive                                               1.4
    Regional Park      1
                                                                                  County Roads 102 & 25                                                      154.2
    Spring Lake Neighborhood Parks (undeveloped)                                  Spring Lake, Rick Gonzales Sr, and Jack                                      14.8
                                                                                  Slaven remainder parks, Spring Lake
                                                                                  Central Park
    Greenbelts/Linear Parks (undeveloped)                                         Various                                                                      14.0
    Sports Park (undeveloped)                                                     2001 East Street                                                             39.5
    Subtotal Undeveloped Parkland                                                                                                                           223.9
    Detention Basins
    Douglass Park (Holding Pond) Detention Basin                                  827 Saratoga Drive                                                           11.3
    Streng Park Pond                                                              Gibson & Columbia Drive                                                        2.5
    Sports Park                                                                   2001 East Street                                                               5.0
    Storz Pond                                                                    SR 113 & Saipan Drive                                                        13.8
    Subtotal Detention Basins                                                                                                                                 32.6
    TOTAL UNDEVELOPED PARKLAND                                                                                                                              256.5
    TOTAL DEVELOPED AND UNDEVELOPED PARKLAND                                                                                                                404.0
     Other Facilities
    Woodland Cemetery                                                             800 West Street                                                             23.5
    TOTAL OTHER FACILITIES                                                                                                                                    23.5
    TOTAL PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES                                                                                                                   427.5
Note: Some totals may not add up precisely due to rounding.
1.	   The Regional Park has the remnants of an old waste fill site and is populated with Special Status species. It is unclear at this time whether the site will be
      used as park space for the city. It may in the future be designated as habitat through a conservation easement.                                            PF 5-17
Source: City of Woodland, 2016.
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                           Parkland Standards
                                                           This General Plan establishes a goal to provide 6.0 acres of parks
                                                           for every 1,000 residents. As shown in Table 5-5, based on the
                                                           2013 population, Woodland currently provides a ratio of 2.6 acres
                                                           of developed park area per 1,000 residents, while the current un-
                                                           developed park area ratio is 4.6 acres per 1,000 residents. Togeth-
                                                           er, the overall ratio is 7.3 acres of developed and undeveloped park
                                                           area per 1,000 residents, which is higher than the General Plan’s
                                                           parkland standard of 6.0 acres.
                                                           This General Plan anticipates a total buildout population of 75,000
                                                           residents by 2035. If no additional parkland were to be established,
                                                           the City would not meet the General Plan standard of 6.0 acres
                                                           per 1,000 residents for the projected 2035 population, as shown in
                                                           Table 5-5, with ratios of 2.0 acres of developed parkland per 1,000
                                                           residents and an additional 3.4 acres of undeveloped parkland per
                                                           1,000 residents by 2035. However, it is required that new parkland
                                                           would be created to serve new growth, ensuring that the parkland
                                                           standard would still be met
         Table 5-5:	           Current and Future Park Ratios
                                                                                                                Current Parks                 Future Parks
                                                                                                               Ratio: Acreage Ratio: Acreage
      Existing Parks and Recreation Facilities                                                      Total
                                                                                                                       per 1,000                 per 1,000
                                                                                                                     Residents1                 Residents2
         Developed Parkland Total Acres                                                            147.5                         2.6                   2.0
         Undeveloped Parkland Total Acres                                                         256.5                          4.6                   3.4
         Developed and Undeveloped Parkland Total Acres3                                         404.0                          7.3                   5.4
         General Park Parkland Standard                                                                                         6.0                   6.0
    Notes:
    1. 	  Current Parks Ratio based on the 2013 existing population of 55,700 residents and existing parks and recreation facilities acreage.
    2. 	  Future Parks Ratio based on the projected 2035 population of 75,000 residents and existing parks and recreation facilities acreage.
    3.	   Numbers may not total due to rounding.
PF 5-18

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 5-2:	Parks and Recreation Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 5-2:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Parks & Recreation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                   N EAST ST
                                              SP-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Parks and Recreation Facilities
                                                                                                                I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mini Parks/Plazas
         Gary     Woodland
      Traynham      West
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Neighborhood Parks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COUNTY RD 102
         Park       Park Jeff
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N PIONEER AVE
              North                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Community Sports Park
North          Park      Roddy
 Park                    Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Recreational Facilities
 L&L
                                                              W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                           E KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                            Linear Park/Greenbelt
                                                                                  Schneider                Charles Brooks
                    Wayne                                                                                                                     Beamer
                                                                                                                             COLLEGE ST
                     Cline                                                           Park                  Community
                                                                                                                                               Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Undeveloped Parks
                                                                                                           Swim Center
                                                                                                                                                                    EAST ST
                     Park                                      W WOODLAND AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Detention Basin
                            ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                   Woodland                             Beamer Park                                                 Beamer
                                                                                     High                               Elementary                                                   Circle                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cemetery
                                                                                    School                    BEAMER ST    School                                                                                                                                  E BEAMER ST
                     Rhoda                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       School Sports Field/Playground
                                                                                                                                           Christiansen
                                                                            CALIFORNIA ST
                    Maxwell                                   Harris                                                                           Park
                   Elementary                                 Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Future Greenbelts
                      School                                                                                   Camerena
                                                                                                                         Heritage
                                         Harris                                                          Clark & Pedroia  Plaza NORTH ST                                                   LEMEN AVE                                                                                                                                                                                             Highways
                                                                                                         Field   Fields
                                         Field                                                                  COURT ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Principal Arterials
                   W MAIN ST                                                                                MAIN ST                                                                                                                                                     E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Minor Arterials
                                              COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                            LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                                                          Freeman
                                                                                                                      City                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Collectors
                                                                                                                                              THIRD ST
                                                                                        Lee Middle                                                          Park
                                                                                                                      Park                                                           Campbell
                                                                                          School                            Dingle                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I -5
                                                                                                                                                                                       Park                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ramps
                                                                                                         CROSS ST        Elementary                                                                                                                                           Tafoya
  COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Elementary              R
                                                                                    Woodland                                School                                                                                                                                                              FA
                                                                                    Cemetery                                                                                                                                                             Storz                School                  NH                                                                                         City Limits
                                                                                                                                                               EAST ST
                                                                                                                           COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pond                                               AM
                                            Whitehead                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VE
                                            Elementary                                                          Douglass                                                       E GUM AVE                                                                                                  U   MA             AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E                                                                                New Specific Plan Boundary
                    John                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EG
                                                                  CALIFORNIA ST
                                               School                                                            Middle
                                                                                               WEST ST
                    Ferns                                                                                        School                                                                                      Woodland                      Klenhard                                Pioneer                                                                                                       Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MATMOR RD
                                                                                    Private                                                                                                                                                                                          Park
                    Park                                                           Catholic                                                                                                                     Prairie                      Park
                                         Streng                                    Cemetery              Southland                                                                                           Elementary                                                                                                                                                                          Urban Limit Line
                                          Park                                                                                                           Everman                                                                                                                BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                                           Park                                            Park                                                 School
                                          Pond
                                                                                                             GIBSON RD                                                                                                                                                          E GIBSON RD
                                                                          Woodside                           Gibson                                                                  Sports Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                            Park                           Elementary                     Crawford                                    Detention                                                                                 Pioneer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Spring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                              School                        Park                                         Basin                                                                                    High
                                                                                                                                                                                Prudler                                    Lake                                                  School
                                                Zamora                                                     EL DORADO DR                                                        Mini Park                                   Park
                                              Elementary
                                                 School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                       Douglass Park                                                                                                                     Tredway                                                              Spring
                        Detention                                           Woodland Parkway Greenbelt                                                     Park                                                   Sports Park  Lake                                                                                                              Spring
                          Basin                                                      (Future)                                                                                                                   (Undeveloped) Central                                                                                                            Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jack                        Greenbelts
                                                                                            SP-1                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Slaven
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                   Community and                                                                                                                                                                     Park
                                                                                                                                    Senior Center                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SP-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                Sports Park
                                                                                                                                                                               (Developed)
                                                                                                                                                                                              113                                                                MARSTON DR                                                                      Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Regional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Heritage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Park                                                                   0            0.375          0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Urban Forest                                      Rick Gonzales                                                                                          Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Greenbelt                                                                                                                                               2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Future)                                            Sr Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PF 5-19
 City of Woodland General Plan 2035
Figure 5-3:	Access to Neighborhood Parks and Recreation Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 5-3:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Access to Parks &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Recreation
                                                                                                                                                                 N EAST ST
                                              SP-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Parks Walkshed*
                                                                                                               I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5 min walking distance (1/4 mile)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10 min walking distance (1/2 mile)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N PIONEER AVE                                                              COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Existing Parks and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Recreation Facilities
                                                              W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                              E KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                  Neighborhood Parks
                                                                                  Schneider               Charles Brooks
                     Wayne                                                                                                                   Beamer
                                                                                                                            COLLEGE ST
                      Cline                                                          Park                 Community
                                                                                                                                              Park                                                                                                                                                                                                        Community Sports Parks
                                                                                                          Swim Center
                                                                                                                                                                 EAST ST
                      Park                                     W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Recreational Facilities
                            ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Existing Residential Areas
                                                                                                             BEAMER ST                                                                                                                E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Highways
                                                                                                                                          Christiansen
                                                                            CALIFORNIA ST
                                                              Harris                                                                          Park
                                                              Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Principal Arterials
                                                                                                              Camerena
                                         Harris                                                         Clark & Pedroia                                                                  LEMEN AVE                                                                                                                                                        Minor Arterials
                                                                                                        Field   Fields                                  NORTH ST
                                         Field                                                                 COURT ST
                    W MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Collectors
                                                                                                           MAIN ST                                                                                                                         E MAIN ST
                                              COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Local Streets
                                                                                                           LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                                                         Freeman
                                                                                                                     City                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ramps
                                                                                                                                             THIRD ST
                                                                                                                                                           Park
                                                                                                                     Park                                                          Campbell
                                                                                                                                                                                     Park                                                                                                                                        I -5
                                                                                                        CROSS ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Limits
   COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FA R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NH                                                                                New Specific Plan Boundary
                                                                                                                                                              EAST ST
                                                                                                                          COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E         AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AV
                                                                                                                                                                             E GUM AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              UM              AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Spring Lake Specific Plan
                    John
                                                                  CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                              WEST ST
                    Ferns                                                                                                                                                                                                 Klenhard                     Pioneer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                               MATMOR RD
                    Park                                                                                                                                                                                                    Park                         Park
                                                                                                        Southland                                       Everman
                                                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BRANIGAN AVE                                                                                          Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                                          Park
                                                                                                            GIBSON RD                                                                                                                               E GIBSON RD
                                                                          Woodside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               * Walksheds are calculated only for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               existing neighborhood parks, community
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PIONEER AVE
                                                                            Park                                                         Crawford
                                                                                                                                           Park                                                                                                                                                                                                sports parks and recreational facilities.
                                                                                                          EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                            SP-1                                                                                                                                                                                      Jack
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Slaven
                                                                                                                                  Community and                                                                                                                                       Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                           HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                   Senior Center                                                                                                                                                                                        SP-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                             Sports Park
                                                                                                                                                                                            113                                       MARSTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0            0.375          0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SPRING LAKE                  Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SPECIFIC PLAN
PF 5-20
                                                           Public Facilities and Services Element
While Woodland does currently meet its parkland standard, park-
land is not evenly distributed throughout the city. As a general
                                                                                                            5
rule of recreation planning, every residence should be within a
quarter-mile (5-minute walking distance) of a neighborhood park.
Figure 5-3 shows the quarter mile and half-mile walk-sheds from
existing parks, and highlights existing residential areas that do not
fall into that area.
The General Plan sets standards and seeks to provide for the
development and maintenance of parks and recreation facilities,
sports and ball fields and expanded recreation activities. The City
plans for the development, operation, improvement, and mainte-
nance of parks and recreational facilities in the Parks, Recreation,
and Community Services Master Plan. It contains an inventory and
analysis of existing parks and open spaces, as well as potential new
park areas; the Master Plan also provides an analysis of current
demand and future trends for parks and recreational facilities. The
Master Plan identifies detailed policies and standards for parks and
recreational facilities, and it contains an implementation plan with
actions, costs, and funding sources. Last adopted in 2004, an up-
date to the Parks, Recreation, and Community Services Master
Plan was commenced in 2015 and will be finalized upon adoption
of the General Plan to reflect the policies outlined in the General
Plan. The City also has a Master Plan to plan for improvements
and maintenance of the Sports Park at the Community and Senior
                                                                           New neighborhood and community
Center.                                                                    parks are built in new residential ar-
                                                                           eas to serve and support growth. The
Recreation and community services and programming are im-                  Woodland General Plan establishes a
portant to the Woodland community, and a diversity of classes              standard for parkland per population
and programs will continue to be provided for the benefit of the           that serves community needs and
community over the next twenty years. The Parks and Recre-                 that can be realistically maintained
ation Commission and the Commission on Aging are integral to               by the City.
recreation and community services in Woodland, as they guide
implementation measures for parks and recreational facilities and
programming, influence the type and amount of recreational pro-
                                                                              The section on Open Space
gramming, and encourage volunteers to assist with parks and rec-
                                                                              for the Preservation of Natural
reation programming, services, and maintenance. In addition, the
                                                                              Resources in the Sustainability,
City will continue to work with the school district and other pub-
                                                                              Conservation, and Open Space
lic and community groups to jointly use facilities and operate pro-
                                                                              Element also addresses the use of
grams. The precise location of future park sites will be determined
                                                                              parks for open space.
by the City in conjunction with new development and based upon
available and appropriately located land.
                                                                                                             PF 5-21
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                         5.5	 Schools
                                         Schools often act as focal points for neighborhoods and can serve
                                         as gathering places and provide open space and recreation oppor-
                                         tunities. The City does not operate any of the schools in Woodland,
                                         nor does it have land use authority over school location, design, or
                                         construction decisions. However, the City does maintain a collab-
                                         orative relationship with the public school district, the Woodland
                                         Community College, and private schools in the area.
                                         Existing Facilities
    Pioneer High School and Woodland
                                         Public Schools
    High School both exceeded the        Woodland Joint Unified School District (WJUSD) provides pub-
    District’s target graduation rate of lic education from kindergarten through 12th grade to residents
    90 percent in the 2011-2012 school   in the Planning Area, as well as nearby unincorporated areas of
    year.
                                         Knight’s Landing, Yolo, and Zamora. The District includes 10 el-
                                         ementary schools, one charter elementary school, two middle
                                         schools, two comprehensive senior high schools for grades 9-12,
                                         and one continuation high school. Additionally, there are three al-
                                         ternative education programs, six pre-schools, three infant-toddler
                                         programs, and an adult education center. Two of the District’s ele-
                                         mentary schools and one of the District’s high schools are located
                                         outside the Planning Area. Altogether, just over 10,100 students
                                         attend public schools in WJUSD, 9,400 of whom attend school in
                                         the Planning Area. Public schools and enrollment for all schools are
                                         detailed in Table 5-6 and are mapped on Figure 5-4.
                                         Private Schools
                                         Private schools located in Woodland include Woodland Christian
                                         School (preschool and K-12) and Holy Rosary Parish School (pre-
                                         school and K-8). The Woodland Christian School has two cam-
                                         puses, the West Campus (K-8) located at 1515 West Street and
                                         the Matmor Campus (9-12) located at 1787 Matmor Road. The
                                         Holy Rosary Parish School is located at 505 California Street. Both
                                         schools are accredited by the Western Association of Schools and
                                         Colleges.
PF 5-22

Higher Education
                                                          Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                         5
Accredited in 2008, Woodland Community College (WCC) is a
two-year community college located at 2300 East Gibson Road
in Woodland on a 112-acre parcel in the northeast corner of the
Spring Lake area. WCC provides a number of academic, transfer,
and enrichment programs to students throughout Yolo County. In
2007, WCC completed a new 72,000 square foot learning re-
source center, doubling the existing footprint of the college. The
new center provides 25 lecture rooms and classrooms, an expand-
ed library, math and writing labs, and a large community events
room. WCC also completed a newly remodeled student services
center in 2010. During the 2015-16 school year, about 3,980 stu-
                                                                          Woodland Community College
dents attended WCC.                                                       serves approximately 4,000 students
                                                                          from across Yolo County, offering
Quality Education Opportunities                                           programs in liberal arts, humanities,
                                                                          social services, and technology.
Woodland takes pride in its educational sector, and schools are an
important and valued asset in the community. While the City of
Woodland does not operate schools, it does frequently partner
and collaborate with public, private, and higher education provid-
ers to support high quality educational opportunities for all resi-
dents. The City also partners with educational providers to ensure
adequate access is available and that facilities are well-maintained.
Standards and Student Generation Rates
The Woodland Joint Unified School District calculates school
capacities for each school based on the number of permanent
classrooms, the number of portable classrooms, the number of
classrooms used for programs other than classroom instruction,
and loading standards. The District currently uses a 24 student
per classroom loading factor for kindergarten and first grade, a 32
student per classroom loading factor for grades 2-6, and a 36 stu-
dent per classroom loading factor for grades 7-12; these are the
permitted class sizes per union contract language. By comparison,
State standards for student loading factors are 25 students per
classroom for elementary schools and 27 students per classroom
for middle and high schools.
The District projects an ongoing decline of 0.5 percent in student
enrollment in the near term, based on projections made in Janu-
ary 2013. The District uses student generation factors (students
per new dwelling units) for single- and multi-family development
                                                                                                           PF 5-23
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
       Table 5-6:	             Existing Public Schools in Woodland Joint Unified
                               School District
                                                                                    State Loading Capacity                       District Loading Capacity
                                                          Total Enroll-
    School                                                  ment 2012-                                          Percent                                    Percent
                                                                      2013                    Total                                       Total
                                                                                                                 Under-                                     Under-
                                                                                      Capacity2                                     Capacity3
                                                                                                                 utilized                                   utilized
       Elementary Schools (K-6)
       Beamer                                                         504                      550                    8%                   704                 28%
       Dingle                                                         406                      525                   23%                   672                 40%
       Freeman                                                        485                      600                   19%                   768                 37%
       Gibson                                                          631                     725                   13%                   928                 32%
       Maxwell                                                         501                     675                   26%                   864                 42%
       Plainfield                                                      313                     450                  30%                    576                 46%
       Tafoya                                                          831                     875                    5%                 1,120                 26%
       Whitehead                                                       423                     575                   26%                   736                 43%
       Woodland Prairie                                               645                      750                   14%                   960                 33%
       Zamora                                                          575                     550                   -5%                   704                 18%
       Sci-Tech                                                        252                     275                    8%                   352                 28%
       Subtotal Elementary                                          5,566                  6,550                     15%                8,384                  34%
       Middle Schools (7-8)
       Douglass                                                       865                   1,107                   22%                  1,312                 34%
       Lee                                                             673                  1,134                    41%                 1,344                 50%
       Subtotal Middle Schools                                      1,538                  2,241                     31%                 2,656                 42%
       High Schools (9-12)
       Cache Creek                                                     149                     297                  50%                    352                 58%
       Pioneer                                                      1,557                  1,944                    20%                 2,304                  32%
       Woodland                                                     1,297                   2,187                    41%                 2,592                 50%
       Subtotal High Schools                                        3,003                  4,428                     32%                 5,248                 43%
       Total                                                      10,107                 13,219                     24%               16,288                   38%
       Total Within Planning                                       9,393                 12,197                     23%               15,008                   37%
       Area
  Notes:
  1. 	   Schools located outside Planning Area.
  2. 	   Total capacity based on a 25 student loading factor for elementary and 27 student loading factor for middle and high school.
  3	     Total capacity based on a 24 student loading factor for kindergarten and first grade, 32 student loading factor for grades 2-6, and a 36 student loading factor
         for grades 7-12.
  Source: Woodland Joint Unified School District, 2013; Jack Schreder & Associates, 2011; California Department of Education, 2013; CDE Data quest.
PF 5-24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 5-4:	Public Educational Facilities in Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 5-4:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Educational Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   & School Districts
                                                                                                                                                           N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Elementary School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Middle School
                                                                                                            I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Special School
                                                                                                                                                                                                            N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Community College
                 W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Planned School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                         Freeman                     Beamer Park                                                                                                                                                                                   High/Middle School Attendance
                                                                                                        Elementary                    Elementary
                                                                                                                        COLLEGE ST
                                    Greengate                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Boundaries
                                                                                                                                                          EAST ST
                                                                                                           School                        School
                                     Special W               WOODLAND AVE
                                    Education
                                     School                            Woodland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Douglass MS & Pioneer HS
                                                                         High
                                                                        School                           BEAMER ST                                                                                                          E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Harriet Lee MS & Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HS
                                                                       CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                       COLLEGE ST
                                       Maxwell                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Elementary School Attendance
                                                                                                                                        THIRD ST
                                     Elementary                                                                                                                              LEMEN AVE                                                                                                                                             Boundaries
                                                                                                                                                   NORTH ST
                                        School
                                                                                                            COURT ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Beamer Elementary
                 W MAIN ST                                                                              MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Dingle Elementary
                                                                                                        LINCOLN AVE
                       ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                        Lee              Dingle                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Freeman Elementray
                                                                                       Middle         Elementary
                                                                                       School           School                                                               Woodland                                                                                                                          I -5                           Gibson Elementary
                                                         CROSS ST                                                                                                              Prairie
                                                                                                                                                                             Elementary                                                                      R
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FA
                                                                                                                                        Woodland                               School               Tafoya                                                      NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Maxwell Elementary
                                                                                                      Douglass                            Adult                                                  Elementary                                              AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AM
                                                                                                       Middle                           Education                                                   School                                        GU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Tafoya Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                       School                                                                                                                                 E                           E
                                         COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                       E GUM AVE                                                                                       AV
                                                              CALIFORNIA ST
                  Whitehead                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Whitehead Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                     MATMOR RD
                  Elementary
                                                                                            WEST ST                                                      EAST ST
                     School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Woodland Prairie Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              School
                                                                                                         GIBSON RD                                                                                                                        E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Zamora Elementary
                                                                                           Gibson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pioneer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PIONEER AVE
                                                                                         Elementary
                                                                                           School                                                                                                                                          High                                                                                               Highways
                                     EL DORADO DR                                                                                                                                                                                         School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Woodland                                                                            Principal Arterials
                                                             Zamora                                                                                                                                                                                      Community
                                                         Elementary School                                                                                                                                                                                 College                                                                            Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FARMERS CENTRAL RD                                                                          Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Planned                                                                                                  Ramps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Middle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                  HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                                                                   113                                      MARSTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Planned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Spring Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              School                                               0            0.375          0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PF 5-25
  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
PF 5-26
in order to project student enrollment. Table 5-7 summarizes the
student generation factors used by the District.
                                                                                    Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                                                     5
Current Unmet Facility Needs
Should new development occur primarily to the south, this Gen-
eral Plan projects that Woodland would add up to 7,000 dwelling
units by 2035. If this were to occur, it is assumed that there would
be a higher amount of infill development with multi-family dwelling
units accounting for approximately 39 percent of all new dwelling
units citywide. Based on these assumptions, it is estimated that the
District would add 3,589 new student enrollments by 2035, using
the student generation factors provided in Table 5-7 below.
                                                                                                    Many of Woodland’s public schools
                                                                                                    are underutilized based on State and
Should new development occur primarily to the east, this General
                                                                                                    District loading factors, meaning
Plan projects that Woodland would add up to 7,000 dwelling units                                    that there is capacity in existing
by 2035. If this were to occur, it is assumed that multi-family dwell-                              schools to serve new population
ing units would account for approximately 30 percent of all new                                     growth in Woodland.
dwelling units citywide. Based on these assumptions, it is estimated
that the District would add 3,759 new student enrollments by
2035, using the student generation factors provided in Table 5-7
below.
Using the District’s classroom loading factors for determining
school capacity, existing facilities accommodate student enrollment
growth generated by new development, irregardless of whether
new growth occurs primarily to the south or to the east, as shown
in Tables 5-8a and 5-8b. However, when using the State’s classroom
loading factors of 25 for elementary and 27 for middle and high
schools, the projected enrollment exceeds the available capacity
for elementary schools if growth occurs primarily to the south,
and for elementary and middle schools if growth occurs primarily
     Table 5-7:	              Student Generation Factors Used by WJUSD
                                                                          Middle School
  Unit Type                            Elementary (K-6)                                    High School (9-12)         Total Rate (K-12)
                                                                                     (7-8)
     Single-family Unit1                                0.3174                    0.1250                0.1809                     0.6233
     Multi-family Unit2                                0.1820                     0.0599                0.0922                     0.3341
Notes:
1.	    Single-family units are detached homes and homes that share a single wall.
2. 	   Multi-family units are attached units that share multiple walls.
Source: Woodland Joint Unified School District, 2013.
                                                                                                                                      PF 5-27

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   to the east. Ultimately, the District must at least meet the State’s
                                   standards for classroom capacity.
                                   Planned Facilities
                                   A new elementary school is planned for the Spring Lake Specific
                                   Plan area to serve surrounding neighborhoods. Construction of
                                   Spring Lake Elementary School (K-6) is anticipated in 2017. Shown
                                   on Figure 5-3, the future school is sited at the corner of Banks
                                   Drive and Miekle Avenue in Spring Lake.
                                   In addition, there is a vacant WJUSD school site south of Pioneer
                                   High School that is intended for a future middle school; detailed
                                   plans may be developed in the coming years and the additional
                                   middle school may be constructed over the horizon of the Gen-
                                   eral Plan.
                                   Should development occur to the east in SP-2, a new school may
                                   be necessary to serve new residential development on the eastern
                                   side of the city. Detailed plans for this potential school may be de-
                                   veloped if necessary over the horizon of the General Plan.
                                   Aging Facilities
                                   According to the WJUSD 2011 Facilities Master Plan, the District’s
                                   aging facilities are in need of renovation and modernization, as they
                                   were designed for the educational needs of over 50 years ago. Of
                                   the District’s 18 school facilities, 50 percent were constructed pri-
                                   or to 1960, and an additional two facilities were constructed prior
                                   to 1930. The District reports that the aging infrastructure can no
                                   longer be repaired, and pipes, heating units, electrical wiring, fire
                                   alarms, and other life safety systems need to be replaced. The cost
                                   to replace and upgrade existing facilities is estimated to be in the
                                   millions, well beyond what the District’s operating fund can pro-
                                   vide; however, the District will continue to implement renovation
                                   and modernization projects as feasible over the planning horizon
                                   of the General Plan.
                                   Joint Use Agreements for Facilities
                                   The City of Woodland has two joint-use agreements for facilities
                                   with the Woodland Joint Unified School District. One agreement
                                   concerns the installation and operation of an electricity cogen-
                                   eration facility. The second agreement, which recently expired,
                                   involves the use of City and District facilities; currently, the City
PF 5-28

     Table 5-8a:	 Enrollment and Capacity in WJUSD If new growth
                                                                                               Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                                                                              5
                             primarily occurs to the South and/or is INFILL
                                                                              2012-2013                                                                       2035
                                                        State Loading Capacity                         District Loading Capacity
                                                                                                                                                         Projected
                             WJUSD En- Existing Total                              Available Existing Total                        Available
  Grade                                                                                                                                                New Enroll-
                                  rollment                Capacity1                Capacity               Capacity2                Capacity
                                                                                                                                                             ment3
     K-6                              5,566                    6,550                      984                  8,384                    2,818               1,856
     7-8                              1,538                     2,241                     703                  2,656                     1,118                 699
     9-12                             3,003                     4,428                   1,425                  5,248                    2,245               1,026
     Total                         10,107                    13,219                     3,112               16,288                     6,181               3,581
Notes:
1. 	   Total capacity based on State standards of 25 students per classroom for elementary and 27 students per classroom for middle and high schools.
2	     Total capacity based on a 24 student loading factor for kindergarten and first grade, 32 student loading factor for grades 2-6, and a 36 student loading factor
       for grades 7-12.
3	     Based on General Plan’s projected construction of 7,000 new dwelling units in Woodland by 2035. Assumes that multi-family dwelling units will account for
       39 percent of all dwelling units citywide. Calculated using WJUSD student generation factors provided in Table 5-2.
Source: Woodland Joint Unified School District, 2011; Jack Schreder & Associates, 2011; California Department of Education, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2016
     Table 5-8B:	 Enrollment and Capacity in WJUSD If New Growth
                             Primarily Occurs to the East
                                                                              2012-2013                                                                       2035
                                                        State Loading Capacity                         District Loading Capacity
                                                                                                                                                         Projected
                             WJUSD En- Existing Total                              Available Existing Total                        Available
  Grade                                                                                                                                                New Enroll-
                                  rollment                Capacity1                Capacity               Capacity2                Capacity
                                                                                                                                                             ment3
     K-6                              5,566                    6,550                      984                  8,384                    2,818                1,939
     7-8                              1,538                     2,241                     703                  2,656                     1,118                 739
     9-12                             3,003                     4,428                   1,425                   5,248                   2,245               1,081
     Total                         10,107                    13,219                     3,112               16,288                     6,181                3,759
Notes:
1. 	   Total capacity based on State standards of 25 students per classroom for elementary and 27 students per classroom for middle and high schools.
2	     Total capacity based on a 24 student loading factor for kindergarten and first grade, 32 student loading factor for grades 2-6, and a 36 student loading factor
       for grades 7-12.
3	     Based on General Plan’s projected construction of 7,000 new dwelling units in Woodland by 2035. Assumes that multi-family dwelling units will account for
       30 percent of all dwelling units citywide. Calculated using WJUSD student generation factors provided in Table 5-2.
Source: Woodland Joint Unified School District, 2011; Jack Schreder & Associates, 2011; California Department of Education, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2016
                                                                                                                                                               PF 5-29

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   uses the District’s facilities for one after-school program and several
                                   recreational programs while the District uses the City’s pool, parks,
                                   and baseball field. Renegotiating and renewing this agreement to ensure
                                   long-term cooperation in the joint use of City and District recreational
                                   facilities is an implementation priority of this General Plan.
PF 5-30

5.6	 Public Utilities
                                                           Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                            5
This section presents the public utilities that serve the Planning
Area, including water supply and demand, waste collection and
treatment, storm drainage facilities, solid waste collection and dis-
posal, and other utilities.
Potable Water
The City of Woodland Public Works Department currently pro-
vides municipal water to residents in the Planning Area. Treated
Sacramento River water supplied by the Woodland-Davis Clean
Water Agency’s Regional Water Treatment Facility (RWTF) is
the primary source of drinking water within the Planning Area.
Groundwater is a backup to the surface water supply and will
supplement surface water during times of high demand or reduced
surface water availability.                                                In 2011, water meters were installed
                                                                           at every home in Woodland in order
The City maintains an Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP)                   to comply with State law. Water
that is updated every five years and describes the current and             customers are now billed based on
future water uses, sources of supply and its reliability, and existing     how much water they use, which is
                                                                           anticipated to reduce demand and
and planned conservation measures. The 2015 UWMP was adopt-
                                                                           help conserve water supplies.
ed by City Council in June 2016. The City also has a Groundwater
Management Plan to manage groundwater resources, which was
adopted in 2010.
Water Supply
Surface Water
Faced with meeting anticipated water quality, reliable water supply
needs, and wastewater discharge regulations, in September 2009,               Water resources and water qual-
the cities of Woodland and Davis established the Woodland-Davis               ity are discussed in the Sustain-
Clean Water Agency (WDCWA). The WDCWA project is a re-                        ability, Conservation, and Open
gional surface water supply project to supplement local ground                Space Element.
water supplies in the region. The project diverts up to 45,000
acre-feet of water per year from the Sacramento River and serves
more than two-thirds of the urban population of Yolo County, as
well as UC Davis as a project partner. Groundwater from Wood-
land and Davis continues to supplement water supplies when local
water demand cannot be met, particularly during summer months
                                                                                                             PF 5-31

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                and other dry periods when Term 912 and Shasta Critical Year Re-
                                                ductions may limit WDCWA’s water diversions from the Sacra-
                                                mento River.2
                                                WDCWA has also secured a senior Sacramento River water right
                                                for 10,000 acre-feet from the Conaway Preservation Group that
                                                is limited to the months of April through October. The WDCWA
                                                project included a newly constructed river water intake structure
                                                and pipeline that transports “raw” water 5.1 miles from the Sac-
                                                ramento River to a new 30-million gallons per day (mgd) water
    The WDCWA Intake Facility at the            treatment plant located 1.4 miles south of Woodland. Woodland
    Sacramento River.                           has a dedicated capacity of 18 mgd of supply from the water treat-
                                                ment plant. Woodland also has an additional 2,000,000 gallons of
                                                storage and a dedicated 4-mgd pump to supplement this supply.
                                                Groundwater is used to supplement surface water supplies and
                                                could account for up to 30 percent of total demand in dry years.
                                                Groundwater
                                                Woodland continues to operate several groundwater wells lo-
    Woodland has a dedicated                    cated throughout the City to supplement surface water supplies.
    capacity of 18 million gallons              Of the 18 wells owned and operated by the City, 70 percent have
    per day of supply from the                  been in operation for 30 years or longer. The typical life of a well
                                                is between 30 and 50 years. Historically, groundwater elevations in
    water treatment plant.
                                                the region have ranged from roughly -20 feet to -60 feet mean sea
                                                level (msl). Several of the older wells are planned to be converted
                                                to landscape irrigation or destroyed in the near future. Ground-
                                                water elevations generally declined from the 1950s to the 1970s;
                                                however, in response to regional water supply projects imple-
                                                mented by Yolo County Flood Control and Water Conservation
                                                District, groundwater elevations have increased since that time. In
                                                the vicinity of Woodland, the base of fresh groundwater occurs at
                                                a depth of approximately 2,500 feet below msl. The groundwater
                                                aquifer in Woodland and the surrounding area is not considered
                                                to be in overdraft. Woodland is planning to implement an Aquifer
                                                Storage and Recovery (ASR) program beginning in fall 2016, which
                                                will further improve groundwater supplies in Woodland. The ASR
                                                program is discussed further below.
                                                Distribution and Storage
                                                The municipal water supply distribution system consists of 260
                                                miles of transmission and distribution lines, a 3 million gallon
                                                ground level storage tank, and a 400,000 gallon elevated storage
                                                tank, which is generally sufficient for peak demands and to regulate
    2	 Term 91 (Stored Water Bypass Requirements) is a permit condition that curtails downstream diverters from taking diversions from
       streams when the State Water Project and Central Valley project are releasing water from storage to meet water quality standards.
PF 5-32

water pressure. There are about 15,635 existing service connec-
tions in the distribution system. The groundwater supply is filtered
                                                                                       Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                                                                     5
naturally by sand and gravel as it passes through the aquifers, and
receives minimal treatment at each well site (0.2 parts per mil-
lion liquid chlorine) for disinfection. Figure 5-5 shows Woodland’s
municipal water infrastructure.The City has planned for the use of
aquifer storage and recovery (ASR) wells to store treated surface
water from excess supply in winter months to supplement supply
in peak demand summer months. The ASR wells are also intended
to store large quantities of treated surface water to meet peak
summer demands and to prepare for future drought conditions.
One ASR well was completed in 2013 and two additional wells are
planned to complete construction in early 2017. Ultimately, five
ASR wells are planned for the system.Three ASR wells are planned
to be operational by mid-2017.
Table 5-9 shows the actual and projected water supplies in Wood-
land from the City’s 2015 Urban Water Management Plan. Ground-
water provided the 2015 water supply, but by 2020, most water
supply is projected to come from surface water, supplemented by
recycled water, and groundwater will serve as supplemental for
emergency conditions. The City’s surface water availability is pro-
jected to grow to a water supply of approximately 24,650 acre-
feet per year (af/yr) by 2035.
     Table 5-9:	             City of Woodland Actual and Projected Water Supplies in
                             Acre-Feet Per Year (af/yr)
                                                            2015                   2020                  2025                   2030                  2035
     Surface Water                                           —                 20,160                20,160                  20,160                24,650
     Groundwater1                                         8,650                      —                     —                      —                      —
     Purchased or Imported                                   —                       —                     —                      —                      —
     Water
     Recycled Water                                          —                     800                    800                   800                   800
     Total                                               8,650                20,960                20,960                  20,960               25,450
Notes:
1. 	   Groundwater provided actual water supplies in 2015. Water supplies are projected to be sourced by surface water and recycled water by 2020. Accord-
       ing to the 2015 UWMP, “the City plans to use groundwater as an emergency supply in the future and plans to maintain and replace groundwater wells as
       needed to meet all future demands for the near-term and provide a minimum emergency supply capacity in the future.”
Source: City of Woodland, 2015 Urban Water Management Plan
                                                                                                                                                      PF 5-33

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                           Water Demand
                                                           In 2015, the city’s water demand was approximately 2.8 billion gal-
                                                           lons per year (7.6 mgd), down from 4.5 billion gallons per year
                                                           (12.4 mgd) in 2010. From 2007-2009 and 2012-2015, California
                                                           experienced drought conditions that resulted in increased water
                                                           conservation and water use awareness. In 2015, single family res-
                                                           idential uses accounted for nearly half of demand (46 percent),
                                                           followed by multi-family residential and commercial (15 percent
                                                           each), industrial and landscape (7 percent each), and institutional/
                                                           governmental (4 percent).3
                                                           Future water demand in Woodland is expected to grow over the
         Water conservation is discussed
                                                           planning horizon. As shown in Table 5-10, the City’s buildout wa-
         in more detail in the Sustainability,
                                                           ter demand is projected to reach approximately 18,700 af/yr in
         Conservation, and Open Space
                                                           the year 2035.4 This water demand projection is based on the
         Element.
                                                           City’s compliance with its 2009 Water Conservation Act (Senate
                                                           Bill x7-7 or SBx7-7) per capita water use targets (interim target of
                                                           261 gallons per capita per day (gpcd) in 2015 and final target of 232
                                                           gpcd in 2020 and in subsequent years).
         Table 5-10:	 City of Woodland Total Water Demands, af/yr
      Demand                                                    2015                  2020                   2025                    2030                    20351
         Potable and Raw Water                                8,650                 15,113               16,226                   17,417                  18,691
         Demand
         Recycled Water Demand                                      0                  800                   800                      800                     800
         Total Water Demand                                  8,650                15,913                17,026                  18,217                    19,491
    Notes:
    1.	     Recycled water demands are based on projected water use for Woodland BioMass customer and park irrigation needs.
    2. 	    Potable and raw water demand projections are calculated based on projected population and 2020 target gallons per capita per day, as calculated using
            Department of Water Resources methodologies for SB X7-7.
    Source: City of Woodland, 2015 Urban Water Management Plan, 2016.
    3	 As defined in the 2015 Urban Water Management Plan, a single-family residential use is a single-family dwelling unit, or a lot with a
          free-standing building containing one dwelling unit that may include a detatched secondary dwelling. A multi-family use is multiple
          dwelling units contained within one building or several buildings within a complex.
    4	 One million gallons per day is equivalent to 1,120 acre-feet per year. 18 million gallons per day is equivalent to 20,160 acre-feet per
          year.
PF 5-34

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 5-5:	Municipal Water Infrastructure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 5-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Municipal Water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Infrastructure
                                                                                                                                             N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Active Water Production Well
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Enclosed Storage Facility
                                                                                                I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Water Pollution Treatment Facility
                                                                                                                                                                                              N PIONEER AVE                                                     COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Regional Water Treatment Facility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Water Pressurized Main Lines
                 W KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                          Water Lateral Lines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Highways
                                                                                                             COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                             EAST ST
                                                       W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Minor Arterials
                                                                                              BEAMER ST                                                                                                        E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Collectors
                       ASHLEY AVE
                                                                  CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ramps
                                                                                                                                     NORTH ST
                                                                                                                                                                LEMEN AVE                                                                                                                                                               City Limits
                                                                                                COURT ST
                 W MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sphere of Influence
                                                                                            MAIN ST                                                                                                               E MAIN ST
                                                                                            LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                          THIRD ST                                                                                                                                                                    I -5
                                                                                             CROSS ST
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FA R
                                                                                  WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NH
                                       COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AM
                                                                                                          COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                         E GUM AVE                                                                                 AV
                                                          CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                       MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Regional Water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Treatment Facility
                                                                                                                                           EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                             GIBSON RD                                                                                                                      E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PIONEER AVE
                                    EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pollution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Facility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                   HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                     113                                      MARSTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0            0.375          0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Accurate as of September 2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PF 5-35
  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
PF 5-36
    Table 5-11:	 City of Woodland Supply and Demand Comparison—
                                                                                          Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                                                            5
                             Normal Year, af/yr
  Demand                                                       2015                  2020                   2025            2030           20351
    Supply Totals (from Table                               8,650                 20,960                20,960            20,960          25,450
    5-9)
    Demand Totals (from Table                               8,650                  15,913                17,026           18,217          19,491
    5-10)
    Difference                                                     0                5,047                 3,934            2,743           4,617
Notes:
1.	   Supply totals for normal year projections reflect anticipated surface water and recycled water supply sources.
Source: City of Woodland, 2015 Urban Water Management Plan, 2016.
Recycled Water
The City of Woodland has evaluated the feasibility of recycled wa-
ter and has planned for a new recycled water utility. The initial
recycled water program would extend purple pipe to the Indus-
trial Area of the City and also serve two City parks with recycled
water. Additional connections to the recycled water system may
be added over time as feasible. The project is expected to be con-
structed in 2016 and begin recycled water deliveries in fall 2016.
The recycled water utility is planned to be expanded to serve pri-                                               The Woodland-Davis Clean Water
                                                                                                                 Agency (WDCWA) facility.
marily industrial uses and landscape irrigation.
Planned Improvements
The Davis-Woodland Water Supply project has allowed Woodland
to secure surface water supplies for current and future demand.
The City plans to utilize ASR wells to balance winter surface wa-
ter supply with summer demand and store treated surface water
ahead of the next drought. The City has planned for five ASR wells
to be ultimately constructed, which will require two additional ASR
wells to be constructed after 2017. The State’s new hexavalent
chromium regulation generally prohibits long term use of exist-
ing wells; any new native groundwater wells would likely require a
wellhead treatment system over the planning period.
The City has several miles of old and undersized cast iron pipe
dating back to the early 1900s. There has been an increase in the
frequency of breaks in these pipes. The City has begun a program
to replace the aging water mains over time.
                                                                                                                                             PF 5-37

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                         Wastewater Collection and Treatment
                                         The City of Woodland’s Public Works Department is the commu-
    The City of Woodland’s               nity’s wastewater service provider. Woodland’s wastewater collec-
    Public Works Department is           tion system conveys wastewater by gravity pipelines to the Water
    the community’s wastewater           Pollution Control Facility (WPCF) located east of the city along
    service provider.                    County Road 103, where it is treated and then discharged to a
                                         large unimproved channel. Treated wastewater eventually drains
                                         to the Tule Canal on the east side of the Yolo Bypass.
                                         Woodland’s wastewater collection system consists of 270 miles of
                                         sewer main and 80 miles of service line. It has more than 15,000
                                         wastewater service connections and serves the city of Woodland
                                         as well as a small area north of the city—Barnard Court. Figure 5-6
                                         shows the city’s existing wastewater infrastructure system.
                                         Current Capacity
                                         While most of the City’s wastewater infrastructure can meet
                                         existing and future demand, the capacity of the sewer system in
                                         the Downtown area is currently strained and improvements are
                                         planned.
                                         The City constructed the Water Pollution Control Facility in 1989.
                                         Since that time, the City has upgraded the facility twice—once
                                         in 1999 and a second time in 2006, when the City expanded and
                                         upgraded the treatment plant’s hydraulic capacity from 7.8 million
                                         mgd to 10.4 mgd. The wastewater treatment plant capacity is mea-
                                         sured in two ways: (1) hydraulic capacity, which is the maximum
                                         inflow/outflow (gallons per day) that a plant can treat; and (2) sol-
                                         ids (biological oxygen demand) capacity, which are the maximum
                                         biological solids (pounds per day) that a plant can adequately treat.
                                         In recent years, hydraulic inflows to WPCF have gone down due
                                         to water conservation, and the average flow to WPCF is currently
                                         about 5.0 mgd, according to a technical report that was completed
                                         to evaluate the General Plan impacts on the WPCF. Future aver-
    The Woodland Water Pollution         age flow to WPCF is expected to grow moderately, from about 6.6
    Control Facility, located in the
    southeastern portion of the Planning
                                         mgd by 2020 to 8.3 mgd by 2035. The projected future capacity of
    Area, will have ample capacity for   the WPCF is about 9.2 mgd for average wastewater flows, which
    treating wastewater when upgrades    could serve up to 105,000 residents.
    to address solids treatment are
    complete (underway, anticipated      However, while hydraulic inflows have decreased, biological solids
    completion in 2016).                 have remained the same, or have slightly increased in recent years.
                                         The City is converting three of the WPCF’s oxidation ditches to
                                         the Modified Ludzack-Ettinger (MLE) process, which enhances ni-
PF 5-38

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 5-6:	Wastewater Infrastructure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 5-6:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wastewater
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Infrastructure
                                                                                                                                                          N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Wastewater Treatment Facility
                                                                                                           I-5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sewer Pressurized Main
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12 inch diameter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kentucky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        18 inch diameter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Trunk                          B12
                                                                                                     A02                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (private - not a municipal facility)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Line
                 W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                         A03                                                                                      E KENTUCKY AVE                                                                              Sewer Gravity Main
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4 to 6 inches diameter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                          COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                          EAST ST
                                                          W WOODLAND AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8 to 12 inches diameter
                                    A01                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Beamer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15 to 18 inches diameter
                                                                 B01                                       B03                         B09                                                                                                                                                                       Trunk
                                                                                                        BEAMER ST                                                                                                                           E BEAMER ST                                                          Line                                                   20 to 30 inches diameter
                       ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        33 to 48 inches diameter
                                                                     CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                        B08                                                                                      B10                                                                    B11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sewer Lateral Lines
                                                                                                       B03                      B08                                          LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                                  NORTH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Highways
                                                                                                           COURT ST                                                    B06
                 W MAIN ST
                                                                                     B02              MAIN ST    B03                                                                                                                            E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Principal Arterials
                                                                                                      LINCOLN AVE                                  B07                                                                                                                                                         A05                                                      Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                       THIRD ST
                                                                                                                 B04                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I -5
                                                                                                       CROSS ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Local Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                   C06
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FA R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ramps
                                                                                           WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                       113                                                 C08         E
                                          COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AV           AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EG                                                                                                         Woodland City Limits
                                                                                                                       COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                       B05                                                             E GUM AVE
                                                            CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                       B05                                                                            C07                                                                                                                               Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                                                                     MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Regional Water
                                                    C02                                                                                                 EAST ST                                                                                            BRANIGAN AVE                                                   Treatment Facility
                                                                                                     C04
                                                                                                       GIBSON RD                                                                                                                                          E GIBSON RD
                   C01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PIONEER AVE
                                    EL DORADO DR                                                                                                                      C05                                                                                                                                      Gibson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Trunk
                                                                                           C03                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Line
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                             HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                   113                                                      MARSTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0            0.375          0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PF 5-39
  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
PF 5-40
                                                           Public Facilities and Services Element
trogen removal in addition to solids capacity. The upgrades to the
oxidation ditches will result in a higher solids capacity of 13,300
                                                                                                        5
lb/d from the current 10,300 lb/d. The construction work is ex-
pected to be completed in fall 2016. This capacity would be suf-
ficient to serve a residential population of 70,000 (at 0.19 pounds
BOD 5 per capita day). With conversion of a fourth oxidation
ditch to MLE the WPCF can treat up to 19,900 lb/day. The WPCF
has a “practical” limit of about 26,000 lb/day, with various addi-
tional upgrades and modifications to the plant, like the addition of
primary treatment and anaerobic digestion.
Historically, wastewater flows and biological loads have been
linked. However, water conservation has resulted in lower flows
to WPCF with the same biological load. In the future, hydraulic ca-
pacity will not be the limiting system factor. Rather, the ability for
WPCF to treat higher amounts of biological solids will determine
overall wastewater system capacity, and the City will make modifi-         The Water Pollution Control Facility
cations and upgrades to the WPCF as needed over the horizon of             in Woodland.
the General Plan.
Woodland Water Pollution Control Facility
The WPCF includes the following processes: (1) mechanical treat-
ment—bar screens and grit removal, (2) oxidation ditches, (3) sec-
ondary clarification, (4) polymer chemical addition, (5) cloth media
filtration, (6) UV disinfection, and (7) discharge.The City also leases
800 acres to Pacific Coast Producers, which operates an Industrial
Wastewater Treatment Process used to treat wastewater from
a tomato processing facility located adjacent to the wastewater
treatment facility. The City and Pacific Coast Producers are co-
permitted and are jointly responsible for maintaining wastewater
discharge standards. Treated wastewater is discharged to a large
unimproved channel, which eventually drains to the Tule Canal on
the east side of the Yolo Bypass.
Electrical Conductivity (EC) indicates the amount of salts or salin-
ity of water. Salts that dissolve in water break into positively and
negatively charged ions. Because dissolved ions increase salinity
as well as conductivity, the two measures are related. High water
salinity can limit the growth of certain crops. The city’s ground-
water historically has had high naturally occurring EC levels.Water
softeners, general water consumption, and effluent contribute to
increased salt content, which can make the wastewater unsuitable
for beneficial agricultural or other beneficial uses. EC is expected
                                                                                                        PF 5-41

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   to decline as the City converts to primarily treated surface water
                                   and residents reduce reliance on water softeners.
                                   Planned Improvements
                                   The City is reviewing alternatives for biosolids disposal to reduce
                                   the cost and remove the accumulated biosolids. The City will also
                                   continue to soil/cement line the sludge disposal ponds as the bio-
                                   solids in each pond are excavated. In the coming years, the City
                                   will prioritize improvements to increase the capacity of the sewer
                                   system in Downtown, which is currently a significant limitation on
                                   the area’s ability to intensify and accommodate more growth. In
                                   addition, the City will investigate potential mitigation strategies to
                                   the odor associated with WPCF. Additional discussion on odor
                                   issues can be found in the Air Quality section of the Sustainability,
                                   Conservation, and Open Space Element.
                                   Additionally, as discussed in the Potable Water section, the City is
                                   currently constructing a recycled water pipeline to the northeast
                                   industrial area that will serve a large industrial user, two parks, and
                                   landscaping located along the pipeline route. Additional connec-
                                   tions to the recycled water pipeline may be added over time as
                                   feasible.
                                   Storm Drainage Facilities
                                   Much of the land area in Woodland is developed, resulting in im-
                                   pervious surfaces from the placement of roads, parking lots, build-
                                   ings and other infrastructure. These facilities reduce the amount
                                   of water infiltration into the ground, increase direct runoff, and
                                   cause soil erosion and sedimentation, which can result in water
                                   quality degradation and flooding concerns.
                                   The Environmental Services Division in the City of Woodland Pub-
                                   lic Works Department provides stormwater management services
                                   for the city. The Wastewater Operations Division is responsible
                                   for stormwater maintenance services. The city’s stormwater sys-
                                   tem includes 130 miles of stormwater drain pipe, 14 miles of drain-
                                   age channel, 1,600 catch basins, 1,874 drain inlets, nine detention
                                   ponds, and nine stormwater pumps in three locations. The City
                                   maintains a Storm Drainage Facilities Master Plan, which is used
                                   to plan and implement improvements to the stormwater infra-
                                   structure in Woodland. The existing stormwater infrastructure is
                                   mapped in Figure 5-7.
PF 5-42

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 5-7:	Storm Drainage Infrastructure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 5-7:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Storm Drainage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Infrastructure
                                                                                                                                                    N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Open Channel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gutter
                                                                                                       I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Culvert
                                                                                                                                                                                                     N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Storm Gravity Main
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4 to 8 inches diameter
                 W KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E KENTUCKY AVE                                                                  10 to18 inches diameter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          21 to 27 inches diameter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                    COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                    EAST ST                                                                                                                                                               30 to 36 inches diameter
                                                         W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          42 to 60 inches diameter
                                                                                                     BEAMER ST                                                                                                       E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          66 to 84 inches diameter
                       ASHLEY AVE
                                                                    CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Existing Detention Basins
                 BROWNS                                                                                                                     NORTH ST
                                                                                                                                                                      LEMEN AVE                                                                                                                                           Highways
                 CORNER                                                                                COURT ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Principal Arterials
                 W MAIN ST                                                                         MAIN ST                                                                                                                E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Minor Arterials
                                                                                                   LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Collectors
                                                                                                                                 THIRD ST                                                                                                                                                  I -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ramps
                                                                                                    CROSS ST
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FA R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Limits
                                                                                         WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                         COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AV            AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        UM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EG                                                                                  Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                 COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                E GUM AVE                                                                                 AV
                                                           CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                              MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               * Note: See Figure 8-5 and 8-6 for the
                                                                                                                                                  EAST ST                                                                           BRANIGAN AVE                                                               location of floodways and floodplains
                                                                                                    GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               within the Planning Area.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COUNTY ROAD 102
                                    EL DORADO DR                                                                                                                                                                     PIONEER AVE
                                                                                     WEST
                                                                                    STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                          HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                            113                                           MARSTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0            0.375          0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PF 5-43
  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
PF 5-44
Existing Storm Drain System
                                                           Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                  5
Woodland’s storm drain system collects water through gutters,
ditches, and catch basins. The storm drain system conveys water
generally west to east by gravity through canals and four main
trunk lines 30 to 84 inches in diameter. The trunk lines discharge
into open channels that convey the flow to three pump stations lo-
cated at the East Main Street Lift Pump Station. It is then pumped
into a canal along the south side of Cache Creek Settling Basin and
then flows into the Yolo Bypass, the Tule Canal, and the Sacramento
River. The City also has several retention/detention basins around
the city to slow and divert storm water from larger storms.
Flooding
City streets are subject to flooding during periods of moderate
to heavy rainfall, as the storm drain system is not adequately sized
for these flows. Older parts of the city, particularly west of East
Street, do not have a system of under-street storm drain pipes.
Rather, runoff is conveyed through intersections in valley gutters,
gutter culverts, or inverted siphons, and must travel long distances
to reach a drain inlet. In these areas, when capacity of drain inlets
and pipes is exceeded, localized street flooding occurs and remains
for three to four hours after rainfall has subsided. Significant prob-
lem areas where localized street flooding occurs include Browns
Corner (West Main Street and County Road 98) and West Street
(South of Del Mar); flooding is discussed in more detail in the
Safety Element.
  •	 Browns Corner. Browns Corner has experienced significant
     flooding problems during the last several years from overland
     flows from unincorporated areas west of Woodland.
  •	 West Street. West Street is experiencing problems with flows
     from fields south of Woodland that flow north on West Street
     and flood Del Mar Street and Miramonte Drive. The City is cur-
     rently working with farmers to minimize impacts to residents.
Woodland also experiences shallow sheet flooding from surface
water runoff (Cache Creek) during large rainstorms with depths
generally less than two feet. For discussion of the flood risk as-
sociated with the Cache Creek 100-year floodplain, see the Safety
Element.
                                                                                                  PF 5-45

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   Planned Improvements
                                   The City plans to continue to review the flooding issue, which will
                                   be studied in the Storm Drain Master Plan update.
                                   Low Impact Development
                                   New development has the potential to cause erosion sediment and
                                   surface water run-off that will enter the City’s storm drainage sys-
                                   tem. As more development occurs in Woodland, more land area is
                                   made impervious, and urban runoff increases. In order to minimize
                                   these impacts, the General Plan encourages future development
                                   projects to minimize runoff into the City’s drainage system and to
                                   increase the use of low impact development techniques.
                                   Solid Waste Collection and Disposal
                                   This section addresses land use compatibility, public sanitation, and
                                   aesthetic impacts associated with the City’s solid waste manage-
                                   ment and community sanitation practices. Solid waste and yard
                                   waste collection and disposal and curbside recycling in Woodland
                                   are provided by a franchise agreement with Waste Management,
                                   with disposal and material processing at Yolo County Central
                                   Landfill. The General Plan policies ensure a consistent, citywide
                                   level of service for refuse collection, neighborhood cleanup, sanita-
                                   tion enforcement, and recycling programs. Existing waste disposal
                                   facilities are adequate to maintain a sufficient level of service for
                                   future population growth in the city over the planning period for
                                   this Plan; according to the Yolo County Integrated Waste Manage-
                                   ment Plan, as of 2012, the landfill has an estimated disposal capacity
                                   for another 79 years.
                                   Other Utilities
                                   Utilities such as electricity, natural gas, and telecommunications,
                                   including broadband internet service, are considered common ele-
                                   ments of contemporary life. It is necessary to ensure these services
                                   are available and adequate to meet the demands of all Woodland
                                   residents and businesses. Rising demand associated with popula-
                                   tion and employment growth will necessitate additional facilities.
                                   It is important that these new facilities and services be provided
                                   in a manner that minimizes impacts on the built and natural envi-
                                   ronments and on the health and safety of Woodland residents and
                                   businesses.
PF 5-46

Broadband Internet Service
                                                           Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                          5
Access to reliable, high speed internet service and to internal net-
                                                                             Broadband internet service’s role
works can be as critical as electricity and water for many business-
                                                                             in economic development is dis-
es and residents. In contrast to traditional dial-up internet access,
                                                                             cussed in the Economic Develop-
broadband internet service provides a faster, more reliable con-
                                                                             ment Element.
nection to the internet, using a wide bandwidth data transmission
that has the ability to simultaneously transport multiple signals
and traffic types. Broadband internet service can be provided via a
cable modem, a digital subscriber line (DSL), fiber, wireless signals,
satellites, or over powerlines. Wireless broadband can be mobile
or fixed; with recent rapid advances in mobile device technology,
both internet service providers and subscribers are increasingly
looking towards mobile solutions to help fill communication gaps
and provide alternatives to typical fixed deployments of broadband.
Woodland currently lacks broadband internet services of sufficient
quality. According to the County’s 2015 Yolo Broadband Strategic
Plan, residents in Woodland are served by two primary provid-
ers, AT&T of California and Wave Broadband. Businesses in Wood-
land subscribe to a larger mix of wireline providers and resell-
ers than residents, including AT&T of California, Wave Broadband,
AFES Wireless Network Services, and Omsoft. Some residents
and businesses also use fixed wireless providers, including Win-
ters Broadband and DigitalPath. Regardless of the internet service
provider, Woodland’s businesses and residents have reported sig-
nificant issues and high levels of dissatisfaction with the speed and
overall reliability of their internet services.
According to the Yolo Broadband Strategic Plan, the City utilizes
a combination of fiber and wireless connections for its municipal
operations. These services provide connectivity between munici-
pal facilities to connect departmental resources to a common net-
work. The City maintains a small amount of its own fiber segments
throughout the community and continues to build new fiber in
conjunction with other capital projects that allow conduit to be
installed for low costs. As more of these projects are completed,
it allows the City to connect segments to one another to form a
larger municipal network that can be utilized to interconnect its
facilities. This municipal network permits the City to reduce its
telecommunications costs and expand the bandwidth as its con-
nectivity needs grow.
                                                                                                           PF 5-47

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   The City will develop a master plan for its fiber network in con-
                                   junction with the Yolo Community Broadband Network. This
                                   will allow the City to continue to build out local infrastructure
                                   in targeted areas, which can be used to reduce costs, create new
                                   opportunities for government collaboration, and provide a new
                                   source of fiber to local service providers. These activities will as-
                                   sist Woodland in promoting the expansion of broadband and po-
                                   tentially wireless services in key areas of the community, such as
                                   Downtown.
                                   There is a strong interest from many segments of the community
                                   and the City in improving the quality, reliability, and accessibility of
                                   broadband internet services in Woodland.This General Plan places
                                   a high priority on broadband market development and the wide-
                                   spread deployment of this critical infrastructure as an economic
                                   development strategy.
                                   Natural Gas
                                   Natural gas in Woodland is provided by Pacific Gas & Electric
                                   (PG&E). As shown in Figure 5-8, several major PG&E gas transmis-
                                   sion pipelines extend through the Planning Area—roughly follow-
                                   ing I-5 to the northwest and Farnham Avenue to the southeast;
                                   along North Pioneer Avenue and Bourn Drive from East Beamer
                                   Street to the southern city limits; Main Street and East Gibson
                                   Road between Bourn Drive and East Street; and County Road 98
                                   from I-5 to West Main Street. The transmission and distribution of
                                   natural gas is regulated by the State. While the City of Woodland
                                   is not responsible for the siting, design, construction, or operation
                                   of these transmission facilities, it has a significant interest in how
                                   they are operated and maintained, and works with PG&E to ensure
                                   their ongoing monitoring, safety, and efficacy.
PF 5-48

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 5-8:	Natural Gas Transmission Pipelines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 5-8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Natural Gas Transmission
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pipelines
                                                                                                                                                                                                    N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Natural Gas Transmission
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pipelines
                                                                                                                                 I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Minor Arterials
                 W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Local Streets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N PIONEER AVE
                                                 Wayne
                                                 Cline                Schneider
                                                                                                                                                  COLLEGE ST
                                                  Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ramps
                                                                                                                                                                                                    EAST ST
                                                                        Park
                                                                     W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                     Beamer
                                                                                                                                                                                      Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Railroads
                                                                                                                               BEAMER ST                                                                                                                                                             E BEAMER ST                                                                                                                             Existing and Planned Parks,
                                                                                                                      Clark      Pedroia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Open Space, & Recreational
                                                                               CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                       Field      Fields
                                         Harris
                                         Field                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City Limits
                                                                                                                                 COURT ST
                 W MAIN ST                                                                                                                                                              Freeman                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                        MAIN ST                                                           Park                                                                                                         E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                         LINCOLN AVE
                            ASHLEY AVE                                                                                             City                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I -5
                                                                    CROSS ST                                                       Park
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FA R
                                                                                               Woodland                                                                                                                                                       Storz
                                         John                                                                                                                                                                                Campbell                         Pond                                                                         NH
                                                                                               Cemetery                                                                                                                        Park
                                         Ferns                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Klenhard                   AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                          THIRD ST
                                         Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Park        AV                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E GUM AVE                                                                                                UM                     AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Buchignani
                                                    COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                       Everman                           Field
                                                                                                                                                                                         Park
                                                                                                      WEST ST                                                                                     EAST ST
                                                                                                                                           Southland                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pioneer
                                                                                                                                             Park                                                                                                                                                                   BRANIGAN AVE                        Park
                                                                                                                               GIBSON RD                                                                                                                                                                             E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PIONEER AVE
                                                                    Woodside
                 Douglass                                           Park
                  Park                   EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                         Tredway
                                                                                                                                                                                             Park
                                                                                                                                                               Crawford                                                                                      Spring
                                                                                                                                                                 Park                                                                                         Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sports
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Community
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jack
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MIEKLE AVE
                            COUNTY RD 24A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Slaven
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Spring                                                 Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Central
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Park
                                                                                                     COUNTY ROAD 99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   COUNTY RD 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rick
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Gonzales
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     113                                                             MARSTON DR                                  Sr Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Regional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0            0.375          0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                               COUNTY RD 25A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PF 5-49
  City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
PF 5-50
Renewable Engergy and Energy Conservation
                                                                Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                       5
It is possible to improve energy efficiency associated with trans-
portation, industrial buildings, and homes and still maintain a high
standard of living and a competitive local economy. By reducing
the amount of energy consumed across land uses and transporta-
tion choices, as well as by using more renewable sources, such as
solar and wind energy, residents and businesses in Woodland can
see many benefits: better protection of the environment, improved
public health, new “green energy” jobs, more stable energy prices,
a more reliable and resilient energy system, and ultimately, a re-
duced cost of infrastructure and energy delivery.
The General Plan promotes the use of renewable energy for residential and business uses.
                                                                                                       PF 5-51

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    5.7	 Goals and Policies
    Goal 5.A	     Law Enforcement Services. Provide a comprehensive program of law enforcement
                  services to deter crime, ensure public safety, and meet the growing demand for police
                  services associated with increasing population and non-residential development.
                  Policy 5.A.1	        Response Time. Strive to maintain a high level of police service to
                                       the community by achieving the following response times:
                                         •	 Priority 1 (Major Crimes) – 5 Minutes. Dispatch time: 1
                                            minute; Police response time: 4 minutes
                                         •	 Priority 2 (Minor Crimes) – 6 minutes. Dispatch time: 1
                                            minute; Police response time: 5 minutes
                                         •	 Priority 3 (Major Crimes Cold) – 25 minutes. Dispatch
                                            time: 15 minutes; Police response time: 10 minutes
                                         •	 Priority 4 (Minor Crimes Cold) – 40 minutes. Dispatch
                                            time 30 minutes; Police response time: 10 minutes
                                         •	 Priority 5 (Service Calls) – 45 minutes. Dispatch time: 35
                                            minutes; Police response time: 10 minutes
                  Policy 5.A.2	        Police Support. Provide law enforcement support in an efficient
                                       and cost-effective manner to maintain service standards and provide
                                       staffing and equipment resources, including patrol and other vehicles,
                                       necessary equipment, and support personnel.
                  Policy 5.A.3	        Development Project Requirements. Require development
                                       projects to develop and/or fund police facilities, equipment,
                                       personnel, and operations and maintenance that maintain the City’s
                                       standards, as demonstrated through positive fiscal impacts or
                                       through specific funding mechanisms in the event of fiscal deficits.
                                       New development should not result in a reduction in service levels
                                       (or capabilities) to existing service population. Explore new and
                                       innovative programs for at-risk youth and a diverse community,
                                       including those that employ restorative justice concepts.
                  Policy 5.A.4	        Public Safety Programs. Promote and fund public safety
                                       programs, including volunteers in policing, neighborhood watch,
                                       child identification and fingerprinting, substance abuse prevention,
                                       violence prevention, conflict resolution, and other public education
                                       and crime prevention efforts.
                  Policy 5.A.5	        At-Risk Children and Youth. Provide and promote services for
                                       children and youth at risk of abuse, neglect, youth violence, and
                                       exploitation.
PF 5-52

          Policy 5.A.6	
                                                        Public Facilities and Services Element
                               Crime Prevention through Design. Consider public safety
                                                                                                    5
                               issues in public facility, commercial, and residential project design,
                               and enhance public safety through implementation of Crime
                               Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) strategies.
                               These include designing the placement of activities and physical
                               features, such as buildings, entrances and exits, corridors, fences,
                               pavement, signs, lighting and landscaping, in such a way as to clearly
                               define public and private space, maximize visibility, control access
                               and circulation and foster positive social interaction.
          Policy 5.A.7	        Development Application Review by Police Department.
                               Continue Police Department review of all development applications,
                               provide comments, and recommend conditions of approval that will
                               ensure adequate on-site and off-site protection systems and features
                               are provided.
Goal 5.B	 Fire Protection Services. Provide a comprehensive program of fire protection
          services to protect residents of and visitors to Woodland from injury and loss of life
          and to protect property from fires.
          Policy 5.B.1	        Response Time and Service Standards. Strive to maintain a
                               high level of fire protection service to the community by achieving
                               the following response times:
                                  •	 Emergency medical service calls: 60 seconds turnout time, at
                                     least 90 percent of the time.
                                  •	 Fire and special operations response: 80 seconds turnout time,
                                     at least 90 percent of the time.
                                  •	 Arrival at fire suppression incident: 4 minutes or less travel time
                                     of the first arriving engine, at least 90 percent of the time.
                                  •	 Deployment of an initial full alarm assignment: 8 minutes or less
                                     travel time, at least 90 percent of the time.
                                  •	 Arrival at an emergency medical incident: 4 minutes or less
                                     travel time, at least 90 percent of the time.
                                  •	 Dispatch call answering time: 15 seconds or less, at least 95
                                     percent of the time, and 40 seconds or less, at least 99 percent
                                     of the time.
                                  •	 Dispatch call processing time: 60 seconds or less, 90 percent of
                                     the time, and 90 seconds or less, 99 percent of the time.
          Policy 5.B.2	        Staff Training and Competency. Maintain a Fire Department
                               staff training program that ensures that personnel receive a
                               minimum of 240 hours of training per year. Ensure that personnel
                               maintain competency to execute all responsibilities required for
                               their position.
                                                                                                    PF 5-53

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 5.B.3	    ISO Target. Strive to maintain an ISO rating of 3 or better for the
                                   city.
                  Policy 5.B.4	    Development Project Requirements. Require development
                                   projects to develop and/or fund fire protection facilities, equipment,
                                   personnel, and operations and maintenance that maintain the City’s
                                   standards, as demonstrated through positive fiscal impacts or
                                   through specific funding mechanisms in the event of fiscal deficits.
                  Policy 5.B.5	    Fire Safety Education. Coordinate a public education program
                                   in order to foster public awareness of fire hazards with the
                                   intention of reducing injury and loss of life, damage to property, and
                                   degradation of the natural environment.
                  Policy 5.B.6	    Adequate Infrastructure. Pursue the provision of adequate
                                   water supplies, hydrants, and appropriate property access to allow
                                   for adequate fire suppression throughout the city.
                  Policy 5.B.7	    Building Codes. Adopt and enforce amendments to the City’s
                                   construction and fire codes, as determined appropriate, to require
                                   adequate water infrastructure and automatic fire detection, control,
                                   and suppression systems, to systematically reduce the level of risk
                                   to life and property from fire, commensurate with the City’s fire
                                   suppression capabilities.
                  Policy 5.B.8	    Development Application Review by Fire Department.
                                   Continue Fire Department review of all development applications,
                                   provide comments, and recommend conditions of approval that will
                                   ensure adequate on-site and off-site fire protection systems and
                                   features are provided.
                  Policy 5.B.9	    Cost Recovery. Continue to evaluate appropriate codes, policies,
                                   and methods to generate fees or other sources of revenue to offset
                                   the ongoing personnel and maintenance costs of providing fire
                                   prevention and response services.
                  Policy 5.B.10	   Construction of New Fire Stations. Consider location of
                                   existing stations in relation to planned growth, and explore efficacy
                                   of current station locations as part of any new fire station location
                                   analysis. Consider where a station relocation might preclude need
                                   for a new station with a new engine company. Prior to approval
                                   and construction of new fire stations, ensure that adequate funding
                                   is available for both the construction and the ongoing operation,
                                   maintenance, and staffing of future fire stations. Park System.
                                   Establish and maintain a complete system of public parks and
                                   community and recreational facilities that provides opportunities for
                                   both passive and active recreation and is well suited to the needs of
                                   Woodland residents, employees, and visitors.
PF 5-54

Goal 5.C	
                                                              Public Facilities and Services Element
                Park System. Establish and maintain a complete system of public parks and
                community and recreational facilities that provides opportunities for both passive and
                                                                                                           5
                active recreation and is well suited to the needs of Woodland residents, employees,
                and visitors.
Goals and policies pertaining to open space are found in the Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space
Element. Additional goals and policies pertaining to physical activity and community facilities are found in the
Healthy Community Element.
                Policy 5.C.1	         Parks, Recreation, and Community Services Master Plan.
                                      Maintain, implement, and update as necessary the Parks, Recreation
                                      and Community Services Master Plan to carry out the goals and
                                      policies of this General Plan. All new development will be consistent
                                      with the applicable provisions of the Parks Master Plan.
                Policy 5.C.2	         Sports Park Master Plan. Maintain, implement, and update as
                                      necessary the Master Plan for the Sports Park at the Community
                                      and Senior Center to ensure the full buildout of the facility expected
                                      and required by the community.
                Policy 5.C.3	         Park Acreage Standard. Ensure that the development of parks
                                      and recreation facilities keeps pace with development and growth
                                      within the city. Of the total acreage, strive to achieve and maintain
                                      a standard of 6.0 acres of parks per 1,000 residents for the
                                      development of City-owned park facilities.
                Policy 5.C.4	         New Development Goals. Require that new residential
                                      development meet its fair share of the park acreage goal by either
                                      dedicating land for new parks, paying a fair share of the costs for
                                      new parks and recreation facilities, and/or renovating existing parks
                                      and facilities.
                Policy 5.C.5	         Proximity of Parks to Housing. Strive to provide accessible
                                      public park, greenbelt, and/or recreational open space within one-
                                      quarter mile of all housing, especially in neighborhoods with higher
                                      density housing. Require new development in Specific Plan areas
                                      to meet this standard in site planning, and pursue opportunities to
                                      establish new parkland in proximity to underserved infill areas, as
                                      feasible.
                Policy 5.C.6	         Park Amenities. Consistent with the Parks, Recreation, and
                                      Community Services Master Plan, develop picnic areas, trails,
                                      playground apparatus, restrooms, shade structures, and other similar
                                      facilities in existing parks and recreation facilities that currently lack
                                      such amenities, so that they can function as neighborhood parks for
                                      nearby residents.
                                                                                                            PF 5-55
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 5.C.7	    Active Linear Connection System. Establish and maintain an
                                   active linear park system that consists of a combination of existing
                                   and new greenbelts, bicycle paths, and pedestrian walkways that
                                   provide linkages within the city and allow alternative means of
                                   access to parks, schools, public facilities, and shopping.
                  Policy 5.C.8	    Connections to Parks. Plan connections between linear parks
                                   and regional bike routes to provide improved access to neighboring
                                   communities.
                  Policy 5.C.9	    Greenbelt Requirements. Require that a minimum of five
                                   percent of newly developed residential land within Specific Plan
                                   areas be designated for use as linear parks/neighborhood greenbelts.
                                   Link new greenbelts to existing or planned greenbelts to create
                                   a greenbelt network that connects housing with recreation,
                                   commercial and employment areas. Note: Linear parks/neighborhood
                                   greenbelts are included in the City’s total parkland acreage and count
                                   towards the City’s parkland standard of 5.0 acres per 1,000 residents.
                  Policy 5.C.10	   Parks in Infill Areas. Allow new development in infill areas to help
                                   meet park and recreation demands by providing mini parks or plazas
                                   that are accessible to the public. Seek opportunities to adaptively
                                   reuse underutilized infill sites for park uses.
                  Policy 5.C.11	   Park Development Funding. Identify appropriate funding
                                   mechanisms to adequately fund the development of new parks
                                   and recreational facilities; the renovation of existing parks and
                                   recreational facilities; and the ongoing preservation, maintenance
                                   and repair of the city’s existing open space, parks and recreational
                                   resources and facilities.
                  Policy 5.C.12	   Park Design. Ensure that the City’s parks, open space, and
                                   recreational resources and facilities include a variety of amenities
                                   and features to meet the needs of the diverse Woodland community.
                                   Consider the following factors in the design of new and renovated
                                   parks and recreation facilities:
                                     •	 Safety
                                     •	 Security
                                     •	 Maintenance
                                     •	 Water conservation / use of recycled water
                                     •	 Urban forest canopy
                                     •	 Accessibility
                                     •	 Travel distance of users
                                     •	 Passive vs. active use areas
PF 5-56

                                 •	 Restroom facilities
                                                       Public Facilities and Services Element
                                                                                                   5
                                 •	 Drinking fountains
                                 •	 Bike access and accommodations
                                 •	 Citizen input
                                 •	 Adequacy of off-street parking
                                 •	 Flexibility for programming activities
                                 •	 Lighting
                                 •	 Small community gardens, as appropriate
          Policy 5.C.13	       Joint Use. Cooperate with public and quasi-public agencies in the
                               joint utilization, development, and maintenance of facilities. Continue
                               to participate in the joint use agreements with the school district
                               for the utilization of parks and school facilities.
          Policy 5.C.14	       Public/Private Partnerships. Encourage the establishment or
                               joint development of commercial or private recreation facilities
                               within the Woodland area.
          Policy 5.C.15	       Collaboration with County. Cooperate with Yolo County in the
                               development of a countywide parks, open space, and trail system.
          Policy 5.C.16	       Park Safety and Law Enforcement. Work with law enforcement
                               agencies to create and maintain a safe environment for all users and
                               reduce crime and vandalism at parks and recreation facilities.
          Policy 5.C.17	       Accessibility. Enhance accessibility to and at parks and recreational
                               facilities to ensure they are available for use by all community
                               members, regardless of ability or income.
          Policy 5.C.18	       Special Facilities. Support special use facilities that foster a variety
                               of sports and recreational activities within the city including baseball,
                               soccer, tennis, swimming, boxing, and others.
Goal 5.D	 Programming. Support recreation and community service programs that promote
          wellness, fun, lifelong learning, skill development, personal enrichment, and positive
          relationships and appreciation of the outdoors and natural resources.
          Policy 5.D.1	        Celebration and Diversity. Provide recreation programming,
                               special events and venues, and educational opportunities that honor,
                               interpret, and celebrate the diversity, history, cultural heritage, and
                               traditions of Woodland.
          Policy 5.D.2	        Senior Programs. Encourage and support recreation programs
                               that meet the needs of Woodland’s aging population by promoting
                               the enrichment and independence of older residents.
                                                                                                    PF 5-57

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 5.D.3	       Youth Programs. Support and promote youth programs and
                                      services, especially those that provide positive educational and social
                                      influences to youth at risk.
                  Policy 5.D.4	       Economically Disadvantaged Programs. Encourage and
                                      support recreation programs and activities that provide affordable
                                      opportunities for economically disadvantaged families and individuals.
                  Policy 5.D.5	       Partnerships in Service. Partner with education agencies such as
                                      the Woodland Joint Unified School District, Woodland Community
                                      College, and the Yolo County Office of Education, to provide
                                      interpersonal skill development activities and programs for at-risk
                                      youth.
    Goal 5.E	     Educational Opportunities. Work cooperatively with school districts, private
                  schools, and higher education institutions to provide superior educational
                  opportunities for all members of the Woodland community.
                  Policy 5.E.1	       Renovation and Modernization. Support the Woodland Joint
                                      Unified School District’s efforts to renovate and modernize its aging
                                      facilities.
                  Policy 5.E.2	       School Location and Site Design. Coordinate with the
                                      Woodland Joint Unified School District, private schools, and higher
                                      education institutions on site location and design to ensure that
                                      adequate educational facilities are available to meet the community’s
                                      needs, are consistent with the General Plan and other City
                                      development regulations, and are integrated with neighborhoods.
                  Policy 5.E.3	       Connectivity to Schools. Implement Complete Street and Safe
                                      Routes to Schools strategies to enable safer access and enhanced
                                      connectivity for all users and modes of transportation.
                                      See also Policies in the Circulation Element.
                  Policy 5.E.4	       Community Use of School Facilities. Encourage school
                                      multi-purpose facilities, recreational facilities, and open space for
                                      community uses to maximize their utilization.
                  Policy 5.E.5	       Joint Use Agreements. Use cooperative joint-use agreements
                                      with the Woodland Joint Unified School District and Woodland
                                      Community College for shared use of facilities, including the
                                      cogeneration plant, recreational facilities, and open spaces.
                  Policy 5.E.6	       Student Generation Factors. Encourage Woodland Joint Unified
                                      School District to update its student generation factors used to
                                      project student enrollment for consistency with the General Plan.
PF 5-58

               Policy 5.E.7	
                                                            Public Facilities and Services Element
                                   Higher Education and Workforce Development. Support
                                   and encourage partnerships between local employers and post-
                                                                                                       5
                                   secondary education providers (Woodland Community College and
                                   other institutions of higher learning) to promote the development
                                   of workforce development facilities and programs, and improve the
                                   match between workers’ skills and employers’ workforce needs in
                                   Woodland.
                                   See also Policies in the Economic Development Element.
               Policy 5.E.8	       Education and Economic Development. Promote Woodland
                                   Community College and the Woodland Joint Unified School District
                                   in the city’s marketing and economic development efforts in order
                                   to foster a positive image of Woodland and communicate its
                                   desirability as a place to live and do business.
                                   See also Policies in the Economic Development Element.
               Policy 5.E.9	       High Quality Educational Opportunities. Partner with public,
                                   private, and higher education providers in Woodland to enrich
                                   educational opportunities and ensure adequate access for residents
                                   of all ages.
               Policy 5.E.10	      Other Educational Programs. Support the development
                                   of vocational and trade schools and alternative and continuing
                                   education programs, such as Woodland Adult Education and Regional
                                   Occupation Programs (ROP), in appropriate locations to provide a
                                   diversity of local, high quality educational opportunities.
Public Utilities and Services
Goal 5.F	      Public Utilities and Services. Ensure the timely development of public facilities,
               provision of public services, and the maintenance of specified service levels for these
               facilities.
               Policy 5.F.1	       New Development. Ensure through the development review
                                   process that adequate public facilities and services are available to
                                   serve new development. Require that new development pay its fair
                                   share of the costs of constructing new public utilities; the costs
                                   of providing new public services; and the costs of upgrading of all
                                   existing facilities it uses, based on the demand for these facilities
                                   attributable to the new development. Exceptions may be made
                                   when new development generates significant public benefits (e.g.,
                                   low-income housing, primary-wage-earner employment) and when
                                   alternative sources of funding can be obtained to offset foregone
                                   revenues.
                                                                                                       PF 5-59

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 5.F.2	      Fiscal Impact Analysis. Require preparation of a fiscal impact
                                     analysis for all specific plans or significant general plan land use
                                     amendments. The analysis should examine the fiscal impacts
                                     on the City and other service providers that result from large-
                                     scale development. The fiscal analysis should project a positive
                                     fiscal impact from new development or include mechanisms to
                                     fund projected fiscal deficits; exceptions may be made when new
                                     development generates significant public benefits (e.g., low-income
                                     housing, primary-wage-earner employment) and when alternative
                                     sources of funding can be obtained to offset foregone revenues.
                  Policy 5.F.3	      Funding Sources. Investigate available methods to provide funding
                                     for operations and maintenance of public facilities and services,
                                     including consideration of Mello-Roos community facilities districts.
                  Policy 5.F.4	      Master Plans. Require Master Plan proposals to include plans for
                                     development and financing of public facilities and services.
                  Policy 5.F.5	      Major Projects Financing Plan. Annually review the Major
                                     Projects Financing Plan (MPFP) and every five years update the MPFP
                                     to ensure the implementation and adequacy of the MPFP Plan.
    Potable Water
    Goal 5.G	     Safe, Reliable, and Sufficient Potable Water. Maintain a safe, reliable, and sufficient
                  potable water supply and delivery system that meets the needs of the city.
                  Policy 5.G.1	      Potable Water Supply and Cost Recovery. Provide potable
                                     water to the existing Woodland community. Ensure that potable
                                     water capacity (including surface water treatment capacity and
                                     Aquifer Storage and Recovery well capacity) is available to serve
                                     planned urban development within the planning area consistent
                                     with the General Plan. Accommodate increase in water demand
                                     from the existing community with the capital costs and benefits
                                     allocated equitably and fairly between existing users and new users,
                                     as authorized by law. Remain in compliance with existing and new
                                     water quality regulations.
                  Policy 5.G.2	      Water Supply Assessment. Require preparation of a Water
                                     Supply Assessment for significant projects consistent with State law.
                  Policy 5.G.3	      Connection to Water System. Require all potable water users
                                     within the City’s service area to connect to the City’s system, except
                                     those areas where the City has determined a connection to the
                                     City’s potable water system would be infeasible.
                  Policy 5.G.4	      Water Management Plans. Maintain and every five years
                                     update the Urban Water Management Plan and the Groundwater
PF 5-60

                                       Public Facilities and Services Element
               Management Plan. Develop and maintain the Groundwater
               Sustainability Plan in conjunction with the Yolo Sustainable
                                                                               5
               Groundwater Management Plan. Use available and “state of the
               practice” tools, such as computerized flow modeling to determine
               system capacity, as necessary to forecast demand on water
               production and distribution systems by urban development, and to
               determine appropriate facility needs.
Policy 5.G.5	  Recycled Water. Expand the recycled water system as feasible
               and in accordance with a Recycled Water System Master Plan,
               which should provide an evaluation of potential recycled water uses,
               facilities planning, distribution service areas, recommended recycled
               water system, financial modeling, implementation strategies, and the
               feasibility of forming a recycled water utility.
Policy 5.G.6	  Conditions of Approval. Set appropriate conditions of approval
               for each new development proposal to ensure that the necessary
               potable water production and supply facilities and water resources
               are in place prior to occupancy and that an adequate funding source
               is in place to finance system development and maintenance. 	
Policy 5.G.7	  Maintenance and Repairs. Evaluate existing water production
               and distribution systems on an ongoing basis and plan for, fund,
               and implement necessary repair or enhancement of damaged or
               antiquated facilities, including wells and storage tanks.
Policy 5.G.8	  CIP Update. Evaluate Capital Improvement Programs and update
               them, as appropriate, for the water infrastructure needs to meet the
               demands of both existing and planned development consistent with
               the General Plan.
Policy 5.G.9	  Regional Partnerships. Partner with Yolo County, WDCWA, the
               City of Davis, and other public agencies in countywide watershed
               management efforts and water efficiency and conservation programs
               and projects, such as the Integrated Regional Water Management
               Plan.
Policy 5.G.10	 Adequate Financing for Water Systems Management.
               Adequately finance water systems management while adhering to
               strict accountability, transparency, and ratepayer protections.
                                                                                PF 5-61

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    Wastewater
    Goal 5.H	     Wastewater Collection, Treatment, Disposal, and Reuse. Ensure that adequate
                  wastewater collection, treatment, recycling and disposal facilities are provided in a
                  timely fashion to serve existing and future needs.
                  Policy 5.H.1	       Treatment Capacity and Cost Recovery. Provide wastewater
                                      collection and treatment services to the existing Woodland
                                      community. Ensure that increased wastewater treatment facility
                                      capacity is available to serve planned urban development within
                                      the Planning Area consistent with this General Plan. Accommodate
                                      increase in flows and loadings from the existing community with
                                      the capital costs and benefits allocated equitably and fairly between
                                      existing users and new users, as authorized by law.
                  Policy 5.H.2	       Sanitary Sewer Management Plan. Maintain and periodically
                                      update the Sanitary Sewer Management Plan. Use available and
                                      “state of the practice” tools, such as computerized flow modeling
                                      to determine system capacity, as necessary to forecast demand
                                      by urban development, and to determine appropriate facility and
                                      system needs.
                  Policy 5.H.3	       Consider Capacity in Plan Amendments. Monitor wastewater
                                      treatment plant flows and loadings. Consider the effects on
                                      wastewater treatment capacity and availability of potable water
                                      when evaluating proposed General Plan amendment proposals,
                                      community plans, specific plans, and master plans.
                  Policy 5.H.4	       Maintenance and Repairs. Evaluate existing wastewater
                                      collection systems and treatment facilities and plan for, fund, and
                                      implement necessary repair or enhancement of damaged or
                                      antiquated facilities.
                  Policy 5.H.5	       CIP Update. Evaluate Capital Improvement Programs and update
                                      them, as appropriate, for the wastewater infrastructure and
                                      treatment facility needs to meet the demands of both existing and
                                      planned development.
                  Policy 5.H.6	       Connection to Sewer System. Require all sewage generators
                                      within its service area to connect to the City’s system, except those
                                      areas where the City has determined a connection to the City’s
                                      sewage collection system would be infeasible.
                  Policy 5.H.7	       Collection Systems. Require that collection systems be designed
                                      on a gravity-flow basis except where sewer depths exceed 14 feet,
                                      then an analysis shall be performed to determine whether gravity
                                      sewers or a lift station would be most appropriate.
PF 5-62

            Policy 5.H.8	
                                                       Public Facilities and Services Element
                                Development Proposals. Review development proposals in
                                the vicinity of the wastewater treatment plant site (as delineated
                                                                                                      5
                                by Figure 7-6) to ensure their safety, compatibility, and sufficient
                                mitigation of odor nuisances.
                                See also goals and policies in the Sustainability, Conservation, and Open
                                Space Element.
            Policy 5.H.9	       Reduce Demand. Reduce wastewater system demand through
                                efficient water use by requiring water-conserving design and
                                equipment in new construction; encouraging retrofitting with
                                water-conserving devices; and designing, constructing, and repairing
                                wastewater systems to minimize inflow and infiltration to the extent
                                economically feasible.
            Policy 5.H.10	      Industrial Pretreatment Program. Continue the industrial
                                pretreatment program in accordance with State and federal
                                requirements.
            Policy 5.H.11	      Hazards and Nuisances. Investigate hazards and nuisance
                                potential associated with operations at the City’s wastewater
                                treatment plant, including odor nuisances, and identify and
                                implement any buffering requirements or operational changes at the
                                plant that may be necessary.
            Policy 5.H.12	      Adequate Financing for Wastewater Management.
                                Adequately finance wastewater management while adhering to strict
                                accountability, transparency, and ratepayer protections.
Storm Drainage Facilities
Goal 5.I	   Stormwater Management. Maintain the City’s storm drainage system and promote
            best management practices to protect from flooding, enhance water quality, prevent
            infrastructure deterioration, and comply with State and federal laws.
            Policy 5.I.1	       Storm Drainage System and Cost Recovery. Maintain and
                                improve the storm drainage system for the existing Woodland
                                community. Ensure that increased storm drainage system capacity
                                is available to serve planned urban development within the Planning
                                Area consistent with this General Plan. Accommodate increase in
                                flows and loadings from the existing community with the capital
                                costs and benefits allocated equitably and fairly between existing
                                users and new users, as authorized by law.
            Policy 5.I.2	       Storm Drainage Facilities Master Plan. Update the Storm
                                Drainage Facilities Master Plan as needed to plan for and direct
                                the collection, repurposing, and/or disposal of stormwater and to
                                                                                                       PF 5-63

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   provide site-appropriate solutions that protect surface water quality
                                   in the Planning Area waterways.
                  Policy 5.I.3	    Overland Flow Requirements in New Development. Require
                                   development to provide for the overland flow of stormwater
                                   meeting or exceeding the City’s standard design capacity of the
                                   storm drainage system. Overland flow waters should be conveyed
                                   over public streets where possible and should be at least one foot
                                   below building pad elevations and contain provisions for removal of
                                   silt and other contaminants.
                  Policy 5.I.4	    Low Impact Development. Require new development and
                                   redevelopment projects to incorporate site design and low impact
                                   development runoff requirements, in accordance with the Municipal
                                   Code to reduce runoff rates, filter out pollutants, and facilitate
                                   groundwater infiltration. Such features may include, but are not
                                   limited to:
                                      •	 Canopy trees or shrubs to absorb rainwater;
                                      •	 Grading that lengthens flow paths over permeable surfaces and
                                         increases runoff travel time to reduce the peak hour flow rate
                                         and the number of required drain inlets;
                                      •	 Partially removing curbs and gutters from parking areas where
                                         appropriate to allow stormwater sheet flow into vegetated
                                         areas;
                                      •	 Use of permeable paving in parking lots and other areas
                                         characterized by significant impervious surfaces;
                                      •	 On-site stormwater detention, use of bioswales and
                                         bioretention basins to facilitate infiltration;
                                      •	 Integrated or subsurface water retention facilities to capture
                                         rainwater for use in landscape irrigation and other non-potable
                                         uses; and
                                      •	 Innovative engineering practices that allow for compact,
                                         connected, and walkable urban design.
                                   (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.9-1)
                  Policy 5.I.5	    Prohibiting Grading Activities in Rainy Season. Prohibit
                                   grading activities during the rainy season, unless adequately
                                   mitigated, to avoid sedimentation of storm drainage facilities.
                  Policy 5.I.6	    Adequate Financing for Stormwater Management.
                                   Adequately finance stormwater management while adhering to strict
                                   accountability, transparency, and ratepayer protections.
                  Policy 5.I.7	    Stormwater Detention Facilities. Use stormwater detention
                                   facilities to mitigate drainage impacts and reduce storm drainage
PF 5-64

                                                         Public Facilities and Services Element
                                 system costs. To the extent practical, design stormwater detention
                                 facilities for multiple purposes, including recreational use in dry
                                                                                                    5
                                 conditions and/or stormwater quality improvement.
            Policy 5.I.8	        Reuse of Stormwater. Allow for and encourage the capture,
                                 treatment, and reuse of stormwater of adequate quality to the
                                 maximum extent feasible in accordance with State and federal laws.
Solid Waste
Goal 5.J	   Solid Waste Collection, Transfer, Recycling, and Disposal. Provide adequate solid
            waste services for the collection, transfer, recycling, and disposal of refuse.
            Policy 5.J.1	        Waste Collection. Provide adequate solid waste services, and
                                 promote maximum use of solid waste source reduction, recycling,
                                 composting, and environmentally safe transformation of wastes.
            Policy 5.J.2	        New Development. Require waste collection in all new
                                 development and ensure that all new development complies with
                                 applicable provisions of the City of Woodland Source Reduction
                                 and Recycling Element and the Yolo County Integrated Waste
                                 Management Plan.
            Policy 5.J.3	        New Techniques. Collaborate with affected stakeholders and
                                 partners to identify and support programs and new techniques of
                                 solid waste disposal, such as recycling, composting, waste to energy
                                 technology, and waste separation, to reduce the volume and toxicity
                                 of solid wastes that must be sent to landfill facilities. Encourage
                                 members of the Woodland community to engage in responsible
                                 buying and consumption practices to reduce unnecessary packaging
                                 and recycling.
            Policy 5.J.4	        Compliance with State Law. Pursue programs to maintain
                                 conformance with the Solid Waste Management Act of 1989 or as
                                 otherwise required by law and mandated diversion goals.
            Policy 5.J.5	        Cleanup and Nuisance Abatement. Enhance nuisance
                                 abatement efforts and services that discourage illegal dumping.
            Policy 5.J.6	        Recycling Facilities. Allow and encourage the development of
                                 regional and community-based recycling facilities and secondary
                                 resource businesses in areas designated for Regional Commercial
                                 and Industrial uses on the General Plan Land Use Diagram.
            Policy 5.J.7	        Promote Waste Reduction. Promote solid waste reduction,
                                 recycling, and composting to Woodland residents and business as
                                 an important way to conserve limited natural resources. Encourage
                                 businesses to use recycled products in their manufacturing
                                 processes and consumers to buy recycled products.
                                                                                                     PF 5-65
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    Other Utilities
    Goal 5.K	     Provision of Other Utilities. Promote adequate levels of utility services provided by
                  private companies and ensure that these are constructed to minimize negative effects
                  on surrounding development and neighborhoods.
                  Policy 5.K.1	      Coordinate with Private Utility Companies. Continue to
                                     communicate major development plans with utility companies and
                                     coordinate planning of extension of necessary facilities.
                  Policy 5.K.2	      Coordinate with Government Agencies. Work with
                                     Yolo County and other agencies to coordinate planning for
                                     telecommunication and other utilities infrastructure on a regional
                                     basis.
                  Policy 5.K.3	      Undergrounding of Utilities. Require undergrounding of utility
                                     lines in new development and as areas are redeveloped.
                  Policy 5.K.4	      Safety of Underground Transmission Lines. Work with PG&E
                                     to ensure the safety of underground transmission lines.
                  Policy 5.K.5	      Managing Underground Infrastructure. Develop and manage
                                     underground infrastructure, including broadband infrastructure,
                                     as “basic infrastructure” that adheres to the City’s standards, is
                                     available for public use, and is managed as an asset in line with other
                                     public property.
                  Policy 5.K.6	      Promote Energy Conservation. Promote energy-saving
                                     practices and encourage energy efficiency through good urban
                                     design and site-planning practices, as well as through building design,
                                     maintenance, and retrofit.
                  Policy 5.K.7	      Renewable Energy. Promote the installation of public and private
                                     renewable energy production systems including photovoltaics, wind
                                     turbines, geothermal systems, and other appropriate technologies.
                  Policy 5.K.8	      Improved and Emerging Technologies. Facilitate the upgrading
                                     of utility services and support development of the infrastructure
                                     necessary for all residents to use and benefit from improved and
                                     emerging technologies in Woodland, including communication
                                     technologies.
                  Policy 5.K.9	      Strategic Planning for Communications Infrastructure.
                                     Establish a plan for the improvement and expansion of the
                                     communications infrastructure network. The plan should address
                                     infrastructure needs and development opportunities, provide cost-
                                     effective and efficient solutions, and explore the possibility of using
                                     City property and rights-of-way for communication infrastructure
                                     sites.
PF 5-66

          Policy 5.K.10	
                                                   Public Facilities and Services Element
                             Diversification of Utility Media. Ensure that public utility
                             infrastructure for telecommunications and other utilities allows
                                                                                               5
                             for and incorporates a diversification of utility service providers, as
                             appropriate.
          Policy 5.K.11	     Government Access Television. Continue to actively use a
                             Government Access Television channel as a communications tool in
                             providing governmental information to the viewing public.
Goal 5.L	 Broadband Distribution and Quality of Service. Facilitate the distribution of the
          best broadband service possible, to as many users and key transportation corridors
          within the community as possible, in a timely and cost effective manner that
          minimizes impacts to visual and natural resources.
          Policy 5.L.1	      High Quality Broadband Service. Work with providers to
                             deliver the best service possible to Woodland residents, businesses,
                             and visitors.
          Policy 5.L.2	      Increase Access to Broadband. Deploy broadband to as many
                             areas in the community and key transportation corridors as possible,
                             and pursue additional providers to increase competition and
                             improve quality of service.
          Policy 5.L.3	      Free WiFi in Public Spaces. Explore the feasibility of providing
                             free WiFi in public spaces including City buildings, parks, and
                             community centers.
          Policy 5.L.4	      Minimize Impacts. Strive to minimize or mitigate the impact of
                             communications projects and infrastructure on the environment and
                             scenic resources.
          Policy 5.L.5	      Master Plan for the City’s Fiber Network. In conjunction with
                             the Yolo Community Broadband Network, develop a Master Plan for
                             the City’s broadband fiber network to build out local infrastructure
                             in targeted areas, reduce costs, create new opportunities for
                             government collaboration, and provide a new source of fiber to local
                             service providers.
                                                                                                PF 5-67

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
PF 5-68
6 Healthy Community
  Element
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                             6.1	 Introduction and
                                                            Purpose
                                             The City of Woodland is embracing the opportunity to bring
                                             health-related perspectives to long-range planning with the Healthy
                                             Community Element.This Element is centered on the concept that
                                             the health of the community is a direct reflection of the health of
                                             the residents living within the community. The Element reviews
                                             current health conditions in Woodland and sets forth goals and
                                             policies to promote the individual and collective health of those
                                             living in Woodland, particularly pertaining to access to medical and
                                             health services and facilities, active lifestyles, healthy food, commu-
                                             nity services, and arts and culture.
    The Woodland Public Library offers a story time for children.
HC 6-2
The Healthy Community Element is
                                                                   Healthy Community Element
                                                                                             6
organized as follows:
•	 Section 6.1: Introduction and Purpose. Introduces the
    topics covered in this Element and outlines the Element’s rela-
    tionship to State law and the Visioning Statement and Guiding
    Principles. It also defines what healthy community means for
    Woodland.
•	 Section 6.2: Physical Health and Environmental Jus-
    tice. Discusses physical health conditions in Woodland; access
    to medical and health facilities and services; and environmental
    justice as it relates to health.
•	 Section 6.3: Active Lifestyles. Presents information related
    to current physical activity levels in Woodland and promotes
    opportunities and improvements related to an active lifestyle
    for the Woodland community.
•	 Section 6.4: Healthy Food. Discusses current nutrition data
    in the Woodland community. Promotes access to healthy foods
    and urban agriculture in Woodland.
•	 Section 6.5: Community Facilities and Services. Pres-
    ents community facilities and services in Woodland, including
    services for youth and seniors.
•	 Section 6.6: Arts and Culture. Promotes public art in the
    built environment and encourages the provision of arts and
    cultural facilities to serve the Woodland community.
•	 Section 6.7 Goals and Policies.
Relationship to State Law
While the inclusion of health is not required as a mandated ele-
ment of a general plan, California Government Code Section 65303
indicates that a general plan may include additional elements that
a community considers important to the physical development of
the city. The California State Office of Planning and Research also
encourages cities to plan for healthy communities in its General
Plan Guidelines.
Relationship to Visioning Statement and Guiding
Principles
The Healthy Community Element reflects several values expressed
in the community’s Visioning Statement and Guiding Principles, in-
                                                                                             HC 6-3

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                           cluding providing “a highly desirable community to live, learn, work
                                           and recreate” and “a healthy community.” In addition, the Element
                                           directly supports the following Guiding Principles:
                                              •	 Health and Recreation: Provide all residents with opportu-
                                                 nities to live an active, healthy, and green lifestyle.
                                              •	 Mobility Options: Coordinate land use and transportation
                                                 planning to provide a range of attractive and viable transporta-
                                                 tion options, such as bicycle, pedestrian, and transit.
                                              •	 Public Services: Provide realistic, supportable and appro-
    The Healthy Community Element                priate levels of public service that are sustainable and fiscally
    includes goals and policies to support
                                                 sound.
    arts and culture in Woodland.
                                              •	 Quality Education: Foster quality educational and enrich-
                                                 ment opportunities.
                                              •	 Environmental Stewardship: Foster a sustainable commu-
                                                 nity for the next generation and protect and improve the qual-
                                                 ity of the natural environment.
                                           Defining Healthy Community
                                           There is a growing awareness of the important relationship be-
                                           tween health and the built environment. Research correlates
                                           community design and environmental characteristics with physi-
                                           cal activity levels, diet, pollution-related illnesses, unintentional in-
                                           jury rates, violent crime, and other health conditions. Coopera-
                                           tion between city planning and health is fundamentally concerned
                                           with addressing the full range of factors affecting health—not only
                                           those that are related to the actions of individuals, such as health
                                           behaviors and lifestyle choices, but also factors such as income,
                                           education, employment and working conditions; access to health
                                           services; nutrition; and the quality of physical environments. The
                                           City of Woodland is aware of the relationship between city plan-
                                           ning and health and intends to use this long-range plan to have a
                                           positive impact on the health of the community.
                                           The World Health Organization defines good health as follows:
                                           “Good health is a state of complete physical, social and mental
    Good health is a state of complete
    physical, social, and mental well-be-  well-being, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.
    ing, according to the World Health     Health is a resource for everyday life, not the object of living, and
    Organization.                          is a positive concept emphasizing social and personal resources as
                                           well as physical capabilities.”
HC 6-4

Building on this definition of health, there are three distinct com-
ponents of a healthy community that are addressed in the General
                                                                               Healthy Community Element
                                                                                                                   6
Plan’s goals, policies, and implementation programs: healthy bodies,
healthy minds, and healthy earth.
  •	 Healthy Bodies. Goals, policies, and implementation pro-
     grams that promote healthy bodies are focused on physical                        These topics are discussed in
     wellbeing. Access to medical and health services and facilities                  more detail in the Sustainability,
     enables care of physical health and is an important aspect of                    Conservation, and Open Space
     healthy bodies that is supported in this Element of the General                  Element and the Public Facilities
     Plan. Opportunities for residents to lead active and healthy                     and Services Element.
     lifestyles are another aspect of healthy bodies that is discussed
     in this Element, through promotion of walking, biking, exercise
     programs and classes, healthy diets, nutrition programs, and
     recreational facilities and programs.
  •	 Healthy Minds. Goals, policies, and implementation pro-
     grams that encourage healthy minds are focused on social and
     mental wellbeing. Healthy minds are nurtured by opportunities
     for life-long learning, and the General Plan supports quality
     educational opportunities for residents of all ages in the Pub-
     lic Facilities and Services Element. A strong, supportive social
     network and sense of community contribute to healthy minds
     and are fostered in this Element. An appreciation of heritage,
     culture, and the arts and opportunities for enhanced creativity
     and expression also play important roles in cultivating healthy
     minds and are supported by this Element.
  •	 Healthy Earth. Goals, policies, and implementation programs
     that promote healthy earth are focused on sustainability and
     the health of the environment. Protection and conservation of
     natural resources, including biological and ecological resourc-
     es, is a key component of a healthy earth. Similarly, a healthy
     earth depends on improving air quality, reducing greenhouse
     gas emissions, protecting water quality, using water resources
     efficiently, and increasing energy efficiency and renewable en-
     ergy usage.
Providing improved access to medical services, community facilities, healthy food, and arts and culture will enhance
healthy lifestyles in Woodland.
                                                                                                                      HC 6-5

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   6.2	 Physical Health
                                                 and Environmental
                                                 Justice
                                   Physical Health
                                   Physical health includes the medical dimension of health and is
                                   an integral component of healthy bodies. The medical dimension
                                   of health encompasses a range of medical and health services, in-
                                   cluding primary care, specialty care, home health care, emergency
                                   services, mental health services, long-term care, dental care, and
                                   alternative care. Access to health care services is an important
                                   determinant of overall community health, since medical monitor-
                                   ing, advice, and care is often essential to preventing disease and
                                   improving health outcomes.
                                   Physical access to medical services is also intertwined with trans-
                                   portation planning, because community members rely on the net-
                                   work of roadways, public transportation services, and walking and
                                   biking facilities to get to and from health-related facilities.As shown
                                   in Figure 6-1, the location of hospitals, medical clinics, and doctors’
                                   and dentists’ offices in Woodland are such that parts of the city are
                                   underserved for residents. This includes the southern and eastern
                                   residential neighborhoods in the city, as many of the medical and
                                   health facilities are located in the northwest area of the city.
                                   Access to health care services is one of many topics researched
                                   by the Yolo County Health and Human Services Department. It
                                   publishes a wealth of health data, including access to services and
                                   health outcomes, in its Community Health Assessment Regional
                                   Reports. According to the 2014 Community Health Assessment
                                   Report,Yolo County has a rate of 121 licensed primary care physi-
                                   cians per 100,000 people, far greater than the statewide rate of 84
                                   physicians per 100,000 people. However, Yolo County has only 47
                                   dentists per 100,000 people, substantially lower than the statewide
                                   rate of 72 dentists per 100,000 people. With regard to healthcare
                                   coverage, nearly 20 percent of Yolo County adults were without
                                   health insurance in 2011, compared to a statewide rate of 25 per-
HC 6-6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            	                                                                         Healthy Community Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 6-1:	Medical and Health Facilities and Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 6-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Medical and Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Facilities and Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                           N EAST ST
                                                      SP-3
                    Yolo County
                    Health and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Hospital
                   Human Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Convalescent Hospital/Nursing
                                                                                                                                         I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Home/Skilled Nursing Facility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Medical Facilities/Clinics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                St. John's                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dental Clinic
                            Gary                                                                                               Retirement
                         Traynham                                                                                                Village
                            Park
                    W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Health Departments & Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                          Palm Gardens                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Retirement Homes/Assisted
                                                     Wayne                                                                                                                Assisted Living
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          COUNTY RD 102
                                                                            Schneider
                                                                                                                                                         COLLEGE ST
                                                     Cline
                                                      Park                     Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Living Facility
                                                                           W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                          Community
                                                                                                                                   Stollwood                                                Beamer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                                           EAST ST
                                                                                                            Swim                                                                              Park
                                                                                                            Center                Convalescent
                                                                                                                                    Hospital                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Principal Arterials
                                            Hansen                                                                                                                      BEAMER ST                                                                                                               E BEAMER ST
                                             Clinic                                                                           Clark    Pedroia
                                                                                                                                             Alderson                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Minor Arterials
                               ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                        CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                              Field     Fields
                                            Harris Park                                                                                    Convalescent
                                                                                                                                             Hospital
                                                                          Northern                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Collectors
                                                                            Valley                                                                                                                                                 LEMEN AVE
                                                                           Indian                                                                                                            NORTH ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Local Roads
                                                                           Health                       COURT ST
                   W MAIN ST                                                                                                 MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                          Heritage
                                                                                                                                                                           Plaza
                                                                                                                                                                                               Freeman
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Park                                                                                                               E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ramps
                                                                                                                                       LINCOLN AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Railroads
                                                                                                                                                                                 THIRD ST
                                 Planned                                                                                 Woodland
                               Parentwood                                                                                Healthcare City                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Existing Residential Areas
                                                                              Cottonwood                                                                                                                                                                           Sutter                                                                                                                                          I -5
                                                                                                                         Outpatient Park
                                                                              Healthcare                                                                                                                                                                      Occupational                                                                                                                                                                         Existing and Planned Parks,
                                                          COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                          Physical                                                          CROSS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dignity
  COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                Center                                    Therapy                                                                                                                                  Health                                                           FA
                                                                                                                                                                        Woodland                                                                                                                                                                                                           Health                                                  Open Space, & Recreational
                                                                                                                   WEST ST
                                                                                                        Woodland                                                                                                                                             Storz
                                             John                                                       Cemetery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Campbell
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pond                                                                         NH
                                             Ferns                                                                                                                      Nursing &                                                     Park                                                                              Klenhard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                              Park
                                                                                                                                                                       Rehabilitation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AM                                                                                                Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EG
                                                                                                                                                      COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E GUM AVE                                                                                                            AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                          EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                              Everman
                                                                           Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                Park
                                                                           Memorial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                New Specific Plan Boundary
                                                                           Hospital                                                              Southland
                                                                                                                                                    Park                                                                                                                                                              BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pioneer Park
                          Streng
                           Park
                           Pond                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Spring Lake Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                      GIBSON RD                                                                                                                                                                      E GIBSON RD
                                                 Woodland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Boundary
                                                 Healthcare
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PIONEER AVE
                   Douglass
                     Park
                                                                          Woodside
                                                                            Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Urban Limit Line
                   Detention
                    Basin                   EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Prudler
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Tredway             Mini
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Park              Park
                                                                                                                                                                      Crawford
                                                                                                                                                                        Park                                                                               Spring Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FARMERS CENTRAL RD
The Californian Assisted                                                                                                                                                                                               Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Community
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sports Park
 Living and Dementia                                                                                                                                                                                                     Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MIEKLE AVE
          Care                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jack
                                                                                                         SP-1                                                                                                                                                                              Spring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Slaven
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Central
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SP-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rick
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Gonzales
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          113                                                        MARSTON DR                                  Sr Park Heritage                         Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Park                             Regional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0           0.375         0.75                        1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SPRING LAKE                                   Data Source: Healthcare Atlas, Office of Statewide Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Planning and Development (OSHPD), 2016; City of Woodland,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SPECIFIC PLAN                                  California, 2013;Yolo County, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HC 6-7
       City of Woodland General Plan 2035
         This page intentionally left blank.
HC 6-8
cent1. About 8 percent of Yolo County children were uninsured in
2011, slightly lower than the statewide rate of 9 percent. A higher
                                                                            Healthy Community Element
                                                                                                      6
percentage of Yolo County residents also used migrant health cen-
ters as a source of primary care than the statewide average.
Physical health conditions influence a community’s health out-
comes, which indicate how healthy a community is. According to
the 2014 Community Health Assessment Report, Yolo County
adults have a slightly higher rate of asthma than the statewide aver-
age, but have lower rates of high blood pressure and heart disease
than the statewide average. Yolo County adults have slightly lower
rates of diabetes than the statewide average; however, the percent-
age of Hispanic/Latino adults who have been diagnosed with dia-
betes more than doubled between 2005 and 2012 in Yolo County,
while it decreased slightly during the same period for non-His-
panic/Latino adults. Despite a lower-than-statewide ratio of dental
care providers in Yolo County, dental care is more common in Yolo
County than across the state; about 19 percent of Yolo County
adults reported receiving no dental care within the last year, com-
pared to the statewide average of 31 percent.The leading causes of
death in Yolo County in 2010 were cancers; diseases of the heart;
chronic lower respiratory diseases; cerebrovascular disease; and
Alzheimer’s disease.
The Health and Human Services Department publishes some
sub-regional health data in its Community Health Assessment Re-
ports. For the purposes of these reports, the county is divided
into seven sub-regions that each have their own report, and the
Central Region primarily includes Woodland and some of the area
immediately surrounding the city. The Community Health Assess-
ment Report for Central County included survey results from a
communitywide survey about health, and it asked respondents
about the top health issues in their communities. Central County
respondents identified the top five health issues that most affect
their community as obesity, mental health issues, health problems
associated with aging, diabetes, and cancer.The top three individual
behaviors most responsible for health issues in the community, as
identified by the respondents, included poor nutrition and eating
habits, alcohol abuse, and lack of exercise. Respondents identified
social and economic circumstances most responsible for health
issues in the community as no health insurance, unemployment,
and poverty. Environmental issues most responsible for health is-
sues, as identified by respondents, included air pollution, cigarette
smoke, lack of access to healthy foods, and pesticide use.
1	 This data was gathered before implementation of the Affordable Care Act.
                                                                                                      HC 6-9

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                        Promoting healthy bodies and physical health is integral to the
                                        General Plan. While many of the physical health issues in this sec-
                                        tion are being addressed by the Yolo County Health and Human
                                        Services Department and local health care providers, this Plan puts
                                        in place new policies to help provide better access to medical and
                                        health facilities. It encourages individuals to participate in health
                                        programs and engage in preventive health care practices as part of
                                        daily life, including physical exercise and eating fresh food, in order
    Woodland Memorial Hospital          to reduce the prevalence and impact of preventable disease and
    (above) Woodland Healthcare Medi-   support healthy bodies in Woodland.
    cal Offices (below)
                                        Environmental Justice
                                        Environmental justice refers to the fair treatment of all people
                                        – regardless of race, income, and religion – when implementing
                                        policies that affect housing and the environment. The problems of
                                        environmental justice that the General Plan can address include
                                        procedural inequities and geographic inequities. Procedural in-
                                        equities occur when the planning process is not conducted in a
                                        uniform way. An example might include holding meetings at times
                                        and places that minimize the ability of low-income residents to
    Providing improved access to medi-  participate. The General Plan Update process was conducted to
    cal services, community facilities,
                                        ensure that all members of the Woodland community had equal
    healthy food and arts and culture
    will enhance healthy lifestyles in  opportunity to meaningfully participate in the planning process and
    Woodland.                           decision-making, such as through the mail-in communitywide sur-
                                        vey, a frequently updated website, community meetings and work-
                                        shops held in the evenings and on weekends, and Spanish language
    This Plan puts in place new         outreach materials and events.
    policies to help provide better     The geographic inequity component of environmental justice is
    access to medical and health        directly connected to healthy bodies. Geographic inequity occurs
    facilities.                         when public services, transit services, and parks are not equitably
                                        distributed in a city, resulting in unequal sharing of benefits of pub-
                                        lic services and facilities, including associated health benefits. It also
                                        occurs when undesirable or unhealthy land uses are concentrated
    Environmental justice refers        in one part of the city, creating a disproportionate burden for resi-
    to the fair treatment of all        dents in certain areas; this can create effects on physical health,
    people – regardless of race,        such as asthma related to poorer air quality. The City of Woodland
    income, and religion –              has strived to address potential geographic inequities in Woodland
    when implementing policies          through the General Plan Update process to ensure the fair treat-
                                        ment of all people in the community. This includes considering po-
    that affect housing and the         tential health impacts associated with land use decisions, including
    environment.
HC 6-10

                                                                     Healthy Community Element
siting of “undesirable” land uses, such as heavy industrial activities;
ensuring equity in the provision and quality of public facilities and
                                                                                               6
services, including parks, transportation facilities, and safety ser-
vices; and striving to reduce adverse health effects associated with
hazardous materials and heavy industrial activities. Ensuring that all
members of the community equally share in both the benefits and
the burdens associated with the city’s amenities, services, facilities,
and land use decisions is a priority for the City of Woodland.
                                                                                               HC 6-11

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                             6.3	 Active Lifestyles
                                             A top priority for the Woodland community is increased healthy
                                             activity and mobility for all ages. An active lifestyle that incorpo-
                                             rates exercise is critical to achieving positive health outcomes and
                                             is directly correlated with the healthy bodies aspect of a healthy
                                             community. Lack of physical activity is a primary risk factor in five
                                             of the top ten causes of death in California: heart disease, cancer,
                                             stroke, diabetes, and Alzheimer’s disease. It is also a primary risk
                                             factor for obesity, which itself contributes to the same prevalent
                                             causes of death. Studies have shown that those who increase their
                                             physical activity during leisure time have lower mortality rates than
                                             those who are sedentary.
                                             The design of neighborhoods and transportation systems often
                                             influences the extent to which physical activity fits into daily life.
                                             The biggest barriers to physical activity in the built environment
                                             are long distances or isolation of uses, lack of facilities, and safety
                                             concerns. Walk Score is an organization that ranks communities
                                             on a scale of 0 to 100 for their “walkability,” with lower scores for
                                             car-dependent places and higher scores for communities where
                                             daily errands do not require a car. In 2016, Woodland scored a
                                             44 on Walk Score, which means it is generally a car-dependent
                                             city; while the city has some public transportation, most errands
                                             require a trip by car. This is exemplified by the lack of pedestrian
                                             and bicycle accessibility to Woodland’s schools, as shown in Figure
                                             6-2. East of East Street, many residential areas do not fall within the
                                             five and ten minute walksheds for schools; in addition, some areas
                                             on the western side of the city, particularly on the western edge
    Active lifestyles are crucial to achiev-
    ing positive health outcomes and are
                                             of the city, also do not fall within schools’ walksheds. Schools often
    strongly supported by the General        lack direct connections to bike routes, which discourages families
    Plan.                                    from using bikes as their means of transportation to school. Lack
                                             of school accessibility by active transportation modes presents a
                                             serious barrier for students to live an active lifestyle and go to and
                                             from school without a trip in a car.
                                             Residents of all ages would benefit from increased physical activity.
    On a scale of 0 to 100 for               According to the Yolo County Health Department’s 2014 Com-
    the community’s walkability,             munity Health Assessment Report for the Central Region of the
    Woodland scored 44, which                county, the number of adults who reported no physical activity or
    means it is generally a car-             exercise within the past month was consistently lower than the
    dependent city.                          statewide average between 2008 and 2010. During this period, the
                                             number of adults reporting no physical activity increased by over
HC 6-12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               	                                                  Healthy Community Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 6-2:	School Accessibility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 6-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             School Accessibility
                                                                                                                                                                                               N EAST ST
                                                    SP-3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Educational Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Elementary, Middle or High School
                                                                                                                                 I-5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Special School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Community College
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Proposed Elementary School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Schools Walkshed*
                  W KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5 Minute Walking Distance
                                                 Wayne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (1/4 Mile)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               COUNTY RD 102
                                                 Cline
                                                                                                                                                COLLEGE ST
                                                                          Schneider
                                                  Park                       Park
                                                                        W WOODLAND AVE                                  Freeman
                                                                                                                       Elementary                                              Beamer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10 Minute Walking Distance
                                                                                                                                                                                               EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                 Park
                                                                                        Woodland                          School                             Beamer Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (1/2 Mile)
                  Maxwell                                                               High School                                                           Elementary
                 Elementary                                                                                                      BEAMER ST                       School                                                                                                                              E BEAMER ST                                                                                                                        Existing Bike Lanes/Bike Paths
                    School  Greengate                                                                                  Clark
                                                                                      CALIFORNIA ST
                              School                                                                                   Field
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Highways
                                         Harris Park
                            ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                   NORTH ST
                                                                                                                                                           COURT ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                 Heritage            Freeman
                                         W MAIN ST                                                                                                                Plaza                Park                                           E MAIN ST                                                                           E MAIN ST                                                                                                     Collectors
                                                                                                                                LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                        Lee                             Dingle                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Local Roads
                                                                                                                                                                        THIRD ST
                                                                                                       Middle                      Elementary
                                                                                                       School                      City School                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I -5                     Ramps
                                                                                                                                   Park                                                                                                                                                                                  Tafoya
                                                                                                                                                                                   CROSS ST                                                                                                                           Elementary
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R
                                                   Whitehead                                          Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Storz                                                  School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FA                                                                                           Railroads
                                         John      Elementary                                         Cemetery                                                                                                             Campbell                               Pond
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Klenhard            NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VE
                                                                                                                                              COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Park
                                         Ferns
                                          Park        School                                                                                                 Woodland                                                                             Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 U      MA              AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Existing Neighborhoods/
                                                                                                                                                               Adult                                                                                                                                                           EG                            E
                                                       COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E GUM AVE                     Prairie                                                                                              AV
                                                                                                                                                             Education                                                                            Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Residential Areas
                                                                                                             WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Buchignani Field
                                                                                                                                                                                             EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                   Everman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                     Park
                                                                                                                                                   Douglass                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Existing and Planned Parks,
                                                                                                                                          Southland Middle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pioneer Park
                                                                                                                                             Park   School                                                                                                                                                                 BRANIGAN AVE                                                                                                 Open Space, & Recreational
                                                                                                                               GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                   Gibson                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Boundary
                                                                                                                                 Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PIONEER AVE
                                                                       Woodside                                                     School                                                                                                                                                                                 Pioneer
                 Douglass
                                         EL DORADO DR
                                                                         Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               High                                                                                                        New Specific Plan Boundary
                  Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      School
                                              Zamora                                                                                                                                    Tredway                                                                                                                                         Woodland                                                                                        Spring Lake Specific Plan Boundary
                                            Elementary                                                                                                                                    Park                                                                                                                                          Community
                                               School                                                                                                        Crawford                                                                                                                                                                     College
                                                                                                                                                               Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Spring Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Park                                                                                                                                                                  Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Woodland       Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Community       Sports
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Center         Park                                                                                                                                                                                             Note: Walksheds are calculated for Public
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jack
                                                                                                       SP-1                                                                                                                                                                                   Spring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Slaven
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Park                                                               Schools, Special Schools and Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lake                                                                                                                          Community College.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Central
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SP-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rick
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gonzales
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  113                                                                      MARSTON DR                                    Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Proposed                            Regional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Elementary                             Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0            0.375           0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SPRING LAKE                  Data Source: ESRI Data & Maps, 2015; City of Woodland,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             California, 2013;Yolo County, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SPECIFIC PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HC 6-13
        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
          This page intentionally left blank.
HC 6-14
five percent in central Yolo County, while the statewide average
showed a decrease by three percent.
                                                                                                             Healthy Community Element
                                                                                                                                                         6
The California Department of Education monitors physical fitness
of students using a fitness test that measures a student’s fitness                                                   In 2014-15, 30-36% of
level as at Health Risk, Needs Improvement, or in the Healthy                                                        Woodland’s 5th, 7th, and 9th
Fitness Zone. Table 6-1 shows the 2014-15 results of the State’s                                                     graders were found to need
physical fitness test for students in grades 5, 7, and 9 for Wood-                                                   improvement in
land Joint Unified School District. In general, a substantial portion                                                aerobic capacity.
of Woodland students fall in the Needs Improvement and Health
Risk ranges, especially for aerobic capacity, which assesses the ca-
pacity of the cardiorespiratory system by measuring endurance.
    Table 6-1:	             2014-15 Physical Fitness Test - Overall Summary Results for
                            Students in Woodland Joint Unified School District
                                   Percentage of 5th Grade                               Percentage of 7th Grade                             Percentage of 9th Grade
                                               Students                                             Students                                         Students
                                                                      Needs                                               Needs                                  Needs
                                                   Needs Improve-                                       Needs Improve-                                 Needs Improve-
  Physical Fitness
                                    HFZ1       Improve-                 ment               HFZ Improve-                    ment                HFZ Improve-       ment
  Area
                                                     ment - Health                                         ment - Health                                ment - Health
                                                                          Risk                                               Risk                                   Risk
   Aerobic                          58%              35%                   7%             61%              30%                9%               51%       36%       14%
   Capacity
   Body                             57%              19%                 24%              58%              17%             25%                57%       20%        23%
   Composition
   Abdominal                        79%              21%               N/A 2              92%               8%             N/A                85%        15%      N/A
   Strength
    Trunk                           95%                5%               N/A               97%                3%            N/A                96%         4%      N/A
    Extension
    Strength
    Upper Body                       61%             39%                N/A               69%              31%             N/A                73%        27%      N/A
    Strength
    Flexibility                     79%              21%                N/A               81%              19%             N/A                82%        18%      N/A
Notes:
1. HFZ is an acronym for Healthy Fitness Zone, a registered trademark of The Cooper Institute.
2. N/A = Not applicable.
3. The PFT is based on the FITNESSGRAM/ACTIVITYGRAM software, owned by the Cooper Institute, Dallas, TX, and published by Human Kinetics, Champaign,
      IL. The PFT is created and copyrighted by the California Department of Education (CDE) under a license agreement with Human Kinetics. The FITNESS-
      GRAM is a registered trademark of The Cooper Institute.
4. The PFT performance standards are available on the CDE FITNESSGRAM: Healthy Fitness Zone Charts Web page. Information about the FITNESSGRAM is
      available on the Human Kinetics Web site (Outside Source).
Source: California Department of Education, 2014-15 California Physical Fitness Report, Overall Summary of Results, Woodland Joint Unified District.
                                                                                                                                                         HC 6-15

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                      To increase opportunities for active lifestyles in Woodland and
                                                      support the healthy bodies aspect of healthy communities, the
                                                      General Plan strives to plan for and implement pedestrian, bicycle,
                                                      and transit improvements that decrease the need for car travel,
                                                      particularly for day-to-day activities. By exchanging some of those
                                                      vehicle trips for non-motorized, active transportation trips, a com-
                                                      munity can realize health benefits and bring healthy physical ac-
                                                      tivity into daily routines. In addition to providing health benefits,
                                                      improving access to pedestrian, bicycle, and transit facilities also
                                                      serves to ensure transportation equity for all Woodland residents
                                                      by providing realistic mobility choices to those who cannot afford
                                                      to rely on cars for all of their trips.
                                                      Walking delivers a myriad of physical and social benefits and is
                                                      strongly supported by the General Plan. Being able to walk to a
       Design that encourages walking                 job, the store, a park, or simply for recreation provides physical
       and biking is discussed in the                 exercise, eliminates travel expenses, and can provide social cohe-
       Land Use, Community Design,                    sion and sense of place. The City of Woodland also has a long-
       and Historic Preservation Ele-                 standing policy of supporting biking, for many reasons including
       ment. and the Transportation                   exercise and health, and the Transportation and Circulation Ele-
       and Circulation Element.                       ment includes a number of goals and policies to promote biking in
                                                      Woodland. The General Plan also supports creating additional safe
                                                      walking and biking routes to schools for children to encourage ac-
                                                      tive lifestyles in families.
                                                      Promoting access to and use of well-maintained recreation spaces
                                                      is another aspect of healthy and active living that is prioritized
                                                      in the General Plan and supports healthy bodies. Studies suggest
                                                      people who live within walking distance (one-quarter mile, or
                                                      about a five-minute walk) of a park are 25 percent more likely to
                                                      meet their minimum recommended weekly amount of exercise.2
                                                      The General Plan recognizes that public parks serve as places for
       Parks and open space is
                                                      physical recreation as well as community anchors that can bolster
       discussed in detail in the Public
                                                      emotional well-being. Making parks and recreation facilities more
       Facilities and Services Element.
                                                      accessible—dispersing them throughout the community and mak-
                                                      ing programs tailored and affordable to the community’s diverse
                                                      residents—will increase the likelihood that all residents will incor-
                                                      porate healthy activity into their daily lives. The General Plan also
                                                      prioritizes enhancing access to parks and recreational facilities and
                                                      ensuring that a wide variety of amenities and features are included
                                                      in the parks and recreational facilities to serve and meet the needs
                                                      of the diverse Woodland community.
    2	 Frank, L., et al., “Linking objectively measured physical activity with objectively measured urban form: findings from SMARTRAQ”,
        American Journal of Preventative Medicine, Vol. 28, Issue 2 (2005).
HC 6-16

6.4	 Healthy Food
                                                                                           Healthy Community Element
                                                                                                                                    6
Directly related to the healthy body aspect of a healthy community,
the City of Woodland supports improving nutrition and increasing
access to healthy and affordable foods throughout the community.
A community’s food environment is related to health outcomes
in several ways. Residents in communities with a more “imbal-
anced food environment” (where fast food and corner stores are
more convenient and prevalent than grocery stores) have more
health problems and higher mortality than residents of areas with
a higher proportion of grocery stores, when other factors are held
constant.3 Drive-thrus at fast food chains often have idling cars
waiting in line, which can contribute to increased air pollution and
greenhouse gas emissions. Additionally, the presence of a super-
market in a neighborhood is linked to higher fruit and vegetable
consumption and a reduced prevalence of obesity.4,5 In low-income
neighborhoods, the addition of a supermarket has been found to
increase residents’ likelihood of meeting nutritional guidelines by
one-third.6
3	Mari Gallagher Research and Consulting Group, Examining the Impact of Food Deserts on Public Health in Chicago (July 2006). Available
   at: www.marigallagher.com/site_media/dynamic/project_files/Chicago_Food_Desert_Report.pdf
4	 Inagami, S., et al., “You are where you shop: grocery store locations, weight, and neighborhoods,” American Journal of Preventative Medi-
   cine,Vol. 31, Issue 1 (2006).
5	 Sturm, R., and A. Datar, “Body mass index in elementary school children, metropolitan area food prices, and food outlet density,” Public
   Health,Vol. 119 (2005).
6	Morland, K., et al., “The contextual effect of the local food environment on residents’ diet”, American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 92,
   Issue 11 (November 2002).
Woodland is situated in one of the most productive agricultural regions in the country.
                                                                                                                                    HC 6-17

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                    Figure 6-3 shows grocery stores, pharmacies, and fast food restau-
                                                    rants in Woodland. There are a number of different types of gro-
                                                    cery stores in Woodland, including discount grocery stores, high
                                                    end grocery stores, and ethnic grocery stores. Many of these facili-
                                                    ties are located along the Main Street corridor, the southern por-
                                                    tion of East Street, or near Interstate 5. The map also shows areas
                                                    that are served by a neighborhood grocery store within a half-mile
                                                    radius.The southwestern and the northwestern neighborhoods, as
                                                    well as the developed area of Spring Lake Specific Plan, are located
                                                    farthest from neighborhood grocery stores in Woodland.
                                                    The Yolo County Health Department’s Community Health Assess-
                                                    ment Report for the Central Region includes countywide data
                                                    about diet and nutrition. Thirty-three percent of Yolo County
                                                    adults ate at least five servings of fruit and vegetables daily, com-
                                                    pared to about 28 percent of adults statewide. However, only one
                                                    third of Yolo County children were estimated to be eating five
                                                    or more servings per day, compared to 53 percent of children
                                                    statewide. Fast food consumption did not change between 2007
                                                    and 2012 for children, though it did decrease for adults during the
                                                    same period. The percentage of Yolo County youth and children
                                                    consuming two or more sugary drinks daily more than doubled
                                                    between 2007 and 2013, with Hispanic/Latinos consuming bever-
                                                    ages at a higher rate than non-Hispanic/Latino youth and children.
                                                    In addition to lack of exercise, poor diet is another major risk fac-
                                                    tor contributing to chronic disease prevalence. In the U.S., obesity
                                                    and diet-related chronic disease rates are escalating. Obesity is
                                                    a particularly important concern for the healthy development of
                                                    children. Childhood obesity has more than tripled in the past 30
                                                    years. Obese youth are more likely to have risk factors for cardio-
                                                    vascular disease, such as high cholesterol or high blood pressure;
                                                    they are also at greater risk for bone and joint problems, sleep ap-
                                                    nea, and social and psychological problems such as stigmatization
    In Woodland in 2014, the                        and poor self-esteem.7,8
    percentage of youth either                      In Woodland in 2014, the percentage of youth either overweight or
    overweight or obese was 43                      obese was 43 percent, higher than both the state and county rates,
    percent, higher than both the                   according to the Yolo County Health Department’s Community
    state and county rates.                         Health Assessment Report for the Central Region of the county.
    7	 Daniels, S.R., et al. “Overweight in children and adolescents: pathophysiology, consequences, prevention, and treatment.” Circulation,
       111;1999–2002, 2005.
    8	 U.S. Surgeon General. Overweight and Obesity: Health Consequences. Rockville: MD (2001).
HC 6-18

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     	                                                         Healthy Community Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 6-3:	Locations of Grocery Stores, Fast Food, and Liquor Stores
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Access to Healthy Food
                               SP-3
                                                                       I-5
              Gary
           Traynham
              Park
                          Wayne
                           Cline        Schneider
                                                                                           Mercado
                           Park            Park                                            Del Valle
                                                                                                 Beamer
                                               Walmart        La Superior                          Park
                                         Neighborhood            Mercado
                                                 Market
                                                       Little  Clark
                                                               Field
                    Harris Park
                                                    Caesars
                                                      Pizza
                                                                  McDonald's                                                                                             Starbucks
Starbucks           Burger            Jimboy's                                                                                                                                                 Main Street
                      King               Taco                                                                                                                             Drive Thru
Drive Thru                                                           Papa Murphy's                                                                                                                   Market
                                                                     Pizza                                                Dutch Bros              McDonald's
                                                                                                                              Coffee                                     Taco Bell
                                       Subway                            Nugget                         Freeman
                                                                                                          Park
    Raley's                     Taco                                    Markets                    Subway
                                 Bell                 KFC                                                                                                                        Walmart Pharmacy                Jack In the Box
                                                                                                     Corner
                            Rite                  Carl's Jr.             Dutch Bros                    Drug                   Grocery California                                     Walmart
                                                                                                                   Jack in Outlet Produce
       Raley's              Aid         Wienerschnitzel       Walgreens Coffee                     Company         the Box                    Market          Subway Food 4                                                                          I -5
     Pharmacy         Pharmacy                                  CVS City                                                                                                  Less                                                     Costco Pharmacy
                                                                         Park                                                                            Carl's Jr./
                                                                Pharmacy                                                                             Green Burrito                                            Target
                                                    Woodland
                                                                                                                    India        Campbell
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Costco
                    John                            Cemetery
                    Ferns                                                                                          Spices            Park                                          Klenhard
                                                                                                                                                                                     Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Target
                     Park                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pharmacy
                                                                                                                        Buchignani Field                                                                                     Panda Express
                                                                                                     Everman
                                                                                                        Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Subway          Starbucks
                                                                              Southland                                                                                                          Pioneer Park                     (Drive Thru)
                                                                                 Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                              In-N-Out
             Streng
              Pond
                                                                                                                                                                                        Bel Air                 Burger
                                   Woodside
    Douglass
                                       Park                                                                            Walmart                                                    Little
      Park                                                                                                         Neighborhood                                                 Caesars
                                                                                                           Tredway        Market                                                 Pizza
                                                                                                             Park
                                                                                        Crawford                                                     Spring Lake
                                                                                          Park                                                          Park
                                                                                                                   Woodland        Woodland
                                                                                                                   Community          Sports
                                                                                                                     Center            Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jack
                                                     SP-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                Slaven
                                                                                                                                                                 Spring                          Park
                                                                                                                                                                  Lake
                                                                                                                                                                 Central
                                                                                                                                                                  Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SP-2
                                                                                                                                                                                               Rick
                                                                                                                                                                                             Gonzales
                                                                                                                                          113                                                 Sr Park                Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Regional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SPRING LAKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SPECIFIC PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HC 6-19
        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
          This page intentionally left blank.
HC 6-20
The Community Health Assessment Report for Central County
reported that between 2005 and 2012, the number of overweight
                                                                     Healthy Community Element
                                                                                                        6
Yolo County adults increased, though obesity rates declined dur-
ing the same period. As of 2012, 35 percent of Yolo County adults
were overweight, the same rate as the statewide rate, and 18 per-
cent were obese, lower than the statewide rate of 25 percent.
The General Plan prioritizes increasing access to healthy, locally
grown foods and encouraging healthy bodies by supporting provi-
sion of grocery stores to serve all neighborhoods. In contrast to
fast food establishments, the General Plan also encourages din-
ing establishments and “slow food,” which is focused on regional,
traditional, and sustainable cuisine. Programs to educate residents
about nutrition and healthy food are strongly encouraged by the
General Plan as well. The General Plan also supports community
interest in urban agriculture, which is the practice of cultivating,
processing, and distributing food in or around a city or town for
local consumption.
Urban agriculture includes farmers’ markets, farm stands, com-
munity gardens, on-site garden produce market stands, and urban
farms. Direct access to fresh fruits and vegetables through urban
agriculture can improve food security and food safety. Another
facet of urban agriculture is the community garden, which is a piece
of land gardened by a group of people. Community gardens can uti-
lize either individual or shared plots on private or public land; they
provide fresh produce and plants for the cultivators’ personal use,
satisfying and community-building labor, neighborhood improve-
                                                                          Increased access to supermarkets
ment, sense of community, and connection to the environment.
                                                                          and farmers markets will create a
                                                                          healthier food system for Woodland
The land may produce fruit, vegetables, and/or ornamentals. They          residents.
typically occur on a small-scale in urban and suburban areas and
may be found in neighborhoods and schools, connected to institu-
tions such as hospitals and churches, and on residential housing
grounds. Urban agriculture, and community gardens in particular,
can increase inexpensive access to fresh, healthy produce – which
can serve as part of the solution to food deserts and other public
health issues related to diet, including obesity.
                                                                                                        HC 6-21

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                             6.5	 Community
                                                             Facilities and
                                                             Services
                                             Integral to the healthy minds aspect of healthy community, and
                                             also of great importance to Woodland residents, is access to the
                                             basic community facilities and services that support families and
                                             quality of life. Community services in Woodland serve residents of
                                             all ages, including youth and seniors. In the Central County Com-
                                             munity Health Assessment Report, respondents to a community-
                                             wide health survey identified the City’s community services and
                                             programs as an important strength of Woodland. Respondents also
                                             took pride in community involvement, the community’s progres-
                                             sive mindset, volunteerism, cultural diversity and tolerance, local
                                             agriculture, and heritage. Each of these sources of pride in the
                                             Woodland community also contribute to healthy minds.
                                             Community facilities are the network of public and private insti-
      High quality education is also         tutions that support the civic and social needs of the population.
      integral to healthy minds and is       They offer a variety of recreational, artistic, and educational pro-
      discussed in the Public Facilities     grams and special events. Community facilities are shown on Fig-
      and Services Element.                  ure 6-4 and include:
                                                •	 Community and Senior Center. Woodland’s Community
                                                   and Senior Center is located at 2001 East Street and is de-
                                                   signed to meet the needs of the population for civic meetings,
                                                   recreational activities, social gatherings, and cultural events.The
                                                   facility also hosts special programming and events for seniors.
    The civic buildings and Senior Center in Woodland house educational, recreation, and civic programs for community
    meetings and events.
HC 6-22

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      	                                                  Healthy Community Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 6-4:	Community Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 6-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Community Facilities
                                                                                                                                                               N EAST ST
                                           SP-3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Library
 Yolo County
  Health and
Human Services                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hospital
                                                                                                         I-5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Museums
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Community Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                               Municipal
                                                                                                                                                                                                Services                                                                                                                                                                       City Hall
                     Gary                                                                                                                                                                        Center
                  Traynham
                     Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Yolo County Courthouse
                  W KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E KENTUCKY AVE
                                         Wayne
                                         Cline                     Schneider
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Yolo County Admin
                                          Park                        Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                      COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Health Departments & Services
                                                                                                                                                               EAST ST
                                                                                                                                            Beamer
                                                                W WOODLAND AVE                                                                Park
                                                                      Community                                               Woodland
                                                                     Swim Center                                               Public Beamer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Municipal Services Center
                                                                                                                               Library Circle
                                                                                                       BEAMER ST                                                                                                                                       E BEAMER ST                                                                                                             Community College
                                      Harris                                                               Christiansen
                                       Park                                                                                                          Yolo
                                                                      CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                               Park
                                                                                                  Clark Pedroia                                     County                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sports & Recreational Facilitites
                                     Harris                                                       Field Field                                       Admin
                                     Field                                                                                                                                                          LEMEN AVE                                                                                                                                                                  Existing Parks
                                                                                                         COURT ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Detention Basin
                 W MAIN ST                                                                                                                         Freeman
                                                                                                    MAIN ST                                          Park                                                                                                  E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Proposed Parks*
                                                                                                                                                                               Yolo County
                                                                                                     LINCOLN AVE                                                               Courthouse                                                                                 California
                        ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Agriculture                                                                                           County Fairgrounds
                                                                                                                                                                                  Historic                                                                                  Museum
                                                                                                                       Woodland                                                   Woodland
                                                                                                               City
                                                                                                                                                                                  Train
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I -5                     Cemetery
                                                               CROSS ST                                        Park    City Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                  Depot
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                               MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                  Woodland                                                                                                                                     Storz                                 Klenhard     FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Highways
                                         John                                     Cemetery                                                                                   Campbell
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pond                                    Park              NH
                                         Ferns                                                                                                                                  Park                                                                                                          AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VE                                                                                           Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                                        THIRD ST
                                         Park
                                                                                                                                                                              E GUM AVE                                                                                    U    MA              AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                       Private                                                                                                                                                                                           EG
                                                                       Catholic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Minor Arterials
                                               COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pioneer
                                                                      Cemetery                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Park
                                                                                                                                                   Everman
                                                                                        WEST ST                                                              EAST ST
                    Streng                                     Woodland                                   Southland                                  Park                      Yolo                                                                                                                                                                                            Collectors
                     Park                                      Healthcare                                    Park                                                            County                                                                                  BRANIGAN AVE
                     Pond                                                                                                                                                  Fairgrounds                                                                                                                                                                                         Ramps
                                                                                                      GIBSON RD                                                                                                                                                      E GIBSON RD
                 Douglass
                   Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PIONEER AVE
                 Detention                       Woodside
                                                                                                                                   Yolo County                                                                                                                                  Community
                  Basin              EL DORADO DR
                                                 Park
                                                                                                                                    Historical                              Prudler                                                                                               College
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               New Specific Plan Boundary
                                                                                                                                     Museum                                  Mini
                                                                                                                                                      Tredway
                                                                                                                                                                             Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Spring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Spring Lake Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                   Crawford
                                                                                                                                     Park
                                                                                                                                                        Park                                                     Lake                                                                                                                                                          Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                 Woodland                                                                                                                                                                                      Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                                                                 Sports Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jack
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    * Rick Gonzales Sr. Park and Spring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Spring
                                                                                      SP-1                                                                                                                                                    Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Central
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Slaven
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Park                                                            Lake Park are under construction.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SP-2
                                                                                                                                                                       Community                                                                                      E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                        & Senior
                                                                                                                                                                         Center                                                                                                                 Rick
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Gonzales
                                                                                                                                                                                          113                                                                                                  Sr Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MARSTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Heritage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0            0.375          0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SPRING LAKE                  Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SPECIFIC PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HC 6-23
        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
          This page intentionally left blank.
HC 6-24
  •	 Civic Buildings. This category of community facilities in-
     cludes City and County administrative and public buildings,
                                                                       Healthy Community Element
                                                                                                           6
     such as City Hall, the Municipal Services Building, and the
     County Courthouse. Many of Woodland’s civic buildings are
     located in historic Downtown Woodland.
  •	 Library. The City of Woodland’s library houses literary, ar-
     tistic, and reference materials for public use and circulation.
     Located at 250 First Street, the library provides opportunities
     to attend social and educational programming and events, and
     provides access to twenty-first century technologies.                  The City of Woodland plans to
                                                                            maintain the Public Library as a
  •	 Visual and Performing Arts Venues. These facilities house              destination by expanding its facilities
     scientific and historical exhibits or offer space for artistic per-    and programs.
     formances and presentations. Woodland is home to a number
     of museums and performing arts venues, including the Yolo
     County Historical Museum and the Woodland Opera House.
  •	 Yolo County Fairgrounds. With over 55 acres of facilities
     including open spaces and buildings, the Yolo County Fair-
     grounds on East Street provide space for the annual County
     Fair and a number of large events during the year.
  •	 Yolo County Health and Human Services Agency. The
     County Health Department is located in northwest Woodland
     and provides a number of important services and programs
     for the Woodland community, as well as the broader county,
     ranging from nutrition classes to health statistics. There is also
     a community garden on site at their office that is open to the
     community and the site of public gardening courses and work-
     shops.
Volunteering is an important strategy for cultivating healthy minds
in Woodland. Volunteering helps engage the mind and provides a              Volunteering helps engage the
sense of community and belonging; it also helps individuals gain            mind and provides a sense of
new skills, make friends, acquire work experience, build contacts,          community and belonging.
and improve the quality of their community. Volunteers are an
integral part of Woodland’s programs and services, and the City
offers seasonal, one-time, and ongoing volunteer opportunities for
individuals, families, community groups, and other interested par-
ties. The General Plan encourages the Woodland community to
volunteer and supports local volunteering opportunities.
Youth engagement—the meaningful participation and continued
involvement of young people in activities focused outside them-
selves—can be conceived as part of a larger group of “develop-
mental assets” in healthy minds. Youth engaged in structured ac-
                                                                                                           HC 6-25

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                tivities—extracurricular school involvements, community service,
                                                organizational work in church or community—have been found to
                                                be less likely to engage in risky activities related to drugs, alcohol,
                                                violence, and risky sexual activity, among other things.There is also
                                                evidence that engaged youth are less depressed, have higher self-
                                                esteem, are more physically active, obtain higher grades in school,
                                                and show a greater commitment to their friends, families, and com-
                                                munities.9 More specifically, involvement in arts and hobbies, as well
                                                as participation in youth group activities, may reduce later delin-
                                                quency. Community service involvement also leads to reduced vio-
                                                lence. Soliciting youth feedback and input in designing public pro-
                                                gramming or infrastructure (parks, schools, etc.) that directly serve
                                                youth can provide significant benefits to institutions and neighbor-
                                                hoods, and is supported by the General Plan. Furthering the en-
                                                gagement of Woodland’s youth in civic activities is a cost effective
                                                way for the City to reduce crime, increase educational attainment,
                                                and improve a number of health indicators across all populations.
                                                This Plan includes specific policies to support the youth programs
                                                and expand collaborative efforts with local schools.
                                                The number of adults over the age of 70 is growing across the
                                                nation as the Baby Boomers grow older, and promoting healthy
    The Yolo County Fairgrounds is a            minds in Woodland seniors is supported in the General Plan. The
    unique community entertainment              Community Services Department provides services and programs
    feature in Woodland.                        to meet the needs of residents over the age of 55; these focus on
                                                health and wellness, social events, expressive arts, nutrition, fitness,
                                                educational classes, and recreational classes. Many of the programs
                                                are held at the Community and Senior Center, which coordinates
                                                recreation, self-enrichment, and educational programs that are of-
                                                ten run by volunteers. One program, Teens Helping Seniors, en-
                                                gages both teens and seniors by pairing youth with older adults
                                                who need assistance at their homes with tasks such as weed pull-
                                                ing and sweeping. The Community and Senior Center also helps
                                                to plan activities, trips, and special events for Woodland seniors
                                                throughout the year. The General Plan encourages healthy minds
                                                in Woodland’s seniors by supporting senior programs, activities,
                                                and services.
    9	 Centres of Excellence for Youth Engagement, “Youth engagement and health outcomes: Is there a link?” (2003).
HC 6-26

6.6	 Arts and Culture
                                                                      Healthy Community Element
                                                                                                            6
Arts and culture play a number of important roles in Woodland
related to healthy minds. Public art in Woodland contributes to
creating vibrant, beautiful, and meaningful spaces for community
members of all ages and backgrounds that support social and men-
tal health, including parks, plazas, and streets. Arts and culture also
support healthy minds by providing opportunities for members of
the community to creatively express themselves and ideas about
nature, community, history, current events, and culture.
In Woodland, arts and culture are expressed in many forms across
the community and reflect the multicultural nature of the city’s
diverse population. Art installations, including murals, signs, and
sculpture, can be found on the streets and sidewalks, as well as in
parks, plazas, bus stops, private businesses and developments, and
private spaces such as homeowners’ yards. Creation and mainte-
nance of art in the public realm in Woodland is supported by the
General Plan, to ensure that local arts and culture continue to be
integral and defining characteristics of the community.
Diverse arts and cultural programming and services are impor-
tant to the Woodland community. The city has several venues
that accommodate art, music, stage, and dance, such as the his-
toric Woodland Opera House, which offers dance and theater
educational programs. The City offers art classes and programs
through its Community Services Department. Many members of
the Woodland community, including volunteers, private businesses,
and non-profit organizations, support the arts in Woodland. The
diversity of cultural and arts programs, services, and activities in
Woodland is an important source of community education and
enrichment; it also presents an opportunity to bolster economic
prosperity in the community through cultural tourism. Continued            Permanent murals and temporary
support and expansion of arts facilities and programs through the          art installations help create a healthy,
                                                                           vibrant, and culturally diverse com-
General Plan will continue to contribute to the distinct qualities
                                                                           munity
that make Woodland a special community in the Sacramento Valley.
                                                                                                            HC 6-27

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    6.7	 Goals and Policies
    Goal 6.A	     Health Equity. Promote health equity in Woodland, including the promotion
                  of equal access to health facilities, goods, services, and economic and educational
                  opportunities; helping to ensure overall well-being for residents of all ages, abilities,
                  and incomes; and fairly treating all members of the public in the process of creating a
                  healthy Woodland.
                  Policy 6.A.1	       Medical and Health Services and Facilities. Support the
                                      managed growth of complementary health services and medical
                                      facilities in Woodland, including clinics, hospitals, medical offices, and
                                      medical laboratories. Work with hospitals, medical practices, and
                                      other health care providers to increase siting and development of
                                      medical clinics and medical facilities across Woodland to ensure
                                      widespread access to these services.
                  Policy 6.A.2	       Monitor Health Data. Collaborate with Yolo County Health and
                                      Human Services Agency (HHSA) as needed to monitor and maintain
                                      data related to Woodland health outcomes and risk factors, and to
                                      use these data to inform new County and City programs to serve
                                      the community.
                  Policy 6.A.3	       Off-site Health Clinics and Workshops. Encourage Yolo County
                                      Health and Human Services Agency to explore the feasibility of
                                      a program of health clinics or workshops, run by medical service
                                      providers or the Yolo County Healthy and Human Services Agency,
                                      but hosted in local neighborhood facilities such as schools, parks,
                                      businesses, or parking lots.
                  Policy 6.A.4	       Publicize Health Programs. Help publicize existing health
                                      programs and assist residents in connecting with County and
                                      community-based health services and medical facilities.
                  Policy 6.A.5	       Encourage Care of Physical Health. Encourage Woodland
                                      residents to participate in health programs offered in the city and to
                                      regularly engage in preventative health care practices.
                  Policy 6.A.6	       Environmental Justice. Treat all segments of the Woodland
                                      community fairly in the process of creating a healthy environment
                                      and strive to equally share the benefits and the burdens associated
                                      with public services, facilities, amenities, and decisions across all
                                      members of the community.
                  Policy 6.A.7	       Health Impacts of Land Use Decisions. Consider potential
                                      health impacts associated with land use decisions, including
                                      enforcement actions, to reduce the adverse health effects of
HC 6-28
                                                                                 Healthy Community Element
                                           hazardous materials, industrial activities, and other undesirable land
                                           uses on all members of the Woodland community.
                                                                                                                     6
                    Policy 6.A.8	          Equity of Environmental Protections. Apply and enforce
                                           environmental protection measures equally among the geographic
                                           and socioeconomic sectors of Woodland.
                    Policy 6.A.9	          Procedural Equity for Health Initiatives. Encourage all
                                           segments of the Woodland community, including residents,
                                           businesses, and organizations, to be involved in the development,
                                           adoption, and implementation of community health initiatives and
                                           consider their input throughout the decision-making process.
Goal 6.B	           Active Lifestyles. Support healthy and active lifestyles for all members of the
                    community by integrating opportunities for active transportation and physical
                    activity into daily life in Woodland.
See also goals and policies in the Transportation and Circulation Element.
                    Policy 6.B.1	          Promote Physical Activity. Promote physical activity programs
                                           and education including but not limited to programs offered by the
                                           City’s Community Service Department, and encourage residents to
                                           regularly participate in physical activity and active lifestyles.
                    Policy 6.B.2	          Accessibility. Remove barriers and improve multimodal mobility
                                           throughout the city for all community members by supporting
                                           transit, pedestrian, and bicycle connections between residential
                                           neighborhoods and major destinations, including parks, civic facilities,
                                           school campuses, other educational institutions, employment
                                           centers, shopping destinations, parks and recreation areas.
                    Policy 6.B.3	          Promote Active Transportation. Promote walking, biking, and
                                           other modes of active transportation as safe, easy, healthy, and fun
                                           alternatives for all residents to complete local errands and short
                                           trips around Woodland.
Sports facilities and recreation programs provide opportunities for physical fitness for Woodland residents of all ages.
                                                                                                                      HC 6-29

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 6.B.4	    Street Design. Implement street design features that facilitate
                                   walking and biking in both new and established areas. Require a
                                   minimum standard of these features for all new developments.
                  Policy 6.B.5	    Citywide Pedestrian and Bicycle Network. Promote active
                                   modes of transportation through development and maintenance of a
                                   citywide pedestrian and bicycle network.
                                   Refer to goals and policies in the Transportation and Circulation and Land
                                   Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Elements.
                  Policy 6.B.6	    Active Transportation to Schools. Improve the street and
                                   neighborhood conditions in the areas surrounding schools to
                                   support children and youth walking and bicycling to school.
                                   Continue to work with the Woodland Joint Unified School District
                                   and other agencies to implement a Safe Routes to School program
                                   and prioritize identified Safe Routes to School infrastructure
                                   improvements in transportation improvement plans.
                                   Refer to additional goals and policies regarding education in the Public
                                   Facilities and Services Element.
                  Policy 6.B.7	    Siting of New Schools. Work with Woodland Joint Unified School
                                   District and private and charter schools to locate and design new
                                   school sites so they are easily and safely accessible to pedestrians
                                   and bicyclists and located and accessed away from major street
                                   intersections and major streets.
                                   Refer to additional goals and policies regarding education in the Public
                                   Facilities and Services Element.
                  Policy 6.B.8	    Signage for Parks and Recreation Facilities. Improve signage
                                   directing residents and visitors to public parks and recreational
                                   facilities from all parts of the community. Integrate parks signage
                                   with bikeway and pedestrian-oriented signage system throughout
                                   Woodland.
                                   The General Plan aims to make it easier and safer for families to access recre-
                                   ation spaces in Woodland.
HC 6-30
          Policy 6.B.9	
                                                                Healthy Community Element
                             Safe, Accessible, and Diverse Facilities. Ensure parks and
                                                                                                 6
                             recreational facilities are safe for all users, accessible to pedestrians
                             and bicyclists, provide safe drinking water, and meet the needs of
                             Woodland’s diverse community through design and amenities.
                             As needed, evaluate and enhance street lighting along bicycle and
                             pedestrian routes to encourage walking and biking.
          Policy 6.B.10	     Improved Pedestrian Connections. Provide pedestrian
                             connections in all new developments to provide full connectivity
                             within a project as well as connections to adjacent uses and the
                             larger network.
Goal 6.C	 Healthy Food. Create a healthy, balanced, functional, and equitable food system for
          the entire Woodland community by reducing barriers and increasing access to locally-
          grown fruits and vegetables, and increasing community-wide knowledge of healthy
          food choices and behaviors.
          Policy 6.C.1	      Farmers Markets. Support farmers markets in Woodland and
                             promote a comprehensive listing of all farmers markets in Woodland.
                             Support local agencies and community groups in working with
                             farmers’ markets to accept WIC and EBT by providing technical
                             assistance, such as providing an exchange or voucher system.
          Policy 6.C.2	      Healthy Food Options. Encourage grocery stores and food
                             establishments to provide healthy food and beverage options.
                             Encourage dining establishments that provide “slow food” that
                             is fresh and minimally processed and that support “farm to fork”
                             initiatives. Encourage these dining establishments to be located along
                             main transportation corridors, as alternatives to fast food or drive-
                             thru establishments.
          Policy 6.C.3	      Urban Agriculture. Promote a full range of urban agriculture
                             activities, including farmers’ markets, farm stands, community
                             gardens, on-site garden produce market stands, and urban farms.
                             Partner with associations involved in these activities.
          Policy 6.C.4	      Community Gardens in High-Density Neighborhoods.
                             Support the planning of community gardens within walking distance
                             of high-density residential areas to compensate for the reduced
                             amount of open space in these areas.
          Policy 6.C.5	      Healthy Food Programs. Encourage participation in healthy food
                             and nutrition programs in Woodland to increase knowledge and
                             consumption of healthy foods and beverages.
          Policy 6.C.6	      Home Gardening. Support home gardening efforts, and provide
                             residents with technical assistance in the form of online and library
                                                                                                  HC 6-31

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                       resources and workshops on gardening basics and cooking easy,
                                       healthy meals with fresh produce.
                  Policy 6.C.7	        Healthy Food in Schools. Help schools increase availability of
                                       healthy foods and beverages by working cooperatively with the
                                       Woodland Joint Unified School District, Yolo County Health and
                                       Human Services Agency,Yolo County Agriculture Department, and
                                       UC Cooperative Extension. 
                  Policy 6.C.8	        Healthy Food and Clean Water at City Programs. Promote
                                       healthy food and beverages at City-sponsored events, programs,
                                       and recreation activities.  Ensure that safe, clean drinking water is
                                       available for the public at all City-owned buildings where public
                                       programs occur.
    Goal 6.D	     Community Facilities and Programs. Support a wide variety of community
                  facilities and programs to serve and meet the needs of the diverse Woodland
                  community.
                  Policy 6.D.1	        Adequate Facilities. Ensure there are adequate community
                                       facilities to serve all segments of Woodland’s growing population.
                                       Plan for appropriate community facilities in new growth areas.
                  Policy 6.D.2	        Downtown Woodland Facilities. Promote Downtown Woodland
                                       as an entertainment, cultural, civic, and community activity center for
                                       the city, county, and region by encouraging related programming and
                                       facilities to be located in the Downtown area.
                  Policy 6.D.3	        Library Facilities and Programming. Provide library facilities
                                       and programs that align with the community’s learning needs,
                                       abilities and demographics, and changes in technology, such as
                                       through facility design, services and service delivery methods, and
                                       partnerships with educational and learning institutions.
                  Policy 6.D.4	        Library Expansion. Expand Woodland library facilities and
                                       programs commensurate with the city’s population growth.
                  Policy 6.D.5	        Library as Downtown Destination. Ensure that the Woodland
                                       Public Library remains a vibrant Downtown destination by
                                       supporting its continued use and preservation.
                  Policy 6.D.6	        Community Engagement. Promote and enhance community
                                       involvement and participation by all sectors of the community.
                                       Foster transparency and participation in local government and
                                       decision-making and in the social, cultural, and recreational activities
                                       of the community.
                  Policy 6.D.7	        Volunteerism. Encourage and support volunteer opportunities
                                       that benefit the community and also benefit volunteers.
HC 6-32

          Policy 6.D.8	
                                                               Healthy Community Element
                             Community Events. Encourage citywide events that integrate
                             family, school, and community.
                                                                                               6
          Policy 6.D.9	      Senior Programs and Services. Promote social engagement and
                             healthy lifestyles in Woodland’s older adults by continuing to fund
                             and organize programs, activities, and services for seniors.
          Policy 6.D.10	     Support Youth and Families. Provide a supportive environment
                             for youth and families within the Woodland community, and support
                             programs, leadership, and opportunities for Woodland’s youth.
          Policy 6.D.11	     Other Programs and Services for Youth. Encourage businesses,
                             agencies, and organizations to develop thoughtful and responsive
                             services and programs that address unmet needs of youth in
                             Woodland. Include and involve youth in the development of these
                             programs and services.
          Policy 6.D.12	     Collaborate with Schools on Services and Programs.
                             Encourage the use of schools as community and neighborhood
                             centers to provide a range of services and programs, such as
                             evening courses related to healthy living, job-training and retraining
                             programs, and other education services for the community at large.
          Policy 6.D.13	     Joint Youth Programs with Education Community. Encourage
                             Woodland Community College, UC Davis, the Woodland Joint
                             Unified School District, and other educational institutions to
                             conduct joint programs with youth organizations. These programs
                             may include the following: mentoring and other forms of community
                             service among college students that provide academic enrichment
                             programs for adolescents; offering opportunities to explore future
                             college attendance by visiting the campuses; meeting slightly older
                             peers; and learning about admissions processes and financial aid.
          Policy 6.D.14	     Consult with Community on Programming. Consult with
                             older adults, youth, families, and others to develop the City’s
                             programs, services, and activities, to ensure that they are responsive
                             to residents’ needs and desires.
Goal 6.E	 Support Public Art. Support public art as an important amenity to creating a
          beautiful and vibrant city.
          Policy 6.E.1	      Arts in Public Places. Develop an “Arts in Public Places” program
                             and supporting standards to create more opportunities for visual
                             and performing arts while providing clear direction on desired
                             expectations with regard to community art.
          Policy 6.E.2	      Downtown as Woodland’s Arts and Cultural Center. Establish
                             Downtown as an entertainment, cultural, ethnic resource, and
                                                                                               HC 6-33

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                community activity center for the city, county, and region. Encourage
                                                the use of Main Street and surrounding streets in the core area for
                                                civic and cultural events.
                         Policy 6.E.3	          Arts and Culture Events. Continue to support First Friday
                                                Artwalk and other similar arts and cultural related events and
                                                programs that reflect the community’s diversity.
                         Policy 6.E.4	          Woodland Opera House. Continue to support the Historic
                                                Woodland Opera House’s use as a performing arts venue.
                         Policy 6.E.5	          Diversity of Art Installations. Encourage public art installations
                                                that are diverse in content, media, and siting; help to create and
                                                reinforce the uniqueness of Woodland; and reflect the array of
                                                regional, cultural, and environmental influences. Seek to ensure that
                                                Woodland residents of all cultural backgrounds are represented and
                                                involved in the art installations.
                         Policy 6.E.6	          Local Artists. Engage the local artist community on public art
                                                projects and programs wherever possible.
                         Policy 6.E.7	          Maintenance of Public Art. Consider maintenance of public art
                                                during the development of public artwork, and require development
                                                of a maintenance funding plan to be in place and adhered to as part
                                                of any new public art installation.
                         Policy 6.E.8	          Public Art Promotion. Promote public enjoyment of art in
                                                Woodland by providing public art installations and informational
                                                resources about public art installations.
    Establishing Downtown as a cultural entertainment center is a priority for the General Plan, which supports outdoor
    festivals, such as the Cesar Chavez event; indoor performances at venues such as the Woodland Opera House; and com-
    munity art events like “Chalk on the Block.”
HC 6-34

Goal 6.F	
                                                                           Healthy Community Element
                  Programs and Facilities for Arts and Culture. Promote, develop, and implement
                  programs and facilities that meet the artistic and cultural needs of the Woodland
                                                                                                             6
                  community.
                  Policy 6.F.1	           Arts Programs and Facilities. Encourage and support the
                                          provision of spaces, programs, and facilities across the community
                                          to provide opportunities for artistic and cultural engagement and
                                          expression for all members of the Woodland community.
                  Policy 6.F.2	           Arts Partnerships. Encourage and support partnerships among
                                          arts organizations, businesses, UC Davis, Taller Arte del Nuevo
                                          Amanecer (TANA), and schools in Woodland. Encourage improved
                                          communication, coordination, and sharing of resources among the
                                          arts, education, and business communities.
                  Policy 6.F.3	           Funding for Arts and Culture. Support adequate public and
                                          private funding for the continued growth of the arts in Woodland.
                  Policy 6.F.4	           Diversity of Public Arts and Culture Classes. Continue
                                          to provide a diversity of public artistic and cultural classes and
                                          programs through the Community Services Department that meet
                                          the needs of the Woodland community.
                  Policy 6.F.5	           Performances in Public Spaces. To the extent feasible,
                                          encourage local groups to perform and host events in public
                                          spaces and in other non-traditional settings, such as the California
                                          Agriculture Museum.
The General Plan aims to create more art in public places.
                                                                                                             HC 6-35
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
HC 6-36
7 Sustainability,
  Conservation, and
  Open Space Element
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                              7.1	 Introduction and
                                                             Purpose
                                              Conservation and sustainability are guiding concepts of planning
                                              that are incorporated throughout the General Plan. According to
                                              the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), “To pursue sus-
                                              tainability is to create and maintain the conditions under which hu-
                                              mans and nature can exist in productive harmony to support pres-
                                              ent and future generations.” In the context of the General Plan, it
                                              is to take responsibility for the urban development and popula-
                                              tion growth projected during the planning period and the resulting
                                              potential impacts on the environment. Maintaining a sustainable
    “To pursue sustainability                 community will require an integrated approach to planning and
    is to create and maintain                 development that fully examines all costs (long- and short-term)
    the conditions under which                and balances those against the long-term environmental and social
    humans and nature can exist               needs of the community. By implementing sustainable design mea-
                                              sures and policies,Woodland can decrease and offset consumption
    in productive harmony to
                                              of natural resources and reduce its contribution to global climate
    support present and future                change.
    generations.”
                                              The Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element estab-
                                              lishes goals and policies for the conservation of natural resources
                                              in Woodland. Woodland’s natural resources – water, natural habi-
                                              tats, wildlife, vegetation, agricultural soils, minerals, and air – con-
                                              tribute to the city’s economy and the quality of life of Woodland
                                              residents. These resources exist in limited quantity and as a result,
                                              the General Plan promotes thoughtful planning and resource man-
                                              agement that can help inform community discussion about weigh-
                                              ing environmental conservation with other General Plan goals.The
                                              General Plan seeks to balance planned growth with conservation
                                              and enhancement of the area’s natural resources.
    Open space is protected for the preservation of natural resources, among other purposes.
CO 7-2

                                        Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
The Sustainability, Conservation, and Open
                                                                                             7
Space Element is organized as follows:
•	 Section 7.1: Introduction and Purpose. Introduces the
    topics covered in this Element and outlines the Element’s rela-
    tionship to State law and the Visioning Statement and Guiding
    Principles.
•	 Section 7.2: Water Resources. Addresses surface water
    and groundwater resources and water conservation efforts.
•	 Section 7.3: Biological Resources and Open Space for
    Conservation. Considers habitats and natural vegetation and
    special-status species.
•	 Section 7.4: Agricultural and Soil Resources. Discusses
    farmland in and surrounding the Planning Area as well as soil
    resources.
•	 Section 7.5: Mineral Resources. Addresses natural gas and
    other mineral resources in the Planning Area.
•	 Section 7.6: Cultural and Archaeological Resources.
    Considers the preservation of prehistoric, cultural and archae-
    ological resources.
•	 Section 7.7: Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases. Dis-
    cusses air pollutants and contaminants, greenhouse gas emis-
    sions and climate change.
•	 Section 7.8: Goals and Policies.
For additional background data and information on these topics,
refer to the Opportunities and Challenges, Issues and Options report.
For more information on climate change refer to the City’s Cli-
mate Action Plan (CAP).
Relationship to State Law
The Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element com-
bines two of the seven required elements of a General Plan: the
Conservation Element, which is required to address the conser-
vation, development, and utilization of natural resources; and the
Open Space Element, which is required to address open space
lands used for a variety of purposes.
Specifically, California Government Code Sections 65302(d) and
Section 65560(b) and Sections 5097.9 and 5097.993 of the Public
Resources Code mandate the Conservation and Open Space Ele-
ments to address the following key topics listed in Table 7-1.
                                                                                             CO 7-3

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                           Relationship to Vision and Guiding Principles
                                           The Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element aligns
                                           with the community’s vision of Woodland as a “sustainable city,”
                                           “healthy community,” and “leader in sustainable agriculture.” In ad-
                                           dition, it directly supports the following Guiding Principles:
                                             •	 Environmental Stewardship: Foster a sustainable commu-
                                                nity for the next generation and protect and improve the qual-
                                                ity of the natural environment.
                                             •	 Agricultural Heritage: Preserve and protect prime agricul-
                                                tural lands and their uses within and surrounding the com-
                                                munity.
      Table 7-1:	       Land Use Topics Required by State Law
                                                              Addressed in this      Location if not addressed
     Required Topic
                                                              Element                in this Element
      Conservation
      Water and its hydraulic force                             Partially             Water supply and demand
                                                                                      are covered in the Public
                                                                                      Facilities and Services
                                                                                      Element. Flooding is
                                                                                      addressed in the Safety
                                                                                      Element.
      Forests                                                   No                    Not applicable. The City
                                                                                      has no forest resources.
      Soils                                                     Yes
      Rivers, creeks, streams, and other waters                 Yes
      Harbors and fisheries                                     No                    There are no harbors or
                                                                                      fisheries in the Planning
                                                                                      Area.
      Wildlife                                                  Yes
      Minerals and other natural resources                      Yes
      Effects of planned development on natural                 Yes
      resources on public lands
      Effects of planned development on natural                 No                    There are no military
      resources on military installations                                             installations in or
                                                                                      immediately around the
                                                                                      Planning Area.
      Flood corridors                                           No                    Flooding is addressed in
                                                                                      the Safety Element.
      Groundwater recharge                                      Yes
      Stormwater management                                     No                    Stormwater management
                                                                                      is addressed in the Public
                                                                                      Facilities and Services
                                                                                      Element.
CO 7-4

 Table 7-1:	
                                              Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
                     Land Use Topics Required by State Law
                                                                                                          7
                                                          Addressed in this      Location if not addressed
Required Topic
                                                          Element                in this Element
 Open Space
 Open space for preservation of natural resources,         Yes
 including:
    •	 Areas required for the preservation of plant
       and animal life
    •	 Habitat areas for fish and wildlife species
    •	 Areas required for ecologic and other scientific
       study purposes
    •	 Rivers, streams, bays, and estuaries
    •	 Coastal beaches, lakeshores, banks of rivers
       and streams
    •	 Watershed lands
 Open space for the managed production of                  Yes
 resources, including:
    •	 Forest land
    •	 Range land
    •	 Agricultural lands
    •	 Areas of economic importance for the
       production of food and fiber
    •	 Areas required for recharge of groundwater
       basins
    •	 Bays, estuaries, marshes, rivers, and streams
       important for commercial fisheries
    •	 Areas containing mineral deposits
 Open space for outdoor recreation, including:             No                     Parks and recreation are
    •	 Areas of outstanding scenic, historic, and                                 addressed in the Public
       cultural value                                                             Facilities and Services
                                                                                  Element.
    •	 Areas particularly suited for park and
       recreation purposes
    •	 Access to lakeshores, beaches, rivers, and
       streams
    •	 Areas that link major recreation and open
       space land such as utility easements, river
       banks, stream banks, and scenic highway
       corridors
                                                                                                          CO 7-5

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
      Table 7-1:	         Land Use Topics Required by State Law
                                                          Addressed in this Location if not addressed
     Required Topic
                                                          Element           in this Element
      Open space for public health and safety, including:  Partially         Earthquake fault zones,
         •	 Earthquake fault zones                                           unstable soil areas,
                                                                             floodplains, high fire risk
         •	 Unstable soil areas                                              areas, and other areas
         •	 Floodplains                                                      that require special
                                                                             management or regulation
         •	 Watersheds                                                       because of hazardous or
         •	 High fire risk areas                                             special conditions are
                                                                             addressed in the Safety
         •	 Areas required for the protection of water
                                                                             Element.
            quality and water reservoirs
         •	 Areas required for the protection and
            enhancement of air quality
         •	 Other areas which require special management
            or regulation because of hazardous or special
            conditions
      Open space in support of the mission of military     No                There are no military
      installations, including:                                              installations in or
         •	 Areas adjacent to military installations and                     immediately around the
            military training routes                                         Planning Area.
         •	 Areas underlying restricted military airspace
      Open space for the protection of Native American     Yes
      places, features, and objects, including:
         •	 Sanctified cemeteries
         •	 Places of worship
         •	 Religious or ceremonial sites
         •	 Sacred shrines
         •	 Historic, cultural or sacred sites
         •	 Historic or prehistoric ruins
         •	 Burial grounds
         •	 Archeological or historic sites
         •	 Inscription sites
         •	 Rock art
CO 7-6

7.2	 Water Resources
                                          Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
                                                                                                         7
Water resources are important not only for residents and busi-
                                                                          Water supply and demand are
nesses, but also for agriculture, natural habitats and other aspects
                                                                          addressed in the Public Facilities
of the natural environment. Careful stewardship is critical to con-
                                                                          and Services Element.
serve and protect surface water and groundwater sources and
ensure water quality. Surface water and groundwater resources
and quality are covered below. The topics of flooding and flood
protection are addressed in the Safety Element.
Woodland is located in the eastern portion of Yolo County within
the Sacramento River Hydrologic Region. Two miles to the east
are the Yolo West Levee Bypass and the Sacramento River. Wil-
low Slough and Putah Creek are located to the south, and Lower
Cache Creek is approximately one-half mile northeast of the voter-
approved Urban Limit Line (ULL). Woodland has a Mediterranean
climate and typically experiences hot, dry summers and temperate,
rainy winters. Winter precipitation comes from the North Pacific
storm track, averaging just less than 20 inches per year.Woodland’s
annual precipitation falls from October to April, with the majority
falling between the months of November and March.
Surface Water
Surface Water Resources
Woodland lies within portions of four major watersheds, includ-
ing the Sacramento River, Cache Creek, Putah Creek, and Willow
Slough watersheds. Surface water in Yolo County and the Wood-
land area generally drains to the Yolo West Levee Bypass on the
eastern edge of the county. Much of the surrounding agricultural
land is irrigated through a series of canals and drainage ditches
connected to these waterways. Figure 7-1 illustrates the major
waterways near the Planning Area.
The City of Woodland, City of Davis, and University of California,
Davis have partnered on a regional surface water supply project,          For additional information about
which secures the use of surface water from the Sacramento River.         this project and surface water
This increases the City’s water supply while reducing the impact          supply, refer to the Public Facilities
                                                                          and Services Element.
on groundwater sources. The project began operation in summer
2016 and is essential in allowing the City to meet future water
demand.
                                                                                                           CO 7-7

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                    Surface Water Quality
                                                    While surface water quality of water bodies in the Woodland area
                                                    is generally good, four nearby water bodies are identified on a list
                                                    of impaired water bodies maintained by the State pursuant to Sec-
                                                    tion 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. As of 2010, the Sacramento
                                                    River from Knight’s Landing through the Sacramento-San Joaquin
                                                    Delta is listed as impaired by mercury and pesticides.These chemi-
                                                    cals are found at their highest concentrations at discharge points
    Cache Creek originates northwest of             along the creeks that receive run-off from agricultural fields, aban-
    Woodland. The waterway terminates
                                                    doned mines, and their associated waste materials. Pollutants from
    at the Cache Creek settling basin,
    just northeast of the Woodland Plan-            these sources are generally transported from upstream areas.
    ning Area. Photo: Yolo County.                  Cache Creek is also listed as a significant contributor of mercury
                                                    to the Delta due to historic mercury mining activities further up-
                                                    stream in Lake County, geothermal springs, the erosion of naturally
                                                    occurring mercury-containing soils, and atmospheric deposition. In
                                                    addition, Putah Creek is listed for boron and mercury, and Willow
                                                    Slough is listed for boron and pathogens.
                                                    Groundwater
                                                    Groundwater Resources
                                                    The Planning Area overlies the Lower Cache-Putah Subarea within
                                                    the East Yolo Subbasin of the greater Sacramento Valley Ground-
                                                    water Basin. The natural gradient of the aquifer runs from west to
                                                    east, following the valley topography, and draining into the Sacra-
                                                    mento-San Joaquin Delta. It is estimated that the Lower Cache-
                                                    Putah Subarea has an estimated storage capacity of 2.7 million
                                                    acre-feet.1
                                                    Now that the regional surface water supply project has come on-
       The ASR program and                          line, Woodland’s reliance on groundwater as a source of potable
       groundwater supply is discussed              water has decreased significantly. The aquifer in Woodland and the
       further in the Public Facilities and         surrounding area is not considered to be in overdraft. In addition,
       Services Element.                            Woodland is planning to implement an Aquifer Storage and Re-
                                                    covery (ASR) program beginning in Fall 2016 which will further
                                                    improve groundwater supplies in Woodland.
    1	Yolo County. 2005 (January). Background Report for the Yolo County General Plan Update. Prepared by: Jones & Stokes, Cotton
        Bridges Associates, Inc., Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc., House Agricultural Consultants, and Applied Development Economics.
CO 7-8

Groundwater Quality
                                          Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
                                                                                               7
Groundwater quality is generally considered adequate for agricul-
tural and municipal uses, although it tends to be “very hard.” There
are some localized areas throughout the basin that have been re-
corded to have high concentrations of boron. Electrical conduc-
tivity, an indicator of salinity, has continued to increase in some
areas. Groundwater near Cache Creek has been noted to contain
higher concentrations of selenium, nitrate, and boron. Other areas
just west of Woodland have been identified as having high levels of
nitrates.
Groundwater Management
In September 2014, a three-bill legislative package, comprised of
AB 1739 (Dickinson), SB 1168 (Pavley), and SB 1319 (Pavley), was
signed into law. Collectively known as the Sustainable Groundwa-
ter Management Act (SGMA), these laws provide for the sustain-
able management of groundwater supplies by local authorities.The
legislation requires the formation of local groundwater sustainabil-
ity agencies (GSAs) that must assess conditions in their local water
basins and adopt groundwater management plans that are tailored
to the resources and needs of their communities by January 31,
2020. The Yolo County Farm Bureau has partnered with the Water
Resources Association of Yolo County to begin the planning pro-
cess for SGMA implementation and the creation of a GSA.
The City of Woodland prepares annual water quality reports. Re-
sults from the shallow and intermediate depths of the aquifer have
indicated some areas with contaminant levels that nearly meet
maximum concentration levels for nitrates, salts, and other ele-
ments. Three of Woodland’s wells have been taken offline due to
the level of nitrates nearing the maximum contaminant limit. In
addition, City wells have been found to contain hexavalent chro-
mium, a naturally occurring metal in soil and water. In 2014, the
California Department of Public Health enacted a maximum con-
taminant level for hexavalent chromium of 10 parts per billion.The
new regulation is restricting the use of many of the City’s exist-
ing wells. Because remediation is prohibitively expensive, the new
surface water supplies from the surface water project along with
the use of blending wells and implementation of an aquifer storage
and recovery system have been important in offsetting issues with
affected wells and ensuring a reliable future water supply.
                                                                                               CO 7-9

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                        Water Conservation Efforts
                                        The City of Woodland has supported efforts to reduce water de-
                                        mand through conservation and other measures. Senate Bill x7-7
                                        (SBx7-7) was enacted in November 2009 as part of the Urban
                                        Water Management Planning Act. SBx7-7 requires water suppli-
                                        ers to increase water conservation efforts. The legislation sets an
                                        overall goal of reducing urban per capita demand by 20 percent by
                                        the year 2020. Urban retail water suppliers that do not meet the
                                        water conservation requirements of SBx7-7 are not eligible for
                                        State water grants or loans.
                                        In compliance with State law, the City has installed water me-
                                        ters throughout Woodland and uses a consumption-based billing
                                        schedule for water utility building. The completion of the City’s
                                        water meter installation program was expected to reduce demand
                                        by about 15 percent per year, helping the City to meet the State’s
                                        SBx7-7 goals. In fact, the City is already successfully meeting or ex-
                                        ceeding the water conservation requirements required by SBx7-7,
                                        as the City achieved a total annual water use reduction of 47 per-
                                        cent by 2014.
                                        In addition, the City promotes “water-wise” landscapes that rely
    “Water-wise” landscaping incorpo-   on native and drought tolerant plants while ensuring adequate wa-
    rates native and drought tolerant
                                        ter for existing and new trees. Water-wise landscapes draw much
    plants to conserve water and create
    attractive alternatives to turf.    less water during hot, peak water-use months; reduce the potential
                                        for discharge of pollutants into the stormwater system; and pro-
                                        vide welcome habitat for beneficial insects and birds. The City of
                                        Woodland hosts a free water-wise residential landscape tour each
                                        year that promotes creative alternatives to turf. In addition, the
                                        City’s website provides planting plans for water-wise mow strips
                                        that provide guidance on plant selection and placement.
    The General Plan promotes efficient
    water use and aims to update land-
    scape water conservation standards.
CO 7-10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i i gh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               K n K nn i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Conservation and Open Space Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 7-1:	Surface Water Hydrology
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i gh                                          ghgh t s L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LEGEND                                                                       LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ts                                        t st s a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 La                                         LLaa i n g                                                                                                                                       Surface Water Bodies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cac                                                                                  nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       he re e k                                                                                                               nndd i                                                                                Surface Water Bodies                                    Surface
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SurfaceWater Bodies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     he C re e k                                                                                            C a cC a ch Ck e k                                                                             ing                                    i nngg R i d                                                                                                                               Detention Basin Bodies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 h e Cer eCer e                                                                                  Ri                                     RRi i d                                                                      Detention Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d                                     d                                                                                                                                Detention
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DetentionBasin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ge                                         C uC uut t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cu                                 g e g ee C                                                                                                               Transportation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Transportation                                                               Transportation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Transportation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Highways                                               Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Principal Arterials                                    Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Principal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Minor      Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Minor Arterials
                                                          §
                                                          ¨
                                                          ¦                                                                                §
                                                                                                                                           ¨
                                                                                                                                           ¦
                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                           §
                                                                                                                                           ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Collectors
                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                        ¦5 ¦
                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                        ¨  5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Local Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Local  Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Local Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Local Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N EAST ST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Boundaries
                                                                                                                                                                                     N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TuTl ue lTeu l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Boundaries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Boundaries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C aCnea C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ca n                                                                                                Boundaries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             anla ln a l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Planning Area             Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tu l e                                                                                                      Urban LimitArea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Planning   Line
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N PIONEER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AVEAVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Urban Limit  Line (SOI)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N PIONEER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sphere of Influence (SOI) Sphere of Influence (SOI)
                                                                                                                        W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sphere of Influence (SOI)
                           W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                      W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                                        E KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sacramento
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EAST ST ST
                                                                                                         W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                          W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sacramento                                                            County
                                                                                                                                                                                     EAST ST                                                                                                                     EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sacramento
                                                           W WOODLAND AVE                                                                                            W WOODLAND AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               County                                                             County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sacramento
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EAST ST
                                                                                                                                         W WOODLAND AVE                                                                               BEAMER ST                                                                                                                                                                            E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yolo                    County
                                                                                                                                          ASHLEY AVEAVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                 CALIFORNIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             County
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ST ST
                                                                                                             BEAMER ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Yolo                                                           Yolo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BEAMER ST                                                  E BEAMER ST                                                                                                              E BEAMER ST
                                          ASHLEY AVE
                                                                               CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                                                            ASHLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             County                                                         County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yolo
                                                                                                                                                                                                   CALIFORNIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sa cr a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ve e r iv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BEAMER ST                                                                                                                                                                  E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                  ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                     CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NORTH ST LEMEN AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     County
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R i iv R
                                                                                                                                                                                                               LEMEN AVE COURT ST
                                                                                                                          NORTH ST                                                                                                  NORTH ST LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t o o nRt o
                                                                                                             COURTWST
                                                                                                                    MAIN ST                                                                                            MAIN ST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         COURT                                                                                                                                                                                               E MAIN ST                                                                                                                                                                          men
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NORTH ST LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m e n ae nmt e
                                W MAIN ST                                                                  MAIN STW MAIN ST                                                                                          MAIN  ST         E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LINCOLN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  COURT   ST AVE                                                                                                                                                                                           E MAIN ST                                                                                                                                                                               to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        THIRD ST ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                     §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¦                                                                                                                                                     S a cSraacSraacmr
                                                                                                         LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                          W MAIN ST                                                                                                      LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MAIN ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E MAIN ST                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                        THIRD ST                                                                                                                           THIRD                                                                                                                                                                                                   §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¦5                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ve
                                                                                                                    COUNTY ROAD 98 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LINCOLNCROSS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AVE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¦5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       COLLEGE
                        COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                      COUNTY  ROAD                                                                                    WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST ST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST ST
                                                                                                                                                                   CALIFORNIA
                                                                                                           CROSS ST
                                                                                                                                                                              ST OD ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AV AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ¦5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              THIRD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CROSS ST
                                                                 So
                                                                                                                                                                        COTTONWO
                                                                                                        WEST ST                                                                                                         WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                          COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                    u                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         COLLEGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M
                                                                                                                                                                           COTTONWO
 o                                                              S o th F
                                                                                                                                                                                     OD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HA A
                                                                                                                                                                                                CROSS ST                                                                                                                 E GUM AVE
     ut h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NH                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                   ut h o r k D i t c h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MATMOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RN      H
                                                                          CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                        COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RD RD
                                                                                                                                                                                            E GUM AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                   COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E GUM AVE
            Fo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AM                                                                                                           R
                                                       So              Fo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EAST ST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          COLLEGE ST
                 rk Dit ch                                                rk Dit ch                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              F
                                                                                                                                                                         EAST ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HA
                                                          ut h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MATMOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AV                                                                                           BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E GUM AVE
                                                               Fo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                   rk Dit ch                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GIBSON RD                                                                                                                                                                                     BRANIGAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E         AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                       CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PIONEER
                                                                                                            GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AVEAVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GIBSON RD                                                              E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          102102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                          CALIFORNIA
                                                                                                                                                                            WEST ST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PIONEER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GIBSON RD                                                                                                                                                                                    E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            COUNTY ROAD 102
                                           EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                            EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HARRY LORENZO AVEAVE
                                                                                                                   EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HARRY LORENZO                                                                                                                                                                                                                             s      s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    p as ass as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Yo lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 By yp Byp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               lo B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E HERITAGE PKWY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           p as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yo Yolo Yolo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            By
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V                                                                                                      U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  V113                                                                                                                                                                                        lo u g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           113                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W i ll ow S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       lo u                             gh     W i ll ow S u g h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              W i ll ow   S l o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W i ll ow S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         lo u g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0                     6,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                   6,000       0                     6,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FEET
                                                                       re e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0                   6,0
                                                                     oo or                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FEET                            FEET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NORTH
or                                                                  M Mo              Ca                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Base Map: City of Woodlan
      Ca                                                                                  n
                                                                                      Ca                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Base Map: City of Woodland      X60285491 020 of06/17
 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Base Map: City    Woodland
            n                              M                                             n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FEET
            al                                   oo                                            al al                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  X60285491 020   06/17           X60285491 020   06/17
                                                       re
                          CSource:
                            an      City of Woodland 2016, Dyett and Bhatia 2017                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Base Map: City of Wood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CO 7-11
 ce: City of Woodland 2016,Source:
                            Dyett and
                                   CityBhatia 2017 2016, Dyett and Bhatia 2017
                                        of Woodland                       al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           X60285491 020   06/17
                                         Source: City of Woodland 2016, Dyett and Bhatia 2017

        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
          This page intentionally left blank.
CO 7-12
7.3	 Biological Resources
                                          Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
                                                                                               7
               and Open Space for
               Conservation
Habitats and Natural Vegetation
Habitat types within the Planning Area include annual grasslands,
alkali sink, freshwater wetlands and drainages. In addition, a number
of other habitats can be found within a two-mile radius of the ULL,
including riparian forest, freshwater marsh, riverine and lake habi-
tats. With the exception of annual grasslands, all of these habitats
are considered to be sensitive habitat types, meaning they have
a high ecological value or function, are somewhat rare, or are of
concern to federal, state and/or local agencies. Habitats, including
sensitive habitat types identified in the Yolo Habitat Conservancy
database, are shown in Figure 7-2.
Annual Grasslands
There are approximately 500 acres of annual grasslands within the
Planning Area. This habitat area is dominated by nonnative grasses
and broad-leaved plants, including mouse barley, Mediterranean
barley, rip gut brome, soft chess, Italian rye grass, and oat. Grass-
lands in the Planning Area are generally subject to some level of
regular maintenance or other type of disturbance, including disking
or mowing. A few scattered parcels of annual grassland are found
along Kentucky Avenue in the northern portion of the Planning
Area and along County Road 102 in the southeastern portion of
the Planning Area.
Sensitive Habitat Types
Alkali Sink
Alkali sink habitat is a shrub-dominated community that occurs on
alkaline soils. This habitat supports six special-status plant species
known to occur within the Planning Area. Roughly 95 acres of al-
kali sink habitat is located in the southeastern portion of the Plan-
ning Area, occurring both east and west of CR 102 in undeveloped
areas south of the Water Pollution Control Facility and north of
Willow Slough.
                                                                                               CO 7-13
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                        Freshwater Wetlands
                                        Freshwater wetlands form in seasonally flooded or saturated soils
                                        in depressions or at the edges of streams, rivers, ponds, lakes,
                                        ditches and canals. They may also exist in artificially created de-
                                        pressions designed to contain stormwater in urban or agricultural
                                        areas. This habitat type occurs in some locations within the south-
                                        eastern portion of the Planning Area as well as along Cache Creek
                                        and Willow Slough.
                                        Drainages, Riverine Habitat, and Lake
                                        Drainages are also considered to be sensitive habitats by the Yolo
    The only waterways located within   County Natural Heritage Program. Agricultural drainages within
    Woodland’s Planning Area are agri-
    cultural drainages. Cache Creek and
                                        the Planning Area include the Maple Canal and Farmer’s Central
    Willow Slough are located north and Ditch.The Maple Canal flows through the southwest corner of the
    south of the Planning Area, respec- Planning Area. Farmer’s Central Ditch follows the southern edge
    tively.                             of the Planning Area boundary, and then flows south in the vicinity
                                        of Sports Park Drive, west of SR 113.
                                        Riverine and lake habitat is limited to areas north and south of the
                                        Planning Area, where these habitat types are primarily associated
                                        with Cache Creek and Willow Slough.
                                        Riparian Forest
                                        Riparian forests are structurally diverse, tree-dominated habitats
                                        that occur along the margins of perennial water bodies. Riparian
                                        forest is located north of Interstate 5 near the northeastern edge
                                        of the Planning Area boundary and along the Cache Creek levee
                                        system and Cache Creek Settling Basin. Willow Slough, located
                                        south of the southeastern edge of the Planning Area boundary,
                                        also supports a narrow band of riparian forest.
                                        Freshwater Marsh
                                        Freshwater marsh and associated wetlands form in permanent-
                                        ly flooded or saturated soils in depressions or at the edges of
                                        streams, rivers, ponds, ditches and canals. Freshwater marsh habi-
                                        tat does not occur within the Planning Area, but is found adjacent
                                        to the southern edge of the Planning Area boundary, north of Wil-
                                        low Slough.
CO 7-14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	                                                Conservation and Open Space Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 7-2:	Habitats
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7
                  k
          C ree                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LEGEND
      e
     ch
    Ca                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Drainages
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Habitat Types
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Alkali Prairie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Annual Grassland
                                                                                                                                                                    N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Detention Basin
                                                                                                                      $
                                                                                                                      ^
                                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Developed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Freshwater Wetland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Riparian Forest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Vernal Pool Complex
                                                         W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                           E KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                Water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PCP Sprayfield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                          COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                    EAST ST
                                                                                     W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                               BEAMER ST                                                                                        E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C a ch e
                                                                 ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                                    CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ee
                                                                                                                                                                                    LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k    Transportation
                                                                                                                                                              NORTH ST
                                                                                                                                 COURT ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Highways
                                                            W MAIN ST                                                         MAIN ST                                                                                            E M AIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                              LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                                       THIRD ST                                                                                                                                                  $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                              Collectors
                                                COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                              CROSS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FA
                                                                                                                    WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E                                                                                              Local Roads
                                                                              COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M        NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GU
                                                                                                                                         COLLEGE ST
                      So                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E                 AM
                                                                                              CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                E GUM AVE
                           ut h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                             MATMOR RD
                                  Fo r k D i t c h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Boundaries
                                                                                                                                                                   EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                                                              GIBSON RD                                                                                                   E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PIONEER AVE
                                                                       EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                         HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ugh
                                                                                                                                                                                        V
                                                                                                                                                                                        U   113                                                                                              Regional Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     W il l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ow S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0       2,000           4,000
          Mo
          or                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FEET                    N ORTH
              an
           eC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Base Map: NAIP 2014
                  al                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  X60285491 036   07/17
Source: City of Woodland 2016, Yolo County 2013, SACOG 2013, Dyett & Bhatia 2013, Yolo County NHP 2013, USGS 2010, USFWS 2009, NWI 2013, Center for Natural Lands Management 2015, Yolo County HCP/NCCP 2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CO 7-15
Habitat Types                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DRAFT - Not for Public Review
        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                Table 7-2:	               Special-Status Wildlife Species with Potential to Occur
                                                                          within the Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                          Potential for Occurrence
                                             Species                                   Federal1         State2,              Habitat
                                                                                                                                                          in the Planning Area
                                                Giant garter snake                       T                T                    Cultivated rice,            Likely to occur. Nine
                                                Thamnophis gigas                                                               freshwater marsh, and       occurrences documented
                                                                                                                               slow moving streams or      within two miles of the
                                                                                                                               canals                      Planning Area
                                                Burrowing owl                            -                SSC                  Nests in mammal             Could occur. One
                                                Athene cunicularia                                                             burrows, rock cavities in   occurrence documented
                                                                                                                               grassland and scrub         within two miles of the
                                                                                                                                                           Planning Area
                                                Mountain plover                          -                SSC                  Forages in short            Likely to occur. One
                                                Charadrius montanus                                                            grasslands and plowed       occurrence documented
                                                                                                                               agricultural fields where   within the Planning Area
                                                                                                                               vegetation is sparse and
                                                                                                                               trees are absent
                                                Swainson’s hawk                          -                T                    Nests in riparian forests   Known to occur.
                                                Buteo swainsoni                                                                and isolated trees,         Numerous occurrences
                                                                                                                               open woodlands, and         documented throughout
                                                                                                                               woodland margins; nests     Planning Area.
                                                                                                                               and forages in grasslands
                                                                                                                               and agricultural fields.
                                                Tricolored blackbird                     -                SSC                  Forages in agricultural     Likely to occur. Two
                                                Agelaius tricolor                                                              lands and grasslands;       occurrences documented
                                                                                                                               nests in marshes, riparian  in the Planning Area
                                                                                                                               scrub, and other areas
                                                                                                                               that support cattails or
                                                                                                                               dense thickets of shrubs
                                                                                                                               or herbs
                                                Western snowy plover                     T                SSC                  Nests and forages           Could occur. One
                                                Charadrius alexandrinus                                                        on sandy and gravelly       occurrence documented
                                                nivosus                                                                        beaches along the coast     in the Planning Area
                                                                                                                               and the shores of inland
                                                                                                                               alkali lakes
                                           Notes:
                                           1. 	    Federal: T = Listed as threatened under ESA
                                           2.	     State: T = Listed as threatened under CESA; SSC = Considered a species of special concern by CDFW
                                           Source: California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB), 2013; U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), 2013.
CO 7-16

Woodland Regional Park
                                          Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
                                                                                                         7
The Woodland Regional Park is a 160-acre property located east
of CR 102 and south of CR 25 in the southeastern portion of
the Planning Area. Unique alkali soils in the Regional Park provide
habitat for a suite of rare native plants. The lands to the east of
the Regional Park are privately owned, including a parcel adjacent
to most of the east side of the Park that is part of a three-unit
conservation easement managed by the Center for Natural Lands
Management. The other two units are located on the north side
of CR 25.
Sensitive habitats present at the Woodland Regional Park include
northern claypan vernal pools, valley sink scrub, alkali meadow, and
seasonal wetlands. However, these habitats were not mapped by
the Yolo Natural Habitat Program because they cover such small
areas, and as a result, are not detailed on Figure 7-2.
The City and the Yolo Habitat Conservancy are in negotiations to
establish a conservation easement over the majority of the park
site to protect it as valuable habitat.
Special-Status Species
Wildlife
                                                                        The giant garter snake, Swainson’s
A total of six special-status wildlife species are known to occur or    hawk, and the tri-colored blackbird
have the potential to occur in the Planning Area. Two species are       are special-status wildlife species
listed as Federally threatened, two are listed as State threatened      that have been known to occur in
and four are listed as State species of special concern.There are no    or within two miles of the Planning
special-status fish species that are known to occur in the Planning     Area. Photos: Yolo Natural Heritage
                                                                        Program.
Area. Additionally, no critical habitat for special-status species is
found in the Planning Area or the surrounding radius of two miles.
The locations of special-status wildlife documented in the Califor-
nia Natural Diversity Database within two miles of the Planning
Area are shown in Figure 7-3. These species are also listed in Table
7-2, along with their status, habitat, and potential to occur in the
Planning Area.
                                                                                                         CO 7-17

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                             Vegetation
                                             As shown in Table 7-3, six special-status plant species have been
                                             documented in the Planning Area. One species, palmate-bracted
                                             bird’s beak, is federally and State listed as endangered. The other
                                             five special-status species have California Rare Plant Rank of 1B, in-
                                             dicating that these species are considered rare or endangered and
                                             are tracked by the California Native Plant Society. The locations of
                                             special-status plants documented in the California Natural Diver-
                                             sity Database within two miles of the Planning Area are shown in
                                             Figure 7-3.
                                             Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community
                                             Conservation Plan
                                             Yolo County and its cities are undertaking a planning process for
                                             a comprehensive countywide Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural
                                             Community Conservation Plan (HCP/NCCP) to address the ef-
                                             fects of growth throughout the county on biological resources.The
                                             primary goal of the HCP/NCCP is the conservation of 12 State-
                                             and federally-listed rare, threatened, and endangered species; and
                                             species of special concern.
                                             When adopted, the HCP/NCCP will set forth mitigation and con-
                                             servation requirements for regional loss of habitat that would ap-
                                             ply to most developed activities. Adoption of the HCP/NCCP is
                                             anticipated by the end of 2017.
    Alkali milk vetch, palmate-bracted
    bird’s beak, and San Joaquin
    spearscale are three of the six special-
    status plant species with the potential
    to occur in the Planning Area. Pho-
    tos: Yolo Natural Heritage Program.
CO 7-18

    Table 7-3:	
                                                                   Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
                               Special-Status Plant Species with Potential to Occur
                                                                                                                                                        7
                               within the Planning Area
                                                                                                                               Potential for Occurrence
  Species                             Federal1         State2,3            Habitat
                                                                                                                               in the Planning Area
    Alkali milk-vetch                   -                1B.2                Alkaline soils within playas,                       Known to occur. Two
    Astragalus tener                                                         vernal pools, and adobe clay                        occurrences documented
    var. tener                                                               valley and foothill grassland                       within the Planning Area
                                                                             habitats; 0 to 196 foot
                                                                             elevation
                                                                             Bloom: March–June
    Brittlescale                        -                1B.2                Alkaline clay soils within                          Known to occur. Four
    Atriplex depressa                                                        chenopod scrub, meadow and                          occurrences documented
                                                                             seeps, playas, vernal pools, and                    within the Planning Area
                                                                             valley and foothill grassland
                                                                             habitats; 0 to 1,050 foot
                                                                             elevation
                                                                             Bloom: April–October
    San Joaquin                         -                1B.2                Alkaline soils on chenopod                          Known to occur. Three
    spearscale                                                               scrub, meadow and seeps,                            occurrences documented
    Atriplex joaquinana                                                      playas, and valley and foothill                     within the Planning Area
                                                                             grassland; 3 to 2,740 foot                          and one occurrence
                                                                             elevation                                           documented within two
                                                                             Bloom: April–October                                miles of the Planning
                                                                                                                                 Area
    Heckard’s                           -                1B.2                Alkaline flats in valley and                        Known to occur. Two
    pepper-grass                                                             foothill grassland; 6 to 656                        occurrences documented
    Lepidium latipes                                                         foot elevation                                      within the Planning Area
                                                                             Bloom: March–May                                    and one occurrence
                                                                                                                                 documented within two
                                                                                                                                 miles of the Planning
                                                                                                                                 Area
    Palmate-bracted                     E                E, 1B.1             Alkaline chenopod scrub and                         Known to occur. Three
    bird’s beak                                                              valley and foothill grassland; 16                   occurrences documented
    Chloropyron                                                              to 510 foot elevation                               within the Planning Area
    palmatum                                                                 Bloom: May–October
    Saline clover                       -                1B.2                Marshes and swamps, vernal                          Known to occur. One
    Trifolium                                                                pools, and mesic, alkaline                          occurrence documented
    hydrophilum                                                              valley and foothill grassland; 0                    within the Planning Area
                                                                             to 984 foot elevation
                                                                             Bloom: April–June
Notes:
1.	    Federal: E = Listed as endangered under ESA
2.	    State: E = Listed as endangered under CESA
3.	    California Rare Plant Ranks and extensions 1B = Rare or endangered in California and elsewhere; .1 = Seriously endangered in California (>80 percent of
       occurrences are threatened and/or high degree and immediacy of threat); .2 = Fairly endangered in California (20 to 80 percent of occurrences are threat-
       ened)
Source: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), 2013; California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB), 2013; California Native Plant Society, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                        CO 7-19

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
CO 7-20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !             !    ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 7-3:	Special Status Species Occurrence within a 2-Mile Search Radius
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Conservation and Open Space Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 3-3:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Existing Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                !                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                            !       !                     !                                                                                  ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                 !                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Special-status Species
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !               !   ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !! !                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Occurrences within a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                 !                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !       !                                                                                                                   ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Valley Oak Woodland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2-mile Search Radius
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Plant - Accuracy Class 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tricolored blackbird
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                            k                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Plant - Accuracy Class 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                       re e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                               C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! ! !
                                                                                                                                he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                      ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                !         ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Plant - Accuracy Class 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                        !                     !                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                !                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                          c                                              !                                                           !                                                                                                                                                               !                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !
                                                                                                                 Ca                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Plant - Accuracy Classes 4-9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Animal - Accuracy Class 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¨
                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Swainson's hawk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                      !
Swainson's hawk                                                                                                                                                           Swainson's hawk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Animal - Accuracy Class 2
                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                        ! ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                        !
                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !
                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                       !
                                                       !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                    !
                                                                                                    ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Animal - Accuracy Class 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ! !
                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! ! !! ! !! !! ! !! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !                    ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !! !                      !! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !       !
                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !             !
                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!
                                                                                                !                                          !                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!   !!                                                                                                               ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tricolored blackbird
                                                                    !                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Animal - Accuracy Classes 4-9
                                                                        ! !                                                                !                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!                                                                                                                                                      !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mountain plover
                                              ! ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                         !                                                                                                             !                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! ! !         !
                                 !                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           western snowy plover
                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Terrestrial Community - Accuracy
                         !
                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Swainson's hawk
                     !                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                !                                                                                       ! ! !                 ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Joaquin spearscale
                 !                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Classes 4-9
                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
           ! !                                                                                          ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                  ! ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!
                                                                                                        ! !
           ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        brittlescale                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! ! !! !! ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                       !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                 !                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                           Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N PIONEER
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! ! !
                     !                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AVE !! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Principal Arterials
                         !                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !! !! !
                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! !!
                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                        !                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            palmate-bracted bird's-beak
                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! !!
                                                           ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E KENTUCKY AVE
                                             ! !                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                !             !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                    !                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ty
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                    !                    !                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ou n r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ch e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o C Riv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Swainson's hawk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C r ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Yolo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    me n t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E BEAMER ST                                                                                                                                                                                                           !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Local Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S acr a ac r a m en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C ou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ramps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                    Swainson's hawk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !!                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nt y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !! ! !! ! !! !! ! !! !                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !! !!                                                                                !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         giant garter snake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MAIN ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           brittlescale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                           !                                                   !                            !                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Swainson's hawk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        giant garter snake                                                                                               Sphere Of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                               !                                            !                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Swainson's hawk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            giant garter snake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EAST ST
                                                                    ! ! ! !
                                                            !
                                                                                            !
                                              !! ! !
                                     Swainson's hawk                                            ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W. GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                          !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                              Swainson's hawk
                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! ! !
                                                                !               !
                                                                    ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       palmate-bracted bird's-beak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                              Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  San Joaquin                                                                                                          brittlescale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   spearscale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        palmate-bracted bird's-beak                                                                                                                                                             !   ! ! !         ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   alkali milk-vetch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                            !                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tricolored blackbird
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                brittlescale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Wil l ow Sl o u gh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CNDDB Accuracy Class 1: Reported
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                         !                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! ! !                                                                                                                 Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                              Swainson's hawk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               occurrence is a point; location considered
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tricolored
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                     !!           !                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Joaquin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            accurate to within the minimum mappable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! ! !              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        blackbird                               ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                          !                                 ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Swainson's hawk                                                                                                                                                                                                                          spearscale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            unit of 80 meters.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               giant garter snake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                       !                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               alkali milk-vetch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !           !                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! !      !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !!     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !   !       !!              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !   !                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               lo                                           CNDDB Accuracy Class 2: Reported
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! ! !                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Heckard's pepper-grass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            location is an area with defined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       By
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ! ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    saline clover
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            boundaries.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !     !    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !! ! !
                                                                                                                            ! ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! ! !             !!                        ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! ! !
                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Heckard's pepper-grass                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  giant garter snake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                 !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !     ! !            !
                                                                                                               Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                               ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        113                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !      ! !                                        ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ss                                      CNDDB Accuracy Class 3: Reported
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            location is a non-specific area; buffer
                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !    !
                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                 !                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Swainson's hawk
                                                                                                                          !            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                              ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! ! !               !                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            added to represent degree of uncertainty
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      in reported location.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! ! !       !! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !!! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! ! !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CNDDB Accuracy Classes 4-9: Reported
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! !                      !                                                                                                                           San Joaquin                                                                                                                             giant garter snake                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  location considered accurate within the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 spearscale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            radius shown.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           giant garter snake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Swainson's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 hawk                                                                                                                                                                                                               burrowing owl                                           ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Swainson's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                        !                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              hawk                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                  Swainson's hawk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0                         0.375   0.75                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Yolo County, 2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dyett & Bhatia, 2013; CDFW, 2013; USGS, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X 60285491 005 5/13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CO 7-21

        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
          This page intentionally left blank.
CO 7-22
7.4	 Agricultural and Soil
                                          Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
                                                                                               7
              Resources
Agricultural Resources
Farmland in the Planning Area
The California Department of Conservation uses the Important
Farmlands Inventory to classify five different categories of agricul-
tural land:
  •	 Prime Farmland is farmland with the best combination of
     physical and chemical features able to sustain long term agricul-
     tural production. This land has the soil quality, growing season,
     and moisture supply needed to produce sustained high yields.
     Land must have been used for irrigated agricultural production
     at some time during the four years prior to the mapping date.
  •	 Farmland of Statewide Importance is farmland similar to
     Prime Farmland but with minor shortcomings, such as greater
     slopes or less ability to store soil moisture. Land must have
     been used for irrigated agricultural production at some time
     during the four years prior to the mapping date.
  •	 Unique Farmland is farmland of lesser quality soils used for
     the production of the state’s leading agricultural crops. This
     land is usually irrigated but may include nonirrigated orchards
     or vineyards as found in some climatic zones in California. Land
     must have been cropped at some time during the four years
     prior to the mapping date.
  •	 Farmland of Local Importance is land of importance to
     the local agricultural economy as determined by each county’s
     board of supervisors and a local advisory committee. In Yolo
     County, Farmland of Local Potential is identified as a subcat-
     egory under Farmland of Local Importance that refers to
     land that contains prime or statewide soils that are not pres-
     ently irrigated or cultivated.
  •	 Grazing Land is land on which the existing vegetation is suit-
     ed to the grazing of livestock.
As shown in Figure 7-4, Woodland currently contains all five types
of agricultural land within the Planning Area, including 1,545 acres
of Prime Farmland. The majority of Prime Farmland acreage is lo-
cated within the SP-1 boundary to the south and the SP-3 bound-
ary and Flood Study Area to the northwest.
                                                                                               CO 7-23

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                            Preservation of Farmland
                                            The General Plan plays an important role in the conservation of
                                            farmland because the city’s growth over the General Plan horizon
                                            will be guided by General Plan policies and the Land Use Diagram.
                                            While the General Plan emphasizes infill development, projected
                                            growth in the Planning Area will also necessitate some conver-
                                            sion of agricultural land to urban uses. However, all new growth
                                            areas identified by this General Plan are located within the ULL.
                                            The primary purpose of the ULL is to allow for development and
                                            densification of Woodland over the long term while preserving
    New growth identified by the Gen-
                                            and protecting agricultural, natural resource, and open space uses
    eral Plan will be located in the Urban
    Limit Line (ULL) to protect farm        outside of the boundary.
    land and open space.
                                            Soil Resources
                                            Soils in the Planning Area
                                            A region’s geology ultimately determines the types of soils that
                                            cover its surface, and soils have implications for agricultural pro-
                                            ductivity, natural hazards, and development potential. In general,
                                            soils in Woodland are characterized by deep, poorly drained, fine-
                                            grained materials that may contain a high percentage of organic
                                            materials. The Planning Area consists of a total of 23 different de-
                                            tailed soil types, with Yolo silt loam being most prevalent. From a
    Woodland’s topography is generally      development perspective, important considerations regarding soils
    level, so with use of proper irrigation include their potential to shrink and swell with changes in mois-
    technique, the risk of soil erosion is  ture (affecting structures built on them) and to erode (see below).
    low.                                    For a more detailed discussion of soils and their characteristics,
                                            see the Environmental Impact Report.
                                            Soil Erosion
                                            Soil erosion is a process by which soil materials are worn away
    The Planning Area consists of           and transported to another area, either by wind or water. Rates
    23 different soil types.                of erosion can vary depending on the soil material and structure,
                                            and the placement and level of human activity. Soil containing high
                                            amounts of silt can be easily eroded, while sandy soils are less
                                            susceptible. Erosion is most likely to occur on sloped areas with
                                            exposed soil. In the case of agricultural or open space uses, ero-
                                            sion potential is highest when there is little vegetation. Soil erosion
                                            matters for agricultural land because it causes the fertile topsoil to
                                            wash away. However, topography in the Planning Area is generally
                                            level, and the erosion potential for soils is therefore generally low.
CO 7-24

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            	                                                              Conservation and Open Space Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 7-4:	Farmland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 7-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Farmland
                                                                                                                                                   N EAST ST
                                        SP-3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Farmland Category
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Prime Farmland
                                                                                                      I-5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Farmland of Statewide Importance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Unique Farmland
                                                                                                                                                                                                       N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Farmland of Local Importance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Farmland of Local Potential
                 W KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Grazing Land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Urban and Built Up Land
                                                                                                                   COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                   EAST ST
                                                         W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Other Land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PCP Sprayfield
                                                                                                    BEAMER ST                                                                                                          E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Highways
                       ASHLEY AVE
                                                                     CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                    LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                           NORTH ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Minor Arterials
                                                                                                      COURT ST
                 W MAIN ST                                                                        MAIN ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E MAIN ST
                                                                                                  LINCOLN AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Local Roads
                                                                                                                                THIRD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ramps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I -5
                                                                                                   CROSS ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Railroads
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FA R
                                                                                        WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NH                                                                                                             New Specific Plan Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                         COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AV           AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EG
                                                                                                                COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                               E GUM AVE                                                                                      AV                                                                                                       Spring Lake Specific Plan
                                                            CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Boundary
                                                                                                                                                 EAST ST                     MATMOR RD                                                 BRANIGAN AVE                                                                                                                    Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                   GIBSON RD                                                                                                                          E GIBSON RD                                                                                                           Note: See Policy 2.A.3 related to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            agricultural mitigation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PIONEER AVE
                                    EL DORADO DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Note: Source data for farmland cateogry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            is from 2012. Some additional urban
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            development has occured since then.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FARMERS CENTRAL RD                                                                                                 Note: This map may change over time
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            with future Department of Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            updates. Please review the latest map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                     SP-1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   provided by the Department of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Conservation, Division of Land
                                                                                                                                                                                         HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SP-2                      Resource Protection, Farmland Mapping
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Due to the use of the land for the PCP waste    and Monitoring Program.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            water spray fields, the State farmland maps
                                                                                                                                                                           113                                         MARSTON DR                                                                           may not reflect current conditions.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0            0.375         0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SPRING LAKE                                                    Data Source: Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (FMMP), 2012; City of Woodland, California, 2013; Yolo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SPECIFIC PLAN                                                   County, 2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CO 7-25
        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
            This page intentionally left blank.
CO 7-26
7.5	 Mineral Resources
                                        Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
                                                                                             7
Aggregate
Cache Creek and its floodplain is a source of aggregate resources,
but all of these resource areas are located outside the Planning
Area. Six aggregate mines are currently in operation along Cache
Creek. The operations of Teichert Aggregates Woodland are the
closest, located about two to three miles west of the Planning Area.
Natural Gas
In recent years, natural gas has become more important to the
regional economy. According to the California Department of
Conservation Division of Oil, Gas, and Geothermal Resources
(DOGGR), there are approximately 25 gas fields located within Yolo
County, including several within the Planning Area, as illustrated
in Figure 7-5. Gas-bearing formations are generally located far
beneath the earth’s surface, and nearby wells are generally in excess
of 2,000 feet deep, with some more than a mile in depth.There are
no active natural gas wells within the City limits, although there
are natural gas wells within the Planning Area. Gas wells require
a permit from DOGGR and Yolo County, which requires CEQA
review and applies permit conditions to protect water quality,
prevent blowouts, and ensure proper spacing of wells.
                                                                                             CO 7-27

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
CO 7-28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            	          Conservation and Open Space Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 7-5:	Natural Gas Fields
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 7-5:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Natural Gas Fields
                                                                                                                                         N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Natural Gas Fields
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Highways
                                                                                             §
                                                                                             ¨
                                                                                             ¦I-5                                                                                                                                                                                                     Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                            N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Local Roads
                 W KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E KENTUCKY AVE                                                        Ramps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Study Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                          COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                         EAST ST
                                                    W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sphere of Influence
                                                                                            BEAMER ST                                                                                                       E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City Limits
                       ASHLEY AVE
                                                              CALIFORNIA ST                                                                               LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                  NORTH ST
                                                                                              COURT ST
                 W MAIN ST                                                                MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                E MAIN ST
                                                                                          LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                       THIRD ST                                                                                                                                                 §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I -5
                                                                                          CROSS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HA
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                              WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                               V
                                                                                                                                                                               U
                                                                                                                                                                               113                                                   FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RN
                                    COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                        COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                     E GUM AVE                                                                                  AV
                                                      CALIFORNIA ST                                                                                                MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                        EAST ST                                                                            BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                           GIBSON RD                                                                                                                      E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                        EL DORADO DR                                                                                                        PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                     HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                 V
                                                                                                                                                                 U
                                                                                                                                                                 113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0         0.25        0.5                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yolo County, 2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dyett & Bhatia, 2013; California Department of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Conservation, Division of Oil, Gas, and Geothermal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Resources, 2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         X 60285491 019 5/13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CO 7-29

        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
             This page intentionally left blank.
CO 7-30
                                        Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
                                   7.6	 Cultural and
                                                                                                    7
                                                 Archaeological
                                                 Resources
                                   In addition to a desire by the community to protect cultural re-
                                   sources, State laws, most notably CEQA, protect archaeological
                                   and other cultural resources. Cultural resources are defined as
                                   buildings, sites, structures, or objects that may have historical, ar-
                                   chitectural, archaeological, cultural, or scientific importance.
                                   Before the settlement of the area by Europeans, the Woodland
                                   area was populated by the Poo-e-win, a dialect group of the Hill
                                   Patwin native Americans. Like most Patwin groups, the Poo-e-win
                                   occupied the major river courses and tributary drainages of their
                                   territory, such as the Sacramento River, Cache and Putah Creeks,
                                   and in some cases, springs. Only places high enough to keep them
                                   above the rising waters of seasonal floods were selected for per-
                                   manent villages, or tribelets.The Poo-e-win tribelet of Yo’doi at one
                                   time occupied the present site of Knights Landing, and probably
                                   occupied the Woodland area in seasonal camps for hunting and
                                   seed gathering. Of special importance to the Poo-e-win and their
                                   neighbors was a main trading trail which followed the course of
                                   Cache Creek. This trade route served as an important means of
                                   cultural and social interchange in addition to a vital economic sup-
                                   ply line for the Patwin and their neighbors – the Nomlaki to the
                                   north, the Nisenan to the east, and the Pomo to the west.
                                   No prehistoric resources have been formally recorded in Wood-
Woodland also has a number of      land, and evidence of early native peoples who occupied the area is
historic resources, which are ad-  scarce. Any artifacts or information is therefore valuable. Policies
dressed in detail in the Land Use, in this Element seek to identify and preserve any archaeological
Community Design, and Historic     resources that might be disturbed by development activity. Wood-
Preservation Element.              land also has a number of historic resources, which are addressed
                                   in detail in the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preser-
                                   vation Element.
                                                                                                    CO 7-31

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   7.7	 Air Quality and
                                                 Greenhouse Gases
                                   Air Quality
                                   Protecting and improving air quality is important to Woodland and
                                   communities across California, as certain kinds of air pollutants
                                   are directly harmful to human health and the health of the natural
                                   environment, including water quality and plant and animal life.
                                   Climate and Atmospheric Conditions
                                   Woodland is located in the Sacramento Valley Air Basin.The Sacra-
                                   mento Valley typically experiences hot dry summers and mild rainy
                                   winters, with temperatures ranging from 20 to 115 degrees Fahr-
                                   enheit throughout the year. In the summer, average highs are in the
                                   mid 90s, while average lows in the winter are around 40 degrees.
                                   Average annual rainfall is just less than 20 inches, and snowfall is
                                   very rare. Prevailing winds are moderate in strength and vary from
                                   dry land flows from the north to moist clean breezes from the
                                   south. The mountains surrounding the Sacramento Valley create a
                                   barrier to airflow, which can trap air pollutants in the Valley, par-
                                   ticularly in the autumn and early winter.
                                   Ozone season in the Sacramento Valley occurs from May through
                                   October. It is characterized by stagnant morning air or light winds,
                                   with the Delta sea breeze arriving in the afternoon and evening
                                   out of the southwest. Usually, this evening breeze transports air-
                                   borne pollutants out of the Sacramento Valley. However, from July
                                   to September, this is often prevented by a phenomenon called the
                                   “Schultz Eddy.” Instead of allowing the prevailing wind patterns to
                                   flow north out of the Valley, the Schultz Eddy causes winds to circle
                                   back south.This means that air pollutants that would otherwise be
                                   transported out of the Valley are instead blown back into it, exac-
                                   erbating pollution levels and increasing the likelihood of violating
                                   federal or State standards.
                                   Criteria Air Pollutants
                                   The California Air Resources Board (ARB) and the U.S. Environ-
                                   mental Protection Agency (EPA) focus on the following air pollut-
                                   ants as indicators of ambient air quality: ozone, carbon monox-
CO 7-32

                                           Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
ide (CO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), respirable
particulate matter (PM10), fine particulate matter (PM2.5), and lead.
                                                                                                         7
These pollutants, which are most linked with impacts to human
health, are commonly called “criteria air pollutants.”
Health-based air quality standards have been established for these
pollutants by the ARB at the State level and by EPA at the national
level. These standards, which include a margin of safety, were es-
tablished to protect the public from adverse health impacts result-
ing from exposure to air pollution. California has also established
standards for sulfates, visibility-reducing particles, hydrogen sulfide,
and vinyl chloride.
                                                                          Diesel-fueled engines release particu-
Sources                                                                   late matter in high concentration
Within theYolo-Solano Air Quality Management District (YSAQMD             along transportation routes.
or the Air District), mobile sources, such as vehicles, are the largest
contributors of carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and reactive
organic gases (ROG). Reactive organic gases and nitrogen oxides
are ozone precursors and therefore, mobile sources are a key tar-
get for reducing ozone concentrations in the region. Stationary
sources, including fuel combustion and industrial processes, are
responsible for the majority of sulfur oxide emissions. Area-wide
sources, such as solvent evaporation and landscape maintenance
equipment, account for most particulate matter emissions.
Attainment Status
The region’s major air quality problem is ozone generation, fol-
lowed by respirable particulate matter and fine particulate matter
concentrations. Between 2009 and 2011, the Woodland monitor-
ing station registered multiple days above the State and Federal
eight-hour ozone standards, but no exceedances of the State one-
hour standard. The State 24-hour respirable particulate matter
standard was exceeded at least once in each year, but the national
24-hour standard was not exceeded during the same period. Mea-
sured concentrations of fine particulate matter exceeded the na-
tional standard once in the past three years.
To determine whether a region’s air quality is healthful or unhealth-
ful, contaminant levels in ambient air samples are compared to the
CAAQS and the NAAQS. Both ARB and EPA designate an area’s
attainment status relative to the state and national standards, re-
spectively, for criteria air pollutants. The purpose of these desig-
                                                                                                         CO 7-33

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   nations is to identify areas with air quality problems and thereby
                                   initiate planning efforts for improvement.
                                   The three basic designation categories are “nonattainment,” “at-
                                   tainment,” and “unclassified.” Attainment status indicates that stan-
                                   dards are met, while nonattainment status indicates they are not.
                                   The unclassified designation is used in areas that cannot be classi-
                                   fied on the basis of available information as meeting or not meet-
                                   ing the standards. With respect to the CAAQS, the Air District is
                                   currently designated as a nonattainment area for ozone and respi-
                                   rable particulate matter, and as an attainment or unclassified area
                                   for all other pollutants. With respect to the national standards, the
                                   YSAQMD is designated as a nonattainment area for ozone and fine
                                   particulate matter and as an attainment or unclassified area for all
                                   other pollutants.
                                   Toxic Air Contaminants
                                   Concentrations of toxic air contaminants (TACs) are also used as
                                   indicators of ambient air quality conditions. TACs are pollutants
                                   that occur at relatively low concentrations and are associated with
                                   carcinogenic and other adverse health risks, but for which no am-
                                   bient air quality standards have been established.
                                   According to the California Almanac of Emissions and Air Quality, the
                                   majority of the estimated health risk from TACs is attributed to
                                   relatively few compounds, the most dominant being particulate
                                   matter exhaust from diesel-fueled engines. Diesel particulate mat-
                                   ter concentrations are typically highest along major transporta-
                                   tion routes with high proportions of heavy-duty diesel truck traffic.
                                   Concentrations drop off substantially with increased distance from
                                   these roadways. For example, ARB reported a 70 percent drop in
                                   particulate matter concentrations at a distance of 500 feet from a
                                   roadway compared to concentrations in areas adjacent to a road-
                                   way. Health risk along major transportation routes is anticipated
                                   to improve over time as ARB requires diesel trucks and buses to
                                   be retrofitted with particulate matter filters.
                                   TAC Sources
                                   Existing TAC sources in the Woodland area include mobile sourc-
                                   es, stationary sources, and areawide sources. Mobile sources are
                                   dispersed on roadways throughout the Planning Area. State Route
                                   113 and Interstate 5 both serve heavy-duty diesel trucks which
                                   emit TACs to which nearby land uses may be exposed. Devel-
CO 7-34

                                           Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
opment anticipated under this General Plan, along with regional
growth, would increase vehicular traffic on I-5 and SR 113. How-
                                                                                                        7
ever, advances in emissions technology, turnover in vehicles, and
increasingly stringent emission standards would likely reduce aver-
age emission rates.
In addition, there are a number of stationary sources of TACs in
the Planning Area, including gasoline-dispensing facilities, natural gas
heaters, paint and adhesives facilities, concrete production, lumber
cutting facilities, woodworking, emergency backup diesel engines,
and grain milling. Areawide TAC emissions are not monitored and
tracked as closely as stationary or major roadway sources because
of the dispersed nature of areawide TAC sources. Typically, area-
wide TAC sources are dependent on consumer behavior, which
makes data difficult to gather. However, ARB has developed TAC
emissions inventories that provide a baseline level of TAC emis-
sions.
Odor
Odors are generally regarded as an annoyance rather than as a
health hazard. However, manifestations of a person’s reaction to
foul odors can range from psychological (e.g., irritation, anger, or
anxiety) to physiological (e.g., circulatory and respiratory effects,
nausea, vomiting, and headache).With respect to odors, the human
nose is the sole sensing device, and the ability to detect odors var-
ies considerably among the population. In addition, an odor that is
offensive to one person may be perfectly acceptable to another.
An unfamiliar odor is more easily detected and is therefore more
likely to result in complaints than a familiar one.
Odor Sources
Woodland has several facilities and land uses that could be con-
                                                                           Recommended distances for odor
sidered potential odor sources. The Water Pollution Control Fa-
                                                                           mitigation from the headworks
cility (WPCF) is located just east of CR 102. The headworks area
                                                                           and sludge stabilization ponds are
includes an influent pump station, screens, and grit removal, all          shown in Figure 7-6.
of which are open air and not currently equipped with any odor
controls. The pond system can receive raw sewage influent and
effluent during times of maintenance or peak flows, which, dur-
ing warmer weather, can also generate odor emissions. Figure 7-6
provides a graphical view of the recommended buffer distances for
different odor mitigations. Odors associated with the WPCF must
be mitigated to acceptable levels in conjunction with planning and
development for any land within the odor buffer shown in Figure
7-6.
                                                                                                        CO 7-35

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
 Figure 7-6:	Odor Impact Area
                                                                                            Figure 7-6: Odor Impact Area
                                                                         I -5
                                                   BRONZE STAR DR
    FARN                 MAXWELL AVE
         M
      HA
            AV E
                                                                                                                                 SP-2
           E GIBSON RD                             COUNTY ROAD 24
                                                                    Water Pollution
                                                                    Control Facility
                                                                       (WPCF)
                                 COUNTY ROAD 102
       FARMERS CENTRAL RD
              E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                           Source: Esri, DigitalGlobe, GeoEye, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS,
                                                                           USDA, USGS, AEX, Getmapping, Aerogrid, IGN, IGP, swisstopo, and the GIS
                                                                           User Community
                No Odor Mitigations Necessary Outside this Boundary
                Minimum Recommended Odor Buffer
                New Specific Plan Boundary (SP-2)
                                                                                                            0         750       1,500                3,000
                                                                                                                                                        Feet
                                                                                                            Data Source: NEXGEN Utility Management, January
                                                                                                            2015; City of Woodland, California, 2013;
CO 7-36
                                          Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
Pacific Coast Producers (PCP), a tomato canning facility, has a con-
tract with the City that allows water used in the manufacturing
                                                                                               7
process to be discharged across agricultural fields owned by the
City in the east side of the Planning Area, within the area identified
as SP-2. As the organic matter in the residual water decomposes,
odor emissions are generated that have impacted local residents
in the past. PCP has invested more than $3 million dollars to re-
duce potential odor sources from its operations, including imple-
mentation of measures such as water saving processing improve-
ments, and adding calcium nitrate and Bioxide to its wastewater
to reduce organic loading rates (i.e., odor-generating source). The
company is also planning to employ a new sprinkler irrigation sys-
tem that is anticipated to help reduce its odor emissions. PCP and
the City have joined together to purchase and utilize a sophisti-
cated computerized odor plume tracking system to identify odor
sources and assist both entities with mitigation efforts. Before
development of SP-2 occurs, the treatment of PCP’s processing
water must be alternatively accommodated. Moving the sprayfields
away from the city or modifying their processing water treatment
process would likely significantly reduce or eliminate the odor im-
pacts experienced by residents.
Other potential odor sources that could impact the Planning Area
include the Yolo County Central Landfill, which is located approxi-
mately seven miles southeast of Downtown. The Yolo County Ani-
mal Services Shelter and the County Fairgrounds (particularly live-
stock shows) have also been identified as odor sources at different
times of the year. Industrial uses, such as manufacturing facilities,
biomass storage, and food processing, also constitute potential
odor sources. In addition, the agricultural uses that surround the
city can generate odors from a variety of processes, such as agri-
cultural burning, livestock pens, fertilization, and composting. The
City of Woodland and the Air District work in cooperation with
industrial facilities and agricultural producers to limit the odor
emissions associated with manufacturing processes and agricul-
tural burning.
Greenhouse Gases
Gases that trap heat in the Earth’s atmosphere are called green-
house gases (GHGs).These gases play a critical role in determining
the Earth’s surface temperature. Some GHGs occur naturally and
are emitted to the atmosphere through natural processes and hu-
                                                                                               CO 7-37

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   man activities, while others are created and emitted solely through
                                   human activities. The six primary GHGs are:
                                     •	 Carbon dioxide (CO2), emitted as a result of fossil fuel com-
                                        bustion, with contributions from cement manufacture;
                                     •	 Methane (CH4), produced through the anaerobic decompo-
                                        sition of waste in landfills, animal digestion, decomposition of
                                        animal wastes, production and distribution of natural gas and
                                        petroleum, coal production, and incomplete fossil fuel combus-
                                        tion;
                                     •	 Nitrous oxide (N2O), typically generated as a result of soil
                                        cultivation practices, particularly the use of commercial and
                                        organic fertilizers, fossil fuel combustion, nitric acid produc-
                                        tion, and biomass burning;
                                     •	 Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), primarily used as refriger-
                                        ants;
                                     •	 Perfluorocarbons (PFCs), originally introduced as alterna-
                                        tives to ozone depleting substances and typically emitted as
                                        by-products of industrial and manufacturing processes; and
                                     •	 Sulfur hexafluoride (SF6), primarily used in electrical trans-
                                        mission and distribution systems.
                                   GHG emissions contributing to global climate change are attribut-
                                   able, in large part, to human activities associated with the trans-
                                   portation, industrial/manufacturing, utility, residential, commercial,
                                   and agricultural emissions sectors. In California, the transportation
                                   sector is the largest emitter of GHGs, accounting for 38 percent
                                   of statewide emissions in 2010. Electricity generation is the second
                                   largest emitter.
                                   Sources of GHGs in Woodland
                                   In order to better understand the sources and magnitude of GHG
                                   emissions, public and private entities at the Federal, State, and local
                                   level are developing GHG inventories. In 2012, the City of Wood-
                                   land worked with UC Davis to develop an estimate of communi-
                                   tywide emissions for the baseline year 2005. Figure 7-7 presents
                                   the City of Woodland’s GHG emission sectors by their relative
                                   contribution to the city’s total emissions. Baseline annual emissions
                                   in Woodland were determined to be approximately 544,145 met-
                                   ric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent per year. Of the total GHG
                                   emissions, over two thirds were generated from transportation.
CO 7-38

                                            Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
Figure 7-7:	2005 City of Woodland GHG Emissions by Category
                                                                                                      7
                                                                Transportation
                                                                Commercial and Residential Energy
                                                                Wastewater Reuse
                                                                Waste and Wastewater
                                                                Municipal (Energy and Transportation)
Source: City of Woodland Climate Action Plan, 2017
General trends in GHG emissions call for significant changes over
the coming decades in transportation systems and in the ways
energy is produced and consumed. Policies in this General Plan
encourage a shift to renewable energy use and the improvement
of community-wide energy conservation. This includes the pro-
motion of smart energy choices for residents and businesses and
land use planning that allows residents to meet more of their daily
needs (commute trips, shopping, etc.) without requiring long auto-
mobile trips. In addition, there are a number of economic benefits
to increased energy efficiency that could benefit the City, as well
as its residents and businesses.
                                                                                                      CO 7-39
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                  Global Climate Change
                                                  Global climate change is currently one of the most significant sci-
                                                  entific, economic, and political issues in the United States. Climate
                                                  change refers to a change in the average climate of the earth that
                                                  may be measured by wind patterns, storms, precipitation, and tem-
                                                  perature. The baseline by which these changes are measured origi-
                                                  nates in historical records identifying temperature changes that
                                                  have occurred in the distant past, such as during previous ice ages.
                                                  The rate of temperature change has typically been incremental,
                                                  with warming and cooling occurring over the course of thousands
                                                  of years. In the past 10,000 years, the earth has experienced incre-
                                                  mental warming as glaciers retreated across the globe. However,
                                                  scientists have observed an unprecedented increase in the rate
                                                  of warming over the past 150 years, roughly coinciding with the
                                                  global industrial revolution.
    In Woodland, the largest contribu-
    tors to greenhouse gas emissions are          Potential Impacts in California
    the transportation sector (predomi-
    nantly motor vehicles) and electricity        According to the California Climate Action Team (CCAT), acceler-
    used in residential and commercial            ating global climate change has the potential to cause a number of
    buildings.                                    adverse impacts in California, including but not limited to:
                                                    •	 A shrinking Sierra snowpack that would threaten the state’s
                                                       water supply;
                                                    •	 Public health threats caused by higher temperatures, more se-
                                                       vere storms and other weather events, and more smog;
                                                    •	 Damage to agriculture and forests due to reduced water stor-
                                                       age capacity, rising temperatures, increasing salt water intru-
                                                       sion, flooding, and pest infestations;
                                                    •	 Critical habitat modification and destruction;
                                                    •	 Eroding coastlines;
                                                    •	 Increased wildfire risk; and
                                                    •	 Increased electricity demand.2
                                                  These impacts have and will continue to have considerable costs
                                                  associated with them. The City of Woodland must consider not
                                                  only how it can reduce its contribution to greenhouse gas emis-
                                                  sions, but also how the City can adapt to climate change’s impacts
                                                  and maintain resilience to global warming over time.
    2	 California Climate Action Team, April 2006.
CO 7-40

Climate Action Plan (CAP)
                                           Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
                                                                                                7
Woodland is committed to helping reduce the effects of rapid
climate change. The city’s Climate Action Plan (CAP) outlines
Woodland’s overall strategy to reduce GHG emissions. It identi-
fies specific implementation measures the City will undertake and
quantifies their impacts, in order to comply with State directives
for reducing GHGs. The California AB 32 Scoping Plan seeks to
bring California to a low carbon future, reducing emissions to 1990
levels by 2020. As part of that reduction, the plan asks municipal
governments to reduce their emissions by at least 15 percent by
2020 compared with current levels (current levels are defined as
2008 levels or earlier). The AB 32 Scoping Plan also directs local
governments to assist the state in meeting California’s emissions
goals.
The CAP proposes a 2020 emissions reduction target equivalent
to 15 percent below the city’s 2005 levels. It provides a commu-
nity-based policy framework to address community-wide GHG
emissions sources. Specifically, the CAP is designed to:
   •	 Translate high-level objectives and quantified goals into a real-
      istic, understandable set of implementation actions;
   •	 Demonstrate that significant reductions in GHG emissions are
      attainable through local actions;
   •	 Inspire community members to work collectively to achieve
      these reductions;
   •	 Dovetail with General Plan policies that are required to ad-
      dress climate change impacts and adaptation, including those
      for land use, transportation, building design, and infrastructure;
      and
   •	 Provide a predictable approach to mitigation strategies for the
      compliance of future development projects with CEQA.
The General Plan directly supports CAP targets with several poli-
cies aimed at monitoring and reducing GHG emissions.
                                                                                                CO 7-41

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    7.8	 Goals and Policies
    Goal 7.A	         Protect Water Supply and Quality. Protect and enhance the natural quantity and
                      qualities of surface water and groundwater resources in the Woodland area.
    See also policies in the Public Facilities and Services Element.
                      Policy 7.A.1	           Surface Water Project. Continue to cooperate with the City of
                                              Davis and UC Davis to operate the Surface Water Project in order
                                              to balance the groundwater supply and protect against aquifer
                                              overdrafts and water quality degradation.
                      Policy 7.A.2	           Groundwater Management. Support local efforts to establish
                                              a Groundwater Sustainability Agency and adopt a Groundwater
                                              Management Plan. Ensure that the City of Woodland and local
                                              watershed agencies retain local authority to regulate and manage
                                              groundwater.
                      Policy 7.A.3	           Watershed Protection. Support local and regional efforts to
                                              protect the Sacramento River, Cache Creek, Putah Creek, and
                                              Willow Slough watersheds.
                      Policy 7.A.4	           Best Management Practices. Continue to require the use
                                              of feasible and practical best management practices (BMPs) and
                                              promote Low Impact Development to protect receiving waters
                                              from the adverse effects of construction activities and urban and
                                              agricultural runoff.
                      Policy 7.A.5	           Landscape Water Conservation Standards. Ensure consistency
                                              with the State water conservation requirements and Model
                                              Ordinance provided by the DWR as well as review and update the
                                              City’s water conservation requirements and ordinance as needed.
                      Policy 7.A.6	           Education. Continue efforts to educate the residents and
                                              businesses of Woodland about wise water use.
    Goal 7.B	         Maintain and Protect Biological Resources. Maintain and protect natural habitats
                      throughout the Planning Area, especially types that are considered sensitive by the
                      Yolo HCP/NCCP. Protect sensitive wildlife and plant species.
                      Policy 7.B.1	           Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community
                                              Conservation Plan. Continue to participate in the planning
                                              process for the countywide Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural
                                              Community Conservation Plan. Once adopted, fully implement
                                              the Plan to mitigate the impacts of growth projected under the
                                              General Plan on plant and wildlife habitats in the Woodland area.
CO 7-42

                   Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
              Evaluate the opportunity for adoption and implementation of a
              Local Conservation Plan to provide additional clearance under the
                                                                                7
              California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) for general biological
              resource impacts.
Policy 7.B.2	 Sensitive Habitat Types. Support and cooperate with efforts of
              other local, State, and Federal agencies and private entities engaged
              in the preservation and protection of sensitive habitat types from
              incompatible land uses and development. Sensitive habitat types
              include alkali sink, freshwater wetlands, freshwater marsh, riparian
              forest, drainages, riverine habitat, and lakes.
Policy 7.B.3	 Special-Status Species. Support preservation of the habitats
              of Federally- or State-listed rare, threatened, endangered, and/or
              other special status species. Encourage Federal and State agencies,
              as well as other resource conservation organizations, to acquire and
              manage endangered species’ habitats.
Policy 7.B.4	 Fish and Wildlife. Support the management efforts of the
              California Department of Fish and Wildlife to maintain and enhance
              the productivity of important wildlife species by protecting identified
              critical habitat for these species from incompatible suburban, rural
              residential, or recreational development.
Policy 7.B.5	 Open Space for Conservation. Where appropriate, permanently
              protect as open space areas of natural resource value, including
              sensitive habitat types (e.g. alkali sink and prairie, freshwater
              wetlands, freshwater marsh, riparian forest, drainages). Maintain
              connectivity between open space areas designated for habitat
              conservation values within the Planning Area as well as linkages to
              adjacent habitats outside the Planning Area, such as Willow Slough,
              Cache Creek, and habitat preserves to the east.
              (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.4-1b)
Policy 7.B.6	 Open Space Buffer. Continue to work with Yolo County and the
              City of Davis to maintain the permanent open space buffer between
              County Roads 27 and 29 and its existing wildlife habitat values.
              (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.4-2a).
Policy 7.B.7	 Woodland Regional Park. Protect and maintain Woodland
              Regional Park as an important wildlife preserve and habitat for
              special-status plants and allow for public access that is compatible
              with and promotes public education of the site’s habitat value.
              (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.4-1b)
                                                                                CO 7-43

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                      Policy 7.B.8	       Native and Compatible Non-Native Plant Species. Require
                                          developers to use native and compatible non-native species,
                                          especially drought-resistant species, to the extent possible in order
                                          to preserve the visual integrity of the landscape, provide benefits
                                          for native wildlife, and ensure that a variety of plants suited to the
                                          region are maintained.
                                          (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.4-2a).
                      Policy 7.B.9	       Tree Canopy. Manage, enhance, and improve the city’s tree canopy
                                          as a valuable ecological resource.
                      Policy 7.B.10	      Urban Forest Management Plan. Establish an urban forest
                                          management plan, overseen by a licensed arborist, to guide the
                                          protection and enhancement of the urban forest. Work with
                                          agencies such as the Woodland Tree Foundation in this effort.
                      Policy 7.B.11	      Sensitive Site Planning. Site new development to maximize the
                                          protection of native tree species and special-status plant and wildlife
                                          habitats.
                                          (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.4-1b)
    Goal 7.C	         Preserve Farmland. Promote preservation and economic viability of agricultural land
                      surrounding the ULL.
    See also policies in the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation Element.
                      Policy 7.C.1	       Annexation. Annex land to the City only as it is needed for
                                          development of designated growth areas. Annexation of agricultural
                                          land will not be permitted except in conjunction with approved
                                          urban development consistent with the General Plan.
                      Policy 7.C.2	       Agricultural Uses Within the ULL. Where agriculture exists
                                          within the ULL, support existing agricultural uses until urban
                                          development (consistent with the General Plan) occurs on these
                                          properties.
                      Policy 7.C.3	       Surrounding Agricultural Land. Encourage Yolo County to
                                          conserve agricultural soils, preserve agricultural land surrounding
                                          the ULL, and promote the continuation of existing agricultural
                                          operations.
                      Policy 7.C.4	       Compatibility. Ensure that urban development within the ULL
                                          does not affect the economic viability of adjacent agricultural
                                          practices located outside the ULL.
CO 7-44

          Policy 7.C.5	
                                    Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
                               Agricultural Buffer. Require new development that occurs at the
                                                                                               7
                               edge of the ULL to be set back a minimum of 150 feet from adjacent
                               agricultural land where possible. Equivalent means of providing
                               agricultural buffers may be considered by the Planning Commission
                               on a case by case basis for parcels where development potential
                               would be precluded or severely limited as a result of the required
                               buffer size. The buffer shall be landscaped/vegetated and may include
                               public right of way.
                               (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.2-3)
Goal 7.D	 Protect Mineral Resources. Cooperate with regional agencies to protect significant
          mineral resources in the Planning Area that may be identified in the future.
          Policy 7.D.1	        Natural Gas. Encourage the County to consider compatibility
                               with land uses planned in the City’s General Plan when considering
                               applications for natural gas wells within the Planning Area.
          Policy 7.D.2	        Plan After Discovery. If previously unknown important mineral
                               resources are discovered in the Planning Area, work with Yolo
                               County and appropriate state agencies to determine a course of
                               action to protect and sustainably manage the resources, consistent
                               with land uses planned in the City’s General Plan.
Goal 7.E	 Preserve Prehistoric, Cultural, and Archaeological Resources. Preserve and protect
          areas and sites of prehistoric, cultural, and archaeological significance.
          Policy 7.E.1	        Potentially Significant Sites. Ensure that development avoids
                               potential impacts to sites determined to be archeologically,
                               paleontologically, or culturally significant.
          Policy 7.E.2	        Discovery of Resources. If cultural, archaeological, or
                               paleontological resources are discovered during construction,
                               ensure their evaluation and protection, as appropriate, in accordance
                               with applicable Federal and State laws and regulations.
          Policy 7.E.3	        Tribal Cultural Resources. Ensure required tribal consultation
                               regarding tribal cultural resources.
Goal 7.F	 Improve Air Quality and Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Protect and improve
          air quality in the Woodland area with the goal of attaining State and Federal health-
          based air quality standards.
          Policy 7.F.1	        YSAQMD Thresholds. Utilize air quality thresholds of significance
                               set by the YSAQMD.
                                                                                               CO 7-45

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 7.F.2	    Best Management Practices. Require all projects to implement
                                   Best Management Practices (BMPs) for reducing air pollutant
                                   emissions associated with the construction and operation of
                                   development projects as a standard City condition of approval.
                                   (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.3-1b)
                  Policy 7.F.3	    Protect Sensitive Receptors. For the purposes of environmental
                                   review of potential toxic air contaminant impacts, consider
                                   residentially designated land uses, hospitals and other medical
                                   facilities, residential care facilities, schools, day care centers, and
                                   playgrounds to be “sensitive receptors.” Discourage the location of
                                   new sensitive receptor uses within 500 feet of a limited access state
                                   highway (SR 113 and 1-5). Implement applicable buffer distances
                                   recommended by the California Air Resources Board between
                                   sensitive uses and sources of substantial pollutant concentrations.
                                   (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.3-3a)
                  Policy 7.F.4	    Landscaping to Improve Air Quality. Promote the increase of
                                   community-wide tree canopy and the use of plants and trees that
                                   are efficient pollutant absorbers.
                  Policy 7.F.5	    Electric Equipment. Promote inclusion of features such as
                                   exterior electrical outlets in new residential development to
                                   encourage the use of electric and other alternative fuel equipment.
                  Policy 7.F.6	    Odor Mitigation. Require odors associated with the wastewater
                                   treatment plant to be mitigated to acceptable levels in conjunction
                                   with planning and development for any land within the odor impact
                                   area identified in Figure 7-6. Require an odor mitigation study to be
                                   prepared to identify specific measures to be undertaken, including
                                   identification of required implementation timing and any necessary
                                   financing, as secured through a Development Agreement, or other
                                   mechanism acceptable to the city, prior to commencement of
                                   development.
                                   Refer to the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic Preservation
                                   Element and the Public Facilities and Services Element for additional
                                   policies regarding the wastewater treatment plant and development in the
                                   surrounding areas.
                  Policy 7.F.7	    Inventory of Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Continue to maintain
                                   inventories of community-wide greenhouse gas emissions and
                                   greenhouse gas emissions from City operations and track related
                                   solid waste, energy, economic, and environmental data. Update
                                   the inventories periodically as additional data and methodologies
                                   become available.
CO 7-46

Policy 7.F.8	
                    Sustainability, Conservation, and Open Space Element
               Reduce Vehicle Miles Travelled. Continue to work in conjunction
               with the YSAQMD and other agencies to establish and implement
                                                                                7
               additional transportation control measures that will reduce vehicle
               travel and improve air quality.
Policy 7.F.9	  Climate Action Plan. Implement the Climate Action Plan to
               achieve the city’s greenhouse gas reduction targets by 2020, 2035,
               and 2050.
Policy 7.F.10	 Public Awareness of Climate Change and Adaptation.
               Promote public awareness of the impacts of global climate change
               and provide information regarding steps that residents and
               businesses can take to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and adapt
               to its effects.
Policy 7.F.11	 Climate Change Resilience. Ensure resilience to the impacts
               of global climate change by considering these effects (including but
               not limited to increasing temperatures, heavier storms and other
               weather events, increased fire risk) in emergency preparedness
               planning.
               See also policies 8.F.1 and 8.F.2.
Policy 7.F.12	 MTP/SCS Consistency. For projects seeking to utilize available
               CEQA streamlining, determine project consistency with the MTP/
               SCS as a component of application review.
               (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.5-2)
                                                                                CO 7-47

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
CO 7-48
8 Safety Elemen
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   8.1	 Introduction and
                                                 Purpose
                                   Ensuring the safety of community members, through protection
                                   from hazards, is an essential service of public agencies and a critical
                                   priority for maintaining community health and welfare. The pur-
                                   pose of the Safety Element is to identify the natural and manmade
                                   public safety hazards that exist within the city and to establish pre-
                                   ventative and responsive policies and programs to mitigate their
                                   potential impacts. In addition, exposure to loud and/or unwanted
                                   noises can also affect community health and safety, as well as qual-
                                   ity of life.
                                   The Safety Element is organized as follows:
                                   •	 Section 8.1: Introduction and Purpose. Introduces the
                                        topics covered in this Element and outlines the Element’s rela-
                                        tionship to State law and the Visioning Statement and Guiding
                                        Principles.
                                   •	 Section 8.2: Geologic and Seismic Hazards. Explains the
                                        geologic makeup of the Planning Area and analyzes potential
                                        threats that may result from land instability or seismic activity.
                                   •	 Section 8.3: Flood Hazards and Protection. Provides an
                                        overview of State and regional flood regulations and require-
                                        ments, flood hazards in the Planning Area, and flood protection
                                        efforts.
                                   •	 Section 8.4: Fire Hazards. Discusses the threat of urban
                                        and wildland fires.
                                   •	 Section 8.5: Airport Hazards. Addresses safety and noise
                                        issues that result from the Planning Area’s proximity to nearby
                                        airports.
                                   •	 Section 8.6: Hazardous Materials and Operations. Pro-
                                        vides an overview of hazardous materials sites in the Planning
                                        Area.
                                   •	 Section 8.7: Emergency Response. Introduces Woodland’s
                                        Emergency Operations Plan and Local Hazard Mitigation Plan.
                                   •	 Section 8.8: Noise. Addresses existing sources of noise and
                                        introduces the General Plan noise standards.
                                   •	 Section 8.9: Goals and Policies.
                                   For additional background data and information on these topics,
                                   refer to the Opportunities and Challenges, Issues and Options report.
SE 8-2

Relationship to State Law
                                                                                 Safety Element
                                                                                                    8
The Safety Element combines two of the seven required elements
of a General Plan: The Safety Element and the Noise Element.
Government Code Sections 65302(f) and 65302(g) require that
the key topics identified in Table 8-1 are addressed in the Safety
and Noise elements of the General Plan. State law provides that
the General Plan can address these topics in any format and is
required to address them only to the extent that they are relevant
in the Planning Area.
  Table 8-1:	         Safety and Noise Topics Required by State Law
                                              Addressed in this Location if not addressed in this
 Required Topic
                                              Element           Element
  Safety
  Seismically induced surface rupture, ground  Yes
  shaking, ground failure
  Tsunami, seiche, and dam failure             Yes
  Slope instability leading to mudslides and   Yes
  landslides
  Subsidence                                   Yes
  Liquefaction                                 Yes
  Other seismic hazards identified pursuant    No                There are no other seismic or geologic
  to the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act, and                        hazards that affect the Planning Area.
  other geologic hazards known to the
  legislative body
  Flooding                                     Yes
  Flood hazard zones, as identified by FEMA    Yes
  National Flood Insurance Program maps,       Yes
  published by FEMA
  Information about flood hazards from the     Yes
  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, including
  the Corps Sacramento and San Joaquin
  River Basins Comprehensive Study
  Dam failure and inundation maps from         Yes
  CalEMA
  Designated floodway maps, available from     Yes
  the CVFPB
  Awareness Floodplain Mapping Program         Yes
  maps and 200-year flood plain maps from
  DWR
  Maps of levee flood protection zones         Yes
  (LFPZs, available from DWR)
                                                                                                       SE 8-3
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
      Table 8-1:	           Safety and Noise Topics Required by State Law
                                                     Addressed in this Location if not addressed in this
     Required Topic
                                                     Element           Element
      Areas subject to inundation in the event of     Yes
      the failure of project or nonproject levees
      or floodwalls
      Historical data on flooding, including locally  Yes
      prepared maps of areas that are subject
      to flooding, areas that are vulnerable to
      flooding after wildfires, and sites that have
      been repeatedly damaged by flooding
      Existing and planned development in flood       Partially         Development in flood hazard zones
      hazard zones, including structures, roads,                        is also addressed in the Land Use,
      utilities, and essential public facilities                        Community Design, and Historic
                                                                        Preservation Element
      Reference to local, state, and federal          Yes
      agencies with responsibility for flood
      protection, including special districts and
      local offices of emergency services
      Goals, policies, and feasible implementation    Yes
      measures that:
         •	 Avoid or minimize the risk of flooding
             to new development
                  •	 Evaluate whether new
                     development should be located
                     in flood hazard zones
                  •	 Identify construction methods
                     or other methods to minimize
                     damage if new development is
                     located in flood hazard zones
         •	 Maintain the structural and
             operational integrity of essential
             public facilities during flooding
         •	 Locate, when feasible, new essential
             public facilities outside of flood
             hazard zones (including hospitals
             and health care facilities, emergency
             shelters, fire stations, emergency
             command centers, and emergency
             communication facilities) or identify
             construction methods or other
             methods to minimize damage if these
             facilities are located in flood hazard
             zones
         •	 Establish cooperative working
             relationships among public agencies
             with responsibility for flood
             protection
SE 8-4

 Table 8-1:	         Safety and Noise Topics Required by State Law
                                                Addressed in this
                                                                                     Safety Element
                                                                  Location if not addressed in this
                                                                                                        8
Required Topic
                                                Element           Element
 Wildland and urban fires, including fire risk   Yes
 for land classified as state responsibility
 areas and/or within a very high fire hazard
 severity zone
 Mapping of known seismic and other              Yes
 geologic hazards
 Evacuation routes, military installations,      Yes               Military installations are not addressed
 peakload water supply requirements, and                           as there are none located within or
 minimum road widths and clearances                                adjacent to the Planning Area.
 around structures, as each of these items
 relate to identified fire and geologic
 hazards
 Noise
 Analyze and quantify, to the extent             Yes               Military installations are not addressed
 practicable, as determined by the legislative                     as there are none located within or
 body, current and projected noise levels                          adjacent to the Planning Area.
 from all of the following:
    •	 Highways, freeways, primary arterials
       and major local streets
    •	 Rail lines and ground rapid transit
    •	 Commercial aviation, general aviation,
       heliports, helistops, military airports,
       aircraft overflights, jet engine test
       stands, and all other ground and
       maintenance functions related to
       airport operations
    •	 Industrial plants and railyards
    •	 Other ground stationary sources,
       including military installations
 Implementation measures and possible            Yes
 solutions to existing and foreseeable noise
 issues
                                                                                                          SE 8-5

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                    Relationship to Visioning Statement and Guiding
                                    Principles
                                    The Safety Element provides the underpinning for many values ex-
                                    pressed in the Visioning Statement and Guiding Principles by en-
                                    suring public safety, which is the first step in fostering Woodland to
                                    be a highly desirable community in which to live, learn, work and
                                    recreate. Specifically, this Element directly supports the following
                                    Guiding Principle:
                                      •	 Safety: Ensure that Woodland remains a safe place to live,
                                         protected from natural and manmade hazards.
                                    8.2	 Geologic and Seismic
                                                 Hazards
                                    Geology
                                    Woodland is located in the Great Valley geomorphic province of
                                    California and consists of gently sloping to level alluvial plains. The
                                    geologic parent material within the region was formed from the
       Refer to the Sustainability, erosion of mountain ranges to the east and geologic uplift along
       Conservation, and Open       the western shore of the North American continent. Two hun-
       Space Element for a more     dred and forty-five million years ago, the Great Valley province be-
       detailed discussion about    gan forming from sediment-laden runoff deposits. Eventually, the
       soils found in the Planning  deposits accumulated to a depth of almost six miles, with large
       Area.                        amounts of sediment continuing to be added until approximately
                                    30 million years ago. These processes occurred beneath the sea,
                                    and as a result, the water captured in the pores of deeply buried
                                    rock is saline.
                                    The Great Valley area generally consists of Holocene alluvium or
                                    basin deposits, as well as Quaternary Modesto and Riverbank for-
                                    mations, both of which consist of somewhat older alluvium. Figure
                                    8-1 illustrates the local geology within and surrounding the Plan-
                                    ning Area.
SE 8-6

                                                                                                                                                                  Qa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	                                 Safety Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 8-1:	Geology
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 8-1:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Geologic Map
                                                                                                                                          N EAST ST
                                    Qmr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qa      Levee and channel deposits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qb      Basin deposits (Alluvium)
                                                                                              §
                                                                                              ¨
                                                                                              ¦I-5                                                                                                                                                                                                                Qr      Riverbank Formation (Alluvium)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Modesto-Riverbank Formations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Qmr
                                                                                                                                                                                                   N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Arkosic alluvium)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Highways
                 W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                           COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                          EAST ST
                                                     W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Collectors
                                                                                                                              Qmr                                                                                                                                                                                         Local Roads
                                                                                             BEAMER ST                                                                                                             E BEAMER ST                                                                                            Ramps
                       ASHLEY AVE
                                                               CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Qb                                     Study Area
                                                                                                                                                            LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                   NORTH ST
                                                                                               COURT ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sphere of Influence
                 W MAIN ST                                                                 MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Limits
                                                                                           LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                        THIRD ST
                                                                                                                                    Qmr
                                                                                           CROSS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HA
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                               WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                        V
                                                                                                                                                                                        U
                                                                                                                                                                                        113                                                 FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RN
                                     COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                         COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                      E GUM AVE                                                                                        AV
                                                       CALIFORNIA ST                                                                                                   MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                         EAST ST                                                                                  BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                            GIBSON RD                                                                                                                            E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PIONEER AVE
                                                                                         EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                   Qa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Qr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                              HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E HERITAGE PKWY
Qmr
                                                                                                                                                                  V
                                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                                                                  113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Qr                        0          0.25         0.5                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Miles
                 Qb                                                                                                                                   Qmr                                                                                                                                                     Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013; Yolo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              County, 2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Bhatia, 2013; California Geologic Survey,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1981
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                X 60285491 023 6/13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SE 8-7

         City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                 Figure 8-2:	 Earthquake Faults
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Olivehurst                                                                                  Figure 8-2
                  Lakeport         Clear                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CE
                                   Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SP
                                                          Clearlake Oaks
                                                                                                                                              COLUSA COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SUTTER                                                                      LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Earthquake Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                          Arbuckle                                                                                                                         VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wheatland                                                T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UL
                                                                                       20
                                           Kelseyville                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T      FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Meadow    Quaternary Faults (Age)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UL                   Vista
                                                                                                                                                                                              5                                                                                                                 PLACER COUNTY          FA      AN
                                                               Clearlake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TDE     M                                    Historic <150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AD            North
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      70                                                        EW                    Auburn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Holocene <15,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            113                                                                D
                                                                     Lower Lake                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AU                                               Late Quaternary <130,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Auburn
                                                                                                  LAKE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mid to Late Quaternary <750,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                         N                                                                                                         Lincoln
                                                                                                 COUNTY                                                                                               DU    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                             IG                                                                                                 65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Quaternary <1,600,000
                                                                                       Hidden Valley                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Loomis
                                                                                           Lake                                                                                                                 AH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Freeway/Major Highway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rocklin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IL LS
                                                                    Middletown                                                                                                                                    H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Grante
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MinorHwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LT                                                                                Roseville
                                     M                                                                                                                                                                                 AU                                                                                                                 Bay
                                   CA                                                                                                                                                                              YOLO                                                                                                                                                           Major/Minor Roads
                                 AA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
                                M                                                                                                                                                                                 COUNTY                                                                                                                     Folsom
                                        A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lake                                Woodland Planning Area
                                               T                                                                                                                                                  Esparto                                                                                                       Citrus
                                             UL                                                                               H                                                                                                                                                                 North
                                           FA                                                                              TA                                                                                                                     Woodland                      Rio Linda                       Heights                    Folsom          El Dorado              Water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Highlands
                                                                                                                         PU                                                                                                                                       5                                                                                           Hills
                                                                                                                                   EE                                                                                                                                                                                Fair Oaks                                                    Urban Areas
                                                                                                                                 CR
                               Healdsburg
                                                                                                                                        KF                                                                                                                                                                  Carmichael                                                            County Boundaries
                                                                                                                                               LT
                                                                                     Calistoga
                                                                                                                          NAPA              AU    Lake                                                      505                            113
                                                                                                        Angwin           COUNTY                 Berryessa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sacramento              Rancho             SACRAMENTO
                                Windsor                                                                                                                                                                                                         Davis                                                           Cordova              COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rosemont
                                                                                                     St. Helena                                                                                Winters
                                                 101                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rancho
                 Forestville                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Murieta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Florin
                                                                           SONOMA
                                                  Santa                    COUNTY
                                                   Rosa                                                                                                                                                                            Dixon
                     Graton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Elk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80                                                                        Grove
                       Sebastopol                                        E                                                                                                                                                                                                               Laguna
                                                                      RE                                                 Yountville                                                                                                                                                                                          Wilton
                                                                    SC
                                                                  ER
                                                                DG
                                                          Rohnert
                                                              RO
                                                            Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vacaville
                                                                                                                               ST                                                                      VA
                                                                                                                            WE
                                                                        K
                                                                             U                                                                                                                           C                                                                          5
                                                                           FA                                                                                                                                        SOLANO
                                                                                                                                                            GREE
                                                                                 T                                                                                                                          A                                                                                              99
                                                                                                                                        Napa
                                                                                                                                  A FAULT
                                                                             L                       Sonoma                                                                                                      T   COUNTY
                                                                                                                               NAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                               UL
                                                                                                                                                                                                             FA
                                                                                                                                                             N VALLE Y
                                                                                                                                                                                          Fairfield                                                                        Walnut
                                                                                              Temelec
                                                                      Petaluma                                                                                                                                                                                             Grove
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Galt
                                                                                                                                                                      T
                                                                                                                                                                F A UL
                                                                                                                                                American 80                                                                                             Rio
                                                                                                                                                 Canyon                                                                                    12           Vista
                                                                                                             37
                                            MARIN
                                                                                                                                                                          680                                                                                                                                                               Lockeford
                                           COUNTY
                                                                      Novato                                                                Vallejo                                                                                                                                                             Lodi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SAN JOAQUIN
                               N
                             SA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                            Benicia              Suisun
                                   DR                                                                       San Pablo Bay                                                         Bay
                                 AN                                                                                                                                        CO
                                     EA                               Marinwood                                                                                                       D
                                            LT                                                                 YW                                                                  OR                                                                                                                                     Morada
                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0               5              10                               20
                                                                                                             HA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pittsburg
                                         AU                                                                                                                       Martinez                                                                                                                                                                        Linden                                                                                 Miles
                                       SF                                                    San                     D
                                                                                                                            Pinole                    4
                                                                                                                   AR                                                                    T
                                                                       Fairfax              Rafael                                                                                     UL
                                                                                                                         T                                                           FA      Concord                                             Oakley                                                                                                                Data Source: U.S. Geological Survey, 2010, Quaternary fault and fold
                     San Francisco                                                                                     UL                                                                                                        Antioch                                                                                                                               database for the United States, accessed April 2016, from USGS
                         Bay                                                                                         FA                                                    Pleasant                                CONTRA COSTA                                                                             Stockton                                                   web site: http//earthquakes.usgs.gov/hazards/qfaults/. ESRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Basemap, 2016;Yolo County, 2016; SACOG Mapping Center, 2016;
                                                                             Larkspur                 580         Richmond                                                   Hill                     Clayton        COUNTY                                                                                                         Sources: Esri, USGS, NOAA          Dyett & Bhatia, 2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stockton
SE 8-8
Faults
                                                                     Safety Element
                                                                                    8
The nearest fault zones exhibiting historic displacement (activity
within the last 200 years) are the Concord-Green Valley, Marsh
Creek-Greenville, and Hayward fault zones, located approximately
27 miles west, 40 miles west, and 54 miles southwest of Wood-
land, respectively. Other active faults within 70 miles of Woodland
are the Dunnigan Hills (10 miles northwest), West Napa (36 miles
southwest) Healdsburg-Rodgers Creek (57 miles southwest), and
San Andreas (66 miles west).
In addition, a seismically-active, concealed (blind) fold and thrust
fault belt situated within the Coast Range-Central Valley Geomor-
phic Boundary is located approximately 10 miles west of the Plan-
ning Area. Earthquakes associated with this fault system include
the 6.1 magnitude Kettleman Hills and 6.5 magnitude Coalinga
events. In Northern California, it is also thought to have produced
the Vacaville-Winters earthquake of 1892, which had an estimated
magnitude of 6.75. Published estimates of the Coast Range-Central
Valley slip rate range from 1 to 10 millimeters per year, and Coal-
inga-type events are estimated to occur once every 200 to 2,000
years.
Figure 8-2 displays all earthquake faults located in the vicinity of
the Planning Area.
Geologic and Seismic Hazards
The Planning Area could experience the effects of a major earth-
quake from one of the active or potentially active faults located
within 60 miles of Woodland. The major hazards associated with
earthquakes are fault surface rupture (ground displacement),
ground motion (or ground shaking), ground failure (e.g., liquefac-
tion), differential settlement, and potential dam failure.
Surface Fault Rupture
Surface rupture is the actual cracking or breaking of the ground
along a fault during an earthquake. Structures built over an active
fault can be torn apart if the ground ruptures. Surface ground rup-
ture along a fault is generally limited to a linear zone a few yards
wide. The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act was enacted
to prohibit structures designed for human occupancy from being
built across the traces of active faults, thereby reducing the risk
of loss of life and property from an earthquake. Located more
                                                                                    SE 8-9
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   than 25 miles southwest of Woodland, the Concord-Green Val-
                                   ley and Marsh Creek-Greenville fault zones are the closest ac-
                                   tive faults zoned under the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning
                                   Act. Because there are no Alquist-Priolo fault zones located in the
                                   Planning Area, the risk of surface fault rupture within Woodland is
                                   considered low.
                                   Ground Shaking
                                   Ground shaking is motion that occurs as energy is released during
                                   an earthquake. Depending on the magnitude of the earthquake, the
                                   location of its epicenter, the character and duration of the ground
                                   motion, and the type of soil and/or rock formation, ground shak-
                                   ing has the potential to cause building damage, landslides, subsid-
                                   ence, liquefaction, or seiches. The California Geological Survey has
                                   determined the probability of earthquake occurrences and their
                                   associated peak ground accelerations throughout the State of Cali-
                                   fornia. The estimated range of peak ground acceleration within the
                                   Planning Area is considered to be moderate.
                                   Liquefaction
                                   During an earthquake, shaking of granular loose soil saturated with
                                   water can lead to liquefaction, a condition in which sediments be-
                                   low the water table temporarily lose strength during an earth-
                                   quake and behave as a viscous liquid rather than a solid. As a result,
                                   this can cause structures to lose foundation-bearing capacity. The
                                   Planning Area is characterized by shallow groundwater, with stand-
                                   ing water generally encountered between zero to three feet below
                                   the surface. Additionally, a review of local well records indicates
                                   that the Planning Area is underlain by stratified layers of silt, silty
                                   clays, and isolated lenses of gravel and/or sand. Therefore, portions
                                   of the Planning Area may be prone to liquefaction resulting from
                                   ground shaking.
                                   Earthquake-Induced Settlement
                                   Prolonged ground shaking can also lead to the rapid compaction
                                   and settling of subsurface materials that are loose, non-compacted,
                                   or have a variable sandy quality. Typically, areas underlain by ar-
                                   tificial fills, unconsolidated alluvial sediments, and slope wash, as
                                   well as areas with improperly engineered construction fills, are
                                   susceptible to settlement. Although the general parent material of
                                   the soil resources in the Planning Area may indicate a higher risk,
SE 8-10
the potential for earthquake-induced settlement in Woodland is
considered low due to the city’s distance from major active faults.
                                                                                  Safety Element
                                                                                                        8
Slope Instability and Landslides
Slope failure, commonly referred to as landslides, can be triggered
by static (i.e., gravity) or dynamic (i.e., earthquake) forces. Exposed
rock slopes undergo rockfalls, rockslides, or rock avalanches, while
soil slopes experience shallow soil slides, rapid debris flows, and
deep-seated rotational slides. Engineered slopes have a tendency
to fail if not properly designed, constructed or compacted. Because     New development is required to
the Planning Area is generally level, hazards associated with land-     abide by current safety standards as-
slides are typically limited to embankments along creek and drain-      sociated with seismic activity.
age ways, and are very minor.
Seismic Sea Waves and Seiches
Earthquakes may affect open bodies of water by creating seis-
mic sea waves and seiches. Seismic sea waves (often called “tidal
waves” or tsunamis) are caused by abrupt, usually vertical ground
movements on the ocean floor in connection with a major earth-
quake. Because of the Planning Area’s long distance from the Pacific
Ocean and the intervening mountainous topography, seismic sea
waves are not a factor in Woodland.
A seiche is a standing wave that results in sloshing water in an
enclosed or restricted body of water, such as a basin, river, or lake.
Seiches can result from earthquakes, and the resulting sloshing can
last for a few minutes or several hours. There are no bodies of
water that are large enough for destructive seiche action to occur
within or adjacent to the Planning Area.
Dam Failure
In addition, areas in and around Woodland could potentially expe-
rience up to eight feet of flooding in the unlikely event of failure
of the Indian Valley Dam, located on the North Fork of Cache
Creek. In addition to a severe earthquake, other potential events
that could lead to dam failure or overtopping include major flood
inflows, massive landslide or slippage, and piping (when water finds
a path through the levee embankment) or erosion of the dam em-
bankment. Flooding would occur within six to seven hours of dam
failure. Figure 8-3 identifies areas in and around Woodland subject
to dam inundation.
                                                                                                        SE 8-11

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   8.3	 Flood Hazards and
                                                   Protection
                                   The City of Woodland is surrounded by waterways that periodi-
                                   cally flood. These waterways include Cache Creek to the north
                                   and northwest and the Yolo Bypass/Sacramento River system to
                                   the east. In the event of a severe storm, these water bodies can
                                   overtop creek banks and levees, or levees could fail, resulting in
                                   flooding in Woodland.
                                   Laws and Regulations
                                   In 2007, the State legislature enacted six interrelated bills to
                                   strengthen the linkage between local land use planning decisions
                                   and flood management practices. SB 5 and 17, and AB 5, 70, 156, and
                                   162 added or amended over 25 sections of the Government Code,
                                   Health and Safety Code, Public Resources Code, and Water Code.
                                   There was considerable overlap between these bills. Together they
                                   significantly modified floodplain planning and management at the
                                   State, regional, and local levels. The six flood protection bills of
                                   2007 (in the order they were signed) are summarized below:
                                      •	 SB 5 (Machado). Enacts the Central Valley Flood Protection
                                         Act of 2008. Requires the California Department of Water Re-
                                         sources (DWR) and the Central Valley Flood Protection Board
                                         (CVFPB; previously known as the State Reclamation Board)
                                         to prepare and adopt a Central Valley Flood Protection Plan
                                         (CVFPP) by 2012. Establishes that 200-year protection is to
                                         be the minimum urban level of flood protection. Sets dead-
                                         lines for cities and counties in the Central Valley to amend
                                         their general plans and their zoning ordinances to conform to
                                         the Plan. Restricts approval of development agreements and
                                         subdivision maps in flood hazard zones, once the general plan
                                         and zoning ordinance amendments have been enacted, unless
                                         certain findings are made. Mandates Central Valley counties to
                                         develop flood emergency plans within 24 months of adoption
                                         of the Plan. Legislative intent for SB 5 is also included in AB 5
                                         and AB 156.
                                      •	 SB 17 (Florez). Sets compensation for the members of the
                                         CVFPB. Establishes the duties of the Board. The provisions of
                                         this bill were also enacted by AB 5.
SE 8-12

                                                                         Safety Element
                                                                                           8
                                                                        Yolo County Operational Area
                                                          Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan
                    Figure B-1 Dam Inundation  Figure
                                                  Zones8-3:	Dam      Inundation Areas
                                                         in Yolo County
In the following information about the dams, the times and areas given for potential
inundation are the best available estimates. Actual inundation times and areas may vary.
Monticello Dam
Monticello Dam is a thin arch concrete structure 270 feet high. It impounds a maximum      SE 8-13of
1,602,300 acre-feet creating Lake Berryessa in Napa County, 10 miles west of Winters. In
the event of failure, Monticello Dam presents a high hazard to downstream areas and
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
SE 8-14
  •	 AB 5 (Wolk). Establishes the CVFPB and its duties. Sets out
     requirements and deadlines for reports on the flood control
                                                                        Safety Element
                                                                                       8
     system to be prepared by DWR and the Board, including levee
     flood zone protection maps to be prepared by DWR. The
     same requirements are also enacted by AB 156.
  •	 AB 70 (Jones). Provides that cities and counties will share li-
     ability with the state in the case of litigation over unreasonably
     approved new development on agricultural lands. This would
     not apply where the city or county has amended its general
     plan and zoning, and otherwise makes land use decisions con-
     sistent with the CVFPP. “Unreasonably approving” is defined
     as approval without appropriate consideration of known sig-
     nificant risks of flooding.
  •	 AB 156 (Laird). Requires DWR and the Board to adopt a
     schedule for mapping flood risk areas within the Central Valley.
     Sets out requirements for reports on the flood control system
     to be prepared by DWR and the Board, including levee flood
     zone protection maps to be prepared by DWR by December
     31, 2008. Mandates DWR to provide yearly notices to owners
     of property within a levee protection zone, beginning Septem-
     ber 1, 2010. The same requirements are also enacted by AB 5.
  •	 AB 162 (Wolk). Requires cities and counties to amend the
     land use, conservation, safety, and housing elements of their
     general plans to address flood-related matters. These amend-
     ments are required to be made by the next scheduled revision
     of the housing element after January 1, 2009.
Since 2007, there have been a number of legislative amendments to
provide further clarifications to these bills, and to require further
related actions at both the state and local level.
California planning law has long required that city and county gen-
eral plans identify flood prone areas and limit development within
those areas. The 2007 flood bills revised the requirements for the
Land Use, Conservation, and Safety elements of city and county
general plans, with the most extensive changes taking place in the
requirements for the Safety Element. These requirements apply
to all cities and counties statewide. However, jurisdictions within
the Central Valley (of which Woodland is one) face additional re-
quirements as a result of this package of bills to ensure conformity
between their general plans and the CVFPP. This Safety Element
addresses all of the applicable requirements.
                                                                                       SE 8-15

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   Environmental Setting
                                   The City of Woodland is located on the western side of the Cali-
                                   fornia Central Valley. The terrain generally slopes downward from
                                   west to east and north to south. Cache Creek drains a large por-
                                   tion of the coastal range and flows into the Yolo Bypass near the
                                   City of Woodland. The Lower Cache Creek and Yolo Bypass le-
                                   vees, as well as levee protection zones and areas subject to inunda-
                                   tion in the event of levee failure are shown in Figure 8-4. Regional
                                   floodways are shown in Figure 8-5.
                                   The Lower Cache Creek levee system, including the Cache Creek
                                   Settling Basin, was designed to contain a flood flow from approxi-
                                   mately a 30 year storm event. As a result, the City is subject to
                                   flooding from the right bank of Cache Creek from larger storm
                                   events. Flood flows from Cache Creek flow south and east to-
                                   wards Woodland. The presence of the Interstate Highway 5 (I-5)
                                   embankment and the Cache Creek Settling Basin levees exacer-
                                   bates the flooding experienced by the city by directing the out-
                                   of-bank flows southward and into the urban areas of the city. The
                                   existing Cache Creek Settling basin and Yolo Bypass levees will
                                   prevent the Cache Creek out-of-bank flows from entering the Yolo
                                   Bypass and will result in flood depths of 10 to 12 feet in part of the
                                   Planning Area that includes commercial and residential develop-
                                   ment, and a portion of I-5.
                                   The existing Yolo Bypass west levee does not meet the State of
                                   California’s Urban Levee Design Criteria and is not certified by
                                   FEMA as adequate to provide the FEMA-required 100-year level of
                                   flood protection. A failure of the Yolo Bypass levee would result in
                                   flooding of portions of the city along the eastern edge of the city
                                   limit.
                                   The City of Woodland and the Central Valley Flood Protection
                                   Board are participating with the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers to
                                   identify a flood solution to reduce the city’s risk of flooding from
                                   Cache Creek. The City is also supportive of other ongoing federal
                                   and State efforts to address flood risk associated with the Yolo
                                   Bypass west levee.
                                   Typical flood hazards in Woodland generally consist of shallow
                                   sheet flooding from surface water runoff from large rainstorms
                                   with depths generally less than two feet. However, in larger storm
                                   events, there are significant areas within the Planning Area on the
SE 8-16

north and east sides that are also affected by flooding from Lower
Cache Creek and/or the Yolo Bypass.
                                                                                                Safety Element
                                                                                                                  8
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has pub-
lished flood hazard maps which delineate portions of the city on
the north and east that fall within the 100-year floodplain. DWR
subsequently published floodplain maps showing areas that would
be inundated by a 200-year flood event. The areas of the city
within the 200-year and the 100-year floodplain of Cache Creek
are approximately the same. As shown in Figure 8-6, 45 percent of
the Planning Area is located in the Cache Creek and/or Yolo By-
pass 200-year floodplains and subject to a 0.5 percent probability
of flooding in any given year.
Due to inadequate flood infrastructure, major storms can result in significant flooding in the Planning Area—including
in areas that have commercial, industrial, and residential development. This image shows flooding that occurred in the
Planning Area in 1996. Source: LAFCo of Yolo County
                                                                                                                   SE 8-17

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                         In utilizing this information, it is important to consider the poten-
       Refer to the Land Use,            tial flooding depths that properties could experience, as this can
       Community Design, and             indicate the relative ease or difficulty of mitigating future flood
       Historic Preservation             hazards. For instance, a parcel with a historic flood depth of less
       Element for additional            than one foot presents a more attractive development opportu-
       discussion regarding the          nity than one that can flood to levels of more than three feet, in
       impact of flooding and            which case the structural improvements would have to be raised,
       flood protection on land          using fill, to an elevation above the flood water surface elevation.
       use, including the                The urban level of flood protection as defined in the 2007 legis-
       establishment of the Flood        lation applies to urban or urbanizing areas located in the Sacra-
       Study Area (FSA) land             mento and San Joaquin Valleys with potential flood depths greater
       use designation. Refer to         than three feet (excluding localized conditions) and designated as
       the Public Facilities and         either a special or moderate flood hazard area on the applicable
       Services Element for a            FEMA FIRMs. The City of Woodland meets the criteria and is sub-
       more detailed discussion          ject to these provisions. As a result, the City is required to achieve
       of the city’s stormwater          200-year flood protection or restrict development until it does.
       infrastructure.                   Roughly 25 percent of land within the Planning Area is subject to
                                         flooding depths of over three feet.
                                         The industrial area, located in the northeastern section of the Plan-
                                         ning Area, is particularly susceptible to flooding. This places Wood-
                                         land at a competitive disadvantage relative to nearby industrial
                                         areas, as the risk level and insurance costs of developing in Wood-
                                         land are higher as a result. In addition, some portions of SP-3 are
                                         subject to flood depths of up to three feet and the majority of SP-2
                                         is susceptible to flooding depths of greater than seven feet. No
                                         specific plan for SP-2 or SP-3 may be processed until the designs
                                         for projects to provide necessary 200-year flood protection have
                                         been approved and the funding for construction has been secured.
    Underpasses and other low points
    can be subject to localized flooding Any contemplated sale of the City’s 900-acre property within SP-2
    during periods of heavy rainfall.    will require a four-fifths (4/5th) vote of the City Council. Before
                                         the City enters into a Development Agreement for any property
                                         located within a floodplain, the City must impose conditions that
                                         will ensure 200-year flood protection.
                                         City streets, even those outside of the floodplain, are also subject
                                         to localized flooding during periods of heavy rainfall. Currently, the
                                         city’s storm drain system is not adequately sized for the actual
                                         flows. Older parts of the city, particularly west of East Street, do
                                         not have a system of under-street storm drain pipes. Instead, runoff
                                         is conveyed through intersections in valley gutters, gutter culverts,
                                         or inverted siphons, and must travel long distances to reach a drain
                                         inlet. In these areas, when the capacity of drain inlets and pipes is
                                         exceeded, localized street flooding occurs and remains for three
                                         to four hours after rainfall has subsided.
SE 8-18

Flood Protection
                                                                      Safety Element
                                                                                     8
Many agencies at various levels of government are responsible for
flood protection. At the federal level, the three primary agencies
are the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, FEMA, and the Bureau of
Reclamation. At the state level, the primary agencies are DWR and
the CVFPB. At the regional and local level, the primary agencies
include the Yolo County Flood Control and Conservation District,
Yolo County, and the City of Woodland.
Woodland’s geography and flooding history present challenges
for phasing of new development, which has significant implica-
tions for economic development. Securing a comprehensive flood
protection solution is a critical priority for Woodland. The City
is currently working with the US Army Corps of Engineers on
a comprehensive solution to achieve 200-year flood protection.
Through their Lower Cache Creek Feasibility Study, the Corps
has narrowed the alternatives for flood risk reduction to several
alternatives which are undergoing further study. The policies in
this General Plan support interim solutions and strategies to allow
development in Woodland to move forward where it is safe and
appropriate, while still actively seeking and advocating for a perma-
nent flood solution for the Planning Area.
                                                                                     SE 8-19

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
SE 8-20
                                                                                Safety Element
                                                                                                    8
                                                                           Yolo County Operational Area
                                                             Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan
                                           Figure 8-4:	Levee Protection Zones
                            Figure B-13 Levee Protection Zones
                   Source: Yolo County General Plan, Health and Safety Element
Previous Occurrences
Major flooding has occurred in the Yolo County study area in 1937-38, 1940, 1943, 1950,
1955, 1958, 1963, 1967, 1973, 1975, and 1986 (U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1969; State
of California, 1964; State of California, 1969; FEMA, 1981; U.S. Department of Agriculture,
1976). Flooding generally occurs in the relatively flat agricultural lands within the eastern
                                                                                                     SE 8-21
two-thirds of the county.
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
SE 8-22
                                                                                                                                         Figure 8-5
                                                                                                                                                     	                                   Safety Element
                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 8-5:	Floodways
                                                                                                                                                                                                           8
                           COLUSA COUNTY                                                        113
                                                                                                                                         Floodways
                16                                                                                                                                 Floodways
                                                                                                    SUTTER                      Lincoln
                                                        5                                                                                          100 Year Floodplain
                                                                          45                        COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                   500 Year Floodplain
                                                                                                                                                   Freeway/Major Highway
  LAKE
COUNTY                                                                                                       70                                    Minor Highway
                                                                                                                                                   Major/Minor Roads
                                                                                                                       PLACER                      Railroads
                                                                                                                      COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                   Woodland Planning Area
                                                                                                                               Roseville
                                                                                                                                                   Water
                                                                                                                                                   Urban Areas
                                                                                                                                                   County Boundaries
                                                                                                                          North
                                         Esparto                                                                 Rio     Highlands
                                                                                          Woodland              Linda
                                                                    16                                     5                       80
                                             YOLO
                                                                                      113
                                            COUNTY
                                                            505
                       Lake
                     Berryessa
 Angwin                                                                                                            Sacramento
           NAPA
          COUNTY                                                                          Davis
                                                   Winters
   St.
 Helena
                                                                                                                           Florin
                                   128
                                                                                Dixon
                                                                                                                          99
                                                                                                                                Elk
                                                                       80                                                      Grove
                                                                                    SOLANO
                                                                                    COUNTY
        29
                             121
                                                          Vacaville                                              5
                                                                                                                      SACRAMENTO
                                                                             113                                         COUNTY
                                                                                                                                         0             2.75           5.5                         11
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Miles
                Napa                                                                                                                     Data Source: Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (dFIRMs), National
                                                                                                                                         Flood Hazard Layer (NFHL), FEMA, 2012;Yolo County, 2016;
                                                Fairfield                                                                                SACOG Mapping Center, 2016; Dyett & Bhatia, 2016
                                              Fairfield
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SE 8-23
          City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Figure 8-6:	100 and 200 Year Floodplains and Historic Flooding Depths
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 8-6:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   100 and 200 Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Floodplains and Historic
                                                                                                                                                                        N EAST ST                                                                                                                                  Flooding Depths
                                                                                                                           I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Historic Flood Areas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              200 Year Flood Line
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100-Year Floodplain*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (Areas of 1% or Greater
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Annual Chance of Flooding)
                                          W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Flood Depth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.00 - 1.00
                                                                                                                                        COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                        EAST ST
                                                                                  W WOODLAND AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.01 - 3.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3.01 - 5.00
                                                                                                                         BEAMER ST                                                                                                    E BEAMER ST                                                                             5.01 - 7.00
                                                ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Above 7.00
                                                                                             CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                          LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                NORTH ST                                                                                                                                                      Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                           COURT ST
                                          W MAIN ST                                                                    MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Collectors
                                                                                                                       LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Local Roads
                                                                                                                                                     THIRD ST                                                                                                                                               I -5              Ramps
                                                                                                                        CROSS ST
                         COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RN                                                       Railroads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FA
                                                                                                             WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VE          HA
                                                                  COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U   MA            M                                               City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EG
                                                                                                                                     COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                                    E GUM AVE                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sphere of Influence
                                                                                    CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                  MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                                                      EAST ST                                                                        BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   * The 100-Year Flood, is the flood that
                                                                                                                        GIBSON RD                                                                                                                   E GIBSON RD                                                    has a 1% chance of being equaled or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   exceeded in any given year. The Special
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Flood Hazard Area is the area subject to
                                                             EL DORADO DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          flooding by the 1% annual chance flood.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Areas of Special Flood Hazard include
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Zones A, AR, AH, AO, AR, A99, V and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FARMERS CENTRAL RD                                          VE. Only Zone AE is present in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Woodland Planning Area.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   The floodway is the channel of a stream
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   plus any adjacent floodplain areas that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   must be kept free of encroachment so
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E HERITAGE PKWY                                           that the 1% annual chance flood can be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   carried without substantial increases in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   flood heights. There are no floodways in
                                                                                                                                                                                                113                                   MARSTON DR                                                                   the Planning Area.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0            0.375          0.75                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo County,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
SE 8-24
8.4	 Fire Hazards
                                                                                  Safety Element
                                                                                                   8
Urban and wildland fire hazards can threaten life and property in
Woodland. Policies of this General Plan seek to ensure that new            The Public Facilities
development is constructed to minimize potential fire hazards and          and Services Element
to provide public education concerning fire prevention.                    addresses the service levels
                                                                           and maintenance of the
                                                                           City’s Fire Department.
Urban Fires
Urban fires are fires that begin in buildings in urban centers. They
are typically localized, but have the potential to spread to an ad-
joining building, especially in areas where homes and/or business
facilities are clustered close together. Structural fire risk in Wood-
land is greatest in older structures and neighborhoods built before
modern building codes for fire safety and building systems were in
place.
Peakload Water Supply Requirement
Woodland engineering standards require a minimum flow of water
for fire protection in accordance with Woodland Fire Department,
California Fire Code, and Insurance Services Office standards.
Minimum Road Widths and Clearances Around Structures
Adequate emergency vehicle access to buildings is important for
effective public safety service and emergency response. Emergency      All portions of a building
access is regulated by the California Fire Code. Under the current     must be located within 150
Fire Code, all portions of a building must be located within 150       feet of a serviceable fire access
feet of a serviceable fire access road. In some instances, the Fire    road.
Marshal can make an exception to this rule, such as when a build-
ing is equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
Wildland Fires
Wildland fires resulting from either natural or manmade causes
occur in forest, brush, grasslands, or undeveloped areas. Their po-
tential for damage is dependent on the extent and type of vegeta-
tion, known as surface fuels, as well as weather and wind condi-
tions.
                                                                                                    SE 8-25

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                          The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL
                                          FIRE) has mapped fire threat potential throughout California. CAL
                                          FIRE ranks fire threat according to the availability of fuel and the
                                          likelihood of an area burning (based on topography, fire history,
                                          and climate).The rankings include little or no fire threat, moderate,
                                          high, and very high fire threat. There are no State Responsibility
                                          Areas or Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones located within the
    Emergency vehicle access is necessary Planning Area or its vicinity. While the majority of the Planning
    for emergency response and public     Area is identified to have little to no wildland fire threat, some ar-
    safety service.                       eas along CR 102 are identified as Local Responsibility Areas with
                                          a moderate fire threat. However, it is likely that wildfire danger will
                                          increase with climate change. Figure 8-7 shows existing fire hazard
                                          severity zones within the Planning Area and its vicinity.
SE 8-26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 8-7:	Fire Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Safety Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 8-7
                                                                            COLUSA COUNTY                                                                                       113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fire Hazards
                                                     16                                                                                                                                                                                  Fire Hazard Severity Zones
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lincoln
                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                45                                                                                       Local Responsibility Area (LRA)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Very High
                                                                                                                                                                                      SUTTER
                                                                                                                                                                                      COUNTY                                                        High
  LAKE
 COUNTY                                                                                                                                                                                            70            PLACER                             Moderate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non-Wildland/Non-Urban
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Urban Unzoned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Roseville   State Responsibility Area (SRA)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Very High
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    High
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Moderate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   North                            Freeway/Major Highway
                                                                                                    Esparto                                                                                              Rio      Highlands
                                                                                                                                                                     Woodland                           Linda                                       Minor Highway
                                                                                                                                      16                                                                                       80
                                                                                                                                                                                               5                                                    Major/Minor Roads
                                                                                                                                   YOLO                                                                                                             Railroads
                                                                                                                                  COUNTY                                                                                                            Woodland Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Water
                                                                                                                            505                                113
                                                                  Lake                                                                                                                                                                              Urban Areas
                                                                Berryessa
   Angwin                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sacramento                              County Boundaries
                            NAPA                                                                                                                                      Davis
                           COUNTY
                                                                                                                 Winters
   St.
  Helena
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Florin
                  5                                                             128
                                                                                          YOLO COUNTY                                                  Dixon
                                                     KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   99
                        BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                           SOLANO                                                         Elk
                                                                                                                                           80              COUNTY                                                        Grove
                                Woodland
                                               MAIN ST
                                                                                      5
                           29
                                     EAST ST
                                                                       121
              WEST ST
                         GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                          Vacaville                                                                     5       SACRAMENTO
                                                     113
                                                                                                                                                     113                                                          COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0            2.75           5.5                           11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Miles
YOLO COUNTY
                                                    Napa                                                                                                                                                                                 Data Source: California Department of Forestry and Fire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Protection (CAL FIRE), 2007 & 2009; Yolo County, 2016;
                                                                                                              Fairfield                                                                                                                  SACOG Mapping Center, 2016; Dyett & Bhatia, 2016
                                                                                                         Fairfield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SE 8-27
        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
          This page intentionally left blank.
SE 8-28
8.5	 Airport Hazards
                                                                                              Safety Element
                                                                                                                8
State law requires the preparation of an Airport Land Use Com-
patibility Plan (ALUCP) for most airports. Local plans (including
general plans) with planning areas that overlap the Airport Influ-
ence Area defined by the ALUCP are required by State law (Gov-
ernment Code Section 65302.3) to ensure that the policies in
place for the affected area are consistent with the ALUCP. This
helps ensure the safety and comfort of those in the area as well as
the safe operation of the airport itself.
Sacramento International Airport (SMF)
Sacramento International Airport (SMF) is located just five miles
east of the Planning Area. SMF’s ALUCP contains policies pertain-
ing to noise, safety, overflight areas, and airspace protection. As
shown in Figure 8-8, the western boundary of the SMF Airport
Influence Area travels north-south through the Planning Area, fol-
lowing the western edge of the Water Pollution Control Facility.
The portion of the Influence Area that overlaps with Woodland
is not subject to restrictions pertaining to noise or safety. Some
development in this overlap area may be subject to Airport Land
Use Commission review to ensure that it abides by height require-
ments set by Federal Aviation Administration Regulations, refrains
from creating electrical or visual hazards that could negatively im-
pact aircraft in flight, and avoids producing thermal plumes that
extend to an altitude where aircraft can fly.1
In addition, a small portion of the eastern side of the Planning Area
is located within the “Secondary Approach Area” defined in the                       The Secondary Approach Area
ALUCP. This is a form of real estate disclosure that is recorded                     is subject to frequent fly-overs
on each residential property deed however it does not convey                         by aircraft, and as a result,
property rights. For other areas within the Influence Area, State                    new residential development
law requires that notice disclosing information about the pres-                      located within this area
ence of nearby airports be given to prospective buyers of certain                    requires a Recorded Overflight
residential real estate. This would apply to any existing or new
residential development located anywhere in the Influence Area.
                                                                                     Notification as a condition of
Future residential development within SP-2 will be subject to these                  project approval.
requirements.2 Additional consideration of noise impacts resulting
from airports is covered in Section 8.8.
1	 Sacramento International Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (2013), Section 1.5.
2	 Sacramento International Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (2013), Section 1.5.
                                                                                                                 SE 8-29

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   Other Airports
                                   Two other airports are located near Woodland: the Yolo Coun-
                                   ty Airport, located roughly nine miles to the southwest; and the
                                   Watts-Woodland Airport, located approximately 3.5 miles west of
                                   the city. While these airports may serve Woodland residents, busi-
                                   nesses, and visitors, neither airport’s Influence Area overlaps with
                                   the Planning Area.
SE 8-30

                                                                                                                                                                                                          	           Safety Element
                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 8-8:	ALUCP Overflight Compatibility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                                                                         ALUCP Overflight Compatibility
                                                 5                                       CHURCHILL DOWNS AVE
                                                                                                                                                                    Airport  Secondary
                                                                                                                                                                   Influence Approach
                                                                                                                                           COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                    KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                     Area*     Area**
                                                                             EAST ST
                                                                                       BEAMER ST          PIONEER AVE
                                       WEST ST
PEDRICK RD
                                             MAIN    ST                                                                                                    MAIN   ST
             LINCOLN AVE
                                                      COLLEGE AVE
                                                                    3RD ST   EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                  5
                COTTONWOOD ST
                                CROSS ST
                                                                                                                        PIONEER AVE
                                                                                         GUM AVE
                                                                                                                                          COUNTY RD 102
                                                 GIBSON RD
                                                                                                   113
                                City Limits                                                                                   HERITAGE PARKWAY
                                Urban Limit Line
* Airport Proximity Disclosure applies within entire          ** Includes locations where aircraft regularly fly below
  Airport Influence Area. See Policy 3.5.3                       3,000 feet. Recorded Overflight Notification required.
                                                                 See Policy 3.5.2
Source: Sacramento International Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (April 2013 Draft)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SE 8-31
        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
          This page intentionally left blank.
SE 8-32
8.6	 Hazardous Materials
                                                                       Safety Element
                                                                                      8
             and Operations
A material is considered hazardous if it appears on a list of hazard-
ous materials prepared by a federal, State, or local agency, and/or if
it has characteristics defined as hazardous by such an agency. Cali-
fornia Health and Safety Code Section 25501 defines a hazardous
material as any material that, because of its quantity, concentration,
or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present
or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environ-
ment if released into the workplace or the environment. Hazard-
ous materials include a wide variety of substances commonly used
in households and businesses. Motor oil, paint, solvents, lawn care
and gardening products, household cleaners, gasoline, and refriger-
ants are among the diverse range of substances classified as haz-
ardous materials.
 “Hazardous wastes” are defined in California Health and Safety
Code Section 25141(b) as substances that, because of their quan-
tity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteris-
tics, may either (1) cause, or significantly contribute to an increase
in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible, or incapacitat-
ing, illness or (2) pose a substantial present or potential hazard
to human health or the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise managed. Haz-
ardous wastes are hazardous materials that no longer have practi-
cal use, such as substances that have been discarded, discharged,
spilled, contaminated, or are being stored prior to proper disposal.
Hazardous materials and hazardous wastes are classified accord-
ing to four properties: toxic (causes human health effects), ignit-
able (has the ability to burn), corrosive (causes severe burns or
damage to materials), and reactive (causes explosions or generates
toxic gases). Nearly all businesses and residences generate some
amount of hazardous waste. Certain businesses and industries, in-
cluding gas stations, automotive service and repair shops, printers,
dry cleaners, and photo processors, generate larger amounts of
such substances. Hospitals, clinics, and laboratories generate medi-
cal waste, much of which is also potentially hazardous.
                                                                                      SE 8-33

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   Hazardous Materials Sites
                                   Releases, leaks, or disposal of chemical compounds, such as pe-
                                   troleum hydrocarbons, on or below the ground surface, can lead
                                   to contamination of underlying soil and groundwater. Disturbance
                                   of a previously contaminated area through grading or excavation
                                   operations could expose the public to health hazards from physical
                                   contact with contaminated materials or hazardous vapors. Improp-
                                   er handling or storage of contaminated soil and groundwater can
                                   further expose the public to these hazards, or potentially spread
                                   contamination through surface water runoff or air-borne dust.
                                   Areas with known or suspected release of hazardous materials to
                                   soil and groundwater, and where current clean up activities moni-
                                   tored by the State Water Quality Control Board or the California
                                   Department of Toxic Substances are active, are shown in Figure
                                   8-9. The sites are primarily located in the industrial area and along
                                   Main Street and East Street. Most of the sites in Woodland are
                                   Leaking Underground Storage Tanks (LUSTs), and many of the
                                   sites are automobile-related, such as gas stations or auto repair
                                   shops. Woodland also currently has sites undergoing remediation
                                   for contamination with hazardous materials. Some contaminated
                                   sites are on vacant parcels or properties with the potential to re-
                                   develop. Contamination does not render these sites unusable, but
                                   may require time and funding for cleanup, and in some cases, may
                                   limit allowable land uses.
                                   Regulation and Enforcement
                                   Various local, State, and federal agencies govern the proper stor-
                                   age, handling, and transport of hazardous materials. Generators
                                   of hazardous waste in Yolo County are required to submit a Haz-
                                   ardous Materials Business Plan to the Environmental Health De-
                                   partment, which serves as the Certified Unified Program Agency
                                   (CUPA) for the County. Hazardous waste generators are inspect-
                                   ed by the CUPA for compliance with hazardous waste storage,
                                   handling, and disposal regulations at least once every three years.
                                   For household related hazardous waste, the Yolo County Planning
                                   and Public Works Department sponsors hazardous waste collec-
                                   tion days at the Yolo County Central Landfill that are free for Yolo
                                   County residents on select days.
SE 8-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 8-9:	Hazardous Materials Sites
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Safety Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 8-9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hazardous Materials
                                                                                                                                                         N EAST ST
                                        SP-3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Closed Sites
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hazardous Sites (SWRCB)
                                                                                                            I-5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Leaking Underground
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Storage Tanks (LUST)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cleanup Site
                                                                                                                                                                                                        N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cleanup Program Site
                 W KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hazardous Sites (DTSC)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Corrective Action
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                          COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Evaluation
                                                         W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Land Disposal Site
                                                                                                                                                         EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      State Response
                                                                                                       BEAMER ST                                                                                                        E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      School Investigation
                       ASHLEY AVE
                                                                     CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Voluntary Cleanup
                                                                                                                                                  NORTH ST
                                                                                                                                                                           LEMEN AVE                                                                                                                                                                  Highways
                                                                                                            COURT ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Principal Arterials
                 W MAIN ST                                                                        MAIN ST                                                                                                                                    E MAIN ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Minor Arterials
                                                                                                        LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Collectors
                                                                                                                                       THIRD ST                                                                                                                                                                        I -5                           Local Roads
                                                                                                             CROSS ST
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FA                                                                                        Ramps
                                                                                        WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                         COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AV               AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UM                                                                                                Railroads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EG
                                                                                                                       COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                                                     E GUM AVE                                                                                           AV
                                                            CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                        EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                   MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      New Specific Plan Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                                      GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Spring Lake Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Urban Limit Line
                                    EL DORADO DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                     SP-1
                                                                                                                                                                                               HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SP-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                 113                                         MARSTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0           0.375          0.75                        1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SPRING LAKE                         Data Source: GeoTracker, State Water Resources Control Board
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (SWRCB), 2016; Envirostor, Department of Toxic Substances
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SPECIFIC PLAN                        Control (DTSC); City of Woodland, California, 2013;Yolo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            County, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SE 8-35
        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
          This page intentionally left blank.
SE 8-36
8.7	 Emergency Response
                                                                      Safety Element
                                                                                     8
Although Woodland seeks to minimize hazards and reduce risks,
in the rare event of an emergency, quick and effective response is
vital. Chapter 8 of the Woodland Municipal Code provides for the
preparation and execution of emergency response efforts.
SB 379
As California confronts mounting climate change impacts, local
governments are now required, in accordance with Senate Bill 379,
Land Use: General Plan: Safety Element (Jackson) to include a cli-
mate change vulnerability assessment, measures to address vul-
nerabilities, and comprehensive hazard mitigation and emergency
response strategy. Impacts that Woodland may face as a result of
climate change include increased flooding, wildfires, and heat waves.
Emergency Operations Plan
The California Emergency Services Act requires cities to prepare
and maintain an Emergency Plan for natural, manmade, or war-
caused emergencies that result in conditions of disaster or in ex-
treme peril to life. The Woodland Emergency Operations Plan ad-
dresses the City’s planned response to extraordinary emergency
situations associated with natural disasters, technological incidents
and national security emergencies, including acts of terrorism. The
plan does not apply to normal day-to-day emergencies, but rather
focuses on large-scale disasters that pose major threats to life,
property and the environment, and require unusual emergency re-
sponses.
Local Hazard Mitigation Plan
The purpose of a Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP) is to re-
duce or eliminate long term risk to human life and property result-
ing from hazards by identifying risks before they occur and putting
together resources, information, and strategies for emergency re-
sponse. A LHMP is required of all cities by federal law.
                                                                                     SE 8-37

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   The City of Woodland partnered with the County and the cities of
                                   Davis, West Sacramento, and Winters to develop the Yolo County
                                   Operational Area Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan. Most
                                   recently updated in 2012, the Mitigation Plan addresses threats
                                   from potential hazards and identifies possible strategies to reduce
                                   impacts. It also serves as the document that, upon its next update,
                                   will address the requirements of SB 379.
SE 8-38
8.8	 Noise
                                                                                                       Safety Element
                                                                                                                                8
Noise is commonly defined as undesirable or unwanted sound.
Noises vary widely in their scope, source, and volume, ranging
from individual occurrences such as leaf blowers, to the intermit-
tent disturbances of overhead aircraft, to the fairly constant noise
generated by traffic on freeways.
Figure 8-10 illustrates sound levels associated with common noise
sources. The perceived loudness of sounds is dependent on many
factors, including sound pressure level and frequency content.
However, within the usual range of environmental sound levels,
perception of loudness is relatively predictable and can be approxi-
mated by frequency filtering using the standardized A-weighting
network. There is a strong correlation between A-weighted sound
levels (expressed as dBA) and community response to noise. For
this reason, the A-weighted sound level has become the standard
descriptor for environmental noise assessment, and noise levels
reported in this General Plan are A-weighted.
Noise-Sensitive Receptors
Noise-sensitive receptors are land uses where the presence of un-
wanted sound could adversely affect the use of the land. Examples
include residentially designated areas, nursing homes, schools, li-
braries, and places of worship.
Ambient Noise Level Measurements
A community noise survey was conducted on March 21-25, 2013
to document noise exposure in areas with noise-sensitive recep-
tors.3 Noise measurement sites are shown in Figures 8-11 and 8-12.
Short-term ambient noise level measurements were conducted at
11 sites. The measurement duration was 15-minutes and at three
different times of the 24-hour day in order to best estimate the
24-hour, day-night average noise level (Ldn). Three continuous 96-
hour ambient noise level measurements were completed to re-
cord day-night statistical noise level trends. Noise measurement
sites, measured noise levels, and estimated Ldn levels for each site
are summarized in Table 8-2.
3	 Noise measurement sites were selected to be representative of typical residential conditions. The community noise survey was con-
    ducted at three of the same sites which were previously selected (in 1995) to support the 1996 General Plan, in order to understand
    any changes over time.
                                                                                                                                 SE 8-39
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    Figure 8-10:	 Decibel Scale
SE 8-40
The community noise survey results indicate that typical noise lev-
els in areas with noise-sensitive receptors range from 51 dB to 69
                                                                                     Safety Element
                                                                                                     8
dB Ldn. Traffic on local roadways and I-5, distant industrial activities,
and neighborhood activities are the controlling factors for back-
ground noise levels in the majority of the Planning Area.
The Leq values presented in Table 8-2 represent the average mea-
sured noise levels during the sample periods (15 minutes). The
Leq values were the basis of the estimated Ldn values. Lmax values
show the maximum noise levels observed during the samples. The
values in parentheses show sound levels measured in 1995 for the
previous background noise study.
  Table 8-2:	       Summary of Short-term Ambient Noise Level Survey Results
                                                                           Measured Sound Level, dB
                                                                                  2013 (1995)
 Site               Location                        Time Period               Leq         Lmax           Ldn
  ST-01              Campbell Park                          Ld1         57 (49)       75 (65)      56 (53)
                                                            Ld2         56 (52)       73 (64)
                                                             Ln         45 (46)       63 (63)
  ST-02              Tredway Park                           Ld1              54            77           58
                                                            Ld2              54            66
                                                             Ln              51            76
  ST-03              Woodside Park                          Ld1         55 (49)       68 (62)      63 (55)
                                                            Ld2         58 (53)       70 (64)
                                                             Ln         57 (48)       77 (62)
  ST-04              133 E Heritage Pkwy                    Ld1              52            74           51
                     (Spring Lake Area)                     Ld2              51            71
                                                             Ln              41            63
  ST-05              Northwest Corner of                    Ld1              67            82           69
                     Kentucky Ave & Walnut St               Ld2              66            77
                                                             Ln              61            79
  ST-06              Private Ranch, South of I-5,           Ld1              52            73           54
                     East of Hwy 102                        Ld2              49            61
                                                             Ln              46            69
                                                                                                       SE 8-41
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
        Table 8-2:	           Summary of Short-term Ambient Noise Level Survey Results
                                                                                             Measured Sound Level, dB
                                                                                                    2013 (1995)
      Site                     Location                                       Time Period       Leq         Lmax           Ldn
        ST-07                   Beamer Park                                           Ld1 51 (49)       64 (61)      58 (54)
                                                                                      Ld2 55 (50)       75 (59)
                                                                                       Ln 52 (48)       74 (59)
        ST-08                   Pool, Americas Best Value                             Ld1      58            68           61
                                Inn & Suites                                          Ld2      61            73
                                                                                       Ln      53            75
        ST-09                   Ramon S Tafoya                                        Ld1      49            61           56
                                Elementary School                                     Ld2      50            63
                                                                                       Ln      50            72
        ST-10                   Southwest Corner of Co                                Ld1      67            82           68
                                Hwy
                                                                                      Ld2      66            79
                                E8 (102) & Kentucky Ave
                                                                                       Ln      59            82
        ST-11                   Downtown, Southeast                                   Ld1      65            76           66
                                corner of Main St & 5th St                            Ld2      64            72
                                                                                       Ln      58            73
    Notes:
    Ld = Average measured sound level during daytime hours (7:00 am – 10:00 pm)
    L n = Average measured sound level during nighttime hours (10:00 pm – 7:00 am)
    Source: AECOM, 2013
SE 8-42

As shown in Table 8-3, ambient noise levels have increased by ap-
proximately 3 to 8 dB (Ldn) since 1995. This is a reasonable amount
                                                                                                          Safety Element
                                                                                                                                   8
of change for a growing urban area such as Woodland. The contin-
uous noise level measurement data shows that ambient noise lev-
els at the measurement sites ranged from 55 to 63 dB Ldn. These
results are consistent with the estimated Ldn values presented in
Table 8-2.
   Table 8-3:	           Summary of Long-term Ambient Noise Level Survey
                         Results
                                                                                Measured Sound Level, dB
                                                                                  March (21-25), 2013
                                                                                                                                Est. Ldn
                                                                        Avg. Leq  Avg. Lmax      Avg. Leq     Avg. Lmax
 Site                     Location
                                                                       (Range)     (Range)     (Range)         (Range)
   LT-01                   1435 Roosevelt Drive                        62 (57 -     78 (70     54 (51 -         68 (65               63
                                                                            66)      - 84)           57)          - 73)
   LT-02                   2113 Glacier Place                           54 (42      73 (59       47 (39       57 (52 -               55
                                                                          - 59)      - 84)         - 50)            65)
   LT-03                   2795 Ortiz Avenue                           54 (51 -   69 (62 -     49 (47 -       64 (61 -               56
                                                                            56)        73)           51)            68)
Source: AECOM, 2013
Existing Sources of Noise
Major transportation routes are dominant sources of noise in the
city. These include traffic on I-5, SR 113, and other local arterials
and streets; aircraft overflights from SMF, Yolo County Airport,
and Watts-Woodland Airport; and train operations on the Cali-
fornia Northern Railway and Sierra Northern Railway. Stationary
sources in the city include construction sites, farming activities,
and commercial and industrial facilities. These noise sources are
discussed individually below.
Traffic
Traffic noise contours prepared using the Federal Highway Admin-
istration (FHWA) Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model for I-5,
SR 113, major and minor arterials, and collector roadway segments
are shown in Figures 8-11 and 8-12. The contour distances may be
used to estimate the distance to the 70 dB Ldn traffic noise contour
for existing Average Daily Traffic (ADT) volumes and the posted
speed limit.4
4	 The Ldn contours shown in Figures 8-11 and 8-12 and Tables 8-2 and 8-3 are only indicators of potential noise conflicts, requiring more
    detailed analysis to determine traffic noise levels at any given location.
                                                                                                                                    SE 8-43
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   Railroads
                                   Woodland has two active rail lines: The California Northern and
                                   the Sierra Northern Railway. The California Northern Railway is
                                   a freight line that runs through Woodland and Davis, and along I-5
                                   past the City of Corning. The freight line schedule varies depend-
                                   ing on agricultural/seasonal demands. The rail line carries an aver-
                                   age of two trains daily, using between one and 50 rail cars and one
                                   or two locomotives, traveling at an average speed of 15 miles per
                                   hour. The estimated railroad noise level at 100 feet from the rail-
                                   way centerline is approximately 45 dB Ldn. The 70 dB Ldn contour
                                   generally aligns with the railroad right-of-way.
                                   The Sacramento River Train is operated by the Sierra Northern
                                   Railroad Company as an entertainment passenger train that runs
                                   from Woodland to West Sacramento. According to Sierra North-
                                   ern Railroad personnel, there is typically one River Train round trip
                                   per day. The trains typically have between two and 25 rail cars with
                                   one or two locomotives, traveling at an average speed estimated at
                                   15 miles per hour. Assuming two daily train passes, each with 25
                                   cars and two locomotives traveling at 15 miles per hour, the esti-
                                   mated railroad noise levels at 100 feet from the railroad centerline
                                   is approximately 44 dB Ldn. The 70 dB Ldn contour generally aligns
                                   with the railroad right-of-way.
                                   Train noise levels and contours distances were calculated following
                                   Federal Transportation Administration guidelines. Noise is associ-
                                   ated with the engines and wheel/track interaction, road crossing
                                   alarm bells, and horn blasts. The use of the railroad warning horns
                                   at the roadway crossings results in brief periods of elevated noise
                                   levels near the tracks. The Federal Railroad Administration regu-
                                   lates locomotive horns under Code of Federal Regulations Parts
                                   222 and 229. CFR Part 222 states that locomotive horns must
                                   be sounded by the lead locomotive of any passenger or freight
                                   train traveling over 15 miles per hour within 15–20 seconds of
                                   crossing any public roadway. Any train traveling over 60 mph may
                                   not sound their horn until it is within ¼-mile of the approaching
                                   crossing. Trains are not required to sound their horn if there is no
                                   at-grade crossing. CFR Part 229 states that lead locomotive horns
                                   shall be equipped with a horn that produces a minimum of 96
                                   dBA and a maximum of 110 dBA at 100 feet. Some sections of rail
                                   lines within the Planning Area may be eligible for a Federal Railroad
                                   Administration Quiet Zone designation, which would significantly
                                   reduce the use of train horns along designated lengths of track.
SE 8-44

Aircraft
                                                                                                         Safety Element
                                                                                                                                8
Aircraft operations in the vicinity of an airport can be a significant
source of noise. The nearest airport is Watts Woodland Airport,
which is located approximately 3.5 miles from the western City
limits. SMF is located approximately five miles northeast, and the
Yolo County Airport is located approximately nine miles south-
west of the City limits. Noise contours for SMF, Watts-Woodland
airport, and Yolo County Airport are depicted in Figure 8-13. None
of the airports’ CNEL contours overlap with Woodland’s Planning
Area. 5
Farming Activities
The primary sources of noise related to farming activity include
tractors, harvesters, farm cannons, and crop-dusting aircraft. Noise
is a concern for growing communities when sensitive uses are pro-
posed in areas with ongoing agricultural activities, and complaints
from new residents create pressure to convert agricultural prop-
erties to urban use. There are various strategies for addressing
this potential conflict, including but not limited to site and building
orientation and design, agricultural buffers, and providing notice to
prospective residents regarding ongoing agricultural activities.
                                                                                                 To address the special case
Typical noise levels from tractors, as measured at a distance of 50                              of residential development
feet, range from about 75 dB to 95 dB with an average of about                                   and other sensitive uses
84 dB. These noise levels should be reasonably representative of                                 being introduced in close
noise levels from other wheeled and tracked farm equipment. Us-                                  proximity to agricultural
ing a source level of 84 dB at 50 feet, and assuming nominal point-                              areas, this General Plan has
source attenuation of 6 dB per doubling of distance, the distance                                established policies that
to noise level contours are as shown in Table 8-4. Most noise-gen-                               promote a buffer along the
erating activities on agricultural lands are seasonal, and therefore a                           urban-agriculture edge. See
noise policy approach that focuses on average daily noise may not                                the Land Use, Community
be appropriate for this type of land use/noise conflict.                                         Design, and Historic Preser-
                                                                                                 vation Element.
5	 Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL): Similar to Ldn, CNEL is the energy-average of the A-weighted sound levels occurring over
    a 24-hour period, with a 10 dB penalty applied to A-weighted sound levels occurring during the nighttime hours (10 p.m.-7 a.m.), and
    a 5 dB penalty applied to the A-weighted sound levels occurring during evening hours (7 p.m.-10 p.m.). The CNEL is usually within 1
    dB of the Ldn, and the two are basically interchangeable.
                                                                                                                                SE 8-45

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    This page intentionally left blank.
SE 8-46
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     	                                Safety Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 8-11:	 City Road Noise Measurement Sites and Contours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 8-11:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Noise Monitoring
                                                                                                                                               N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Locations and Contours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Noise Contours
                                                                                                   §
                                                                                                   ¨
                                                                                                   ¦I-5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               70 db Ldn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65 db Ldn
                                                                                                                                                                                                       N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60 db Ldn
                                                                                                           ST-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Noise Monitoring Locations
                 W KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST-10
                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                          H                                                                                                                                    E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H        Long-term
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                COLLEGE ST
                                                    LT-02
                                    !
                                    H                                                                                                          EAST ST                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H        Short-term
                                                      W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                         ST-07
                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Highways
                                                                                                  BEAMER ST                                                                                                            E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Principal Arterials
                       ASHLEY AVE
                                                                CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                   LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                        NORTH ST                                                                                                                                                                                                      Collectors
                                                                                                    COURT ST
                 W MAIN ST                                                      ST-08           MAIN ST                                     ST-11                                                                                                                                                                                                     Local Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E MAIN ST
                                                                        !
                                                                        H                       LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                          H                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ramps
                                                                                                                             THIRD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Study Area
                                                                                                CROSS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Urban Limit Line
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HA
COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                    WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                            ST-01
                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                    H                     V
                                                                                                                                                                                          U
                                                                                                                                                                                          113                                              ST-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST-06                                Sphere of Influence
                                    COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H
                                                                                                              COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AV
                                                                                                                                                            E GUM AVE                                                                                                                                                                                 City Limits
                                                        CALIFORNIA ST                                                                                                     MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                              EAST ST                                                                                     BRANIGAN AVE                                                                                   Short-term ambient noise level
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         measurements were conducted for
                                                                                                 GIBSON RD                                                                            LT-01                                              E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15-minute periods at three different
                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                      H                                                                                                                                                  times of the 24-hour day in order to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PIONEER AVE
                                                     ST-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         best estimate the 24-hour, day-night
                                          !
                                          H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              average noise level.
                                                                                              EL DORADO DR                                                 ST-02
                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                              H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Long-term ambient noise level
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         measurements were completed for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LT-03                                        96 continuous hours.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST-04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H                       E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                        V
                                                                                                                                                                        U
                                                                                                                                                                        113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0         0.25       0.5                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Yolo County, 2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dyett & Bhatia, 2013; AECOM, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       X 60285491 018 6/13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SE 8-47

          City of Woodland General Plan 2035
           Figure 8-12:	 Highway Noise Contours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 8-12:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Noise Monitoring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Locations and
                                                                                                                                                                       N EAST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Highway Contours
                                                                                                                           §
                                                                                                                           ¨
                                                                                                                           ¦I-5                                                                                                                                                                                                              Noise Contours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          70 db Ldn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N PIONEER AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          65 db Ldn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60 db Ldn
                                         W KENTUCKY AVE                                                                           ST-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST-10
                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                  H                                                                                                                                     E KENTUCKY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H                                  Noise Monitoring Locations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COUNTY RD 102
                                                                                                                                        COLLEGE ST
                                                                            LT-02
                                                            !
                                                            H                 W WOODLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H        Long-term
                                               ASHLEY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                 ST-07
                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                          H
                                                                                                                                                                       EAST ST                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H        Short-term
                                                                                                                          BEAMER ST                                                                                                                                  E BEAMER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Highways
                                                                                        CALIFORNIA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Principal Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                     LEMEN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                NORTH ST                                                                                                                                                                                  Minor Arterials
                                                                                                                            COURT ST
                                         W MAIN ST                                                      ST-08           MAIN ST                                     ST-11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Collectors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E MAIN ST
                                                                                                !
                                                                                                H                       LINCOLN AVE
                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                  H                                                                                                                                                                                       Local Roads
                                                                                                                                                     THIRD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ramps
                                                                                                                              CROSS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Study Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HA
                        COUNTY ROAD 98
                                                                                                            WEST ST
                                                                                                                                                                                    ST-01
                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                            H                      V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   113                                              ST-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ST-06                       Urban Limit Line
                                                            COTTONWOOD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H
                                                                                                                                      COLLEGE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AV
                                                                                                                                                                                    E GUM AVE                                                                                                                                                             Sphere Of Influence
                                                                                CALIFORNIA ST                                                                                                      MATMOR RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                      EAST ST                                                                                      BRANIGAN AVE
                                                                                                                         GIBSON RD                                                                             LT-01                                              E GIBSON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Short-term ambient noise level
                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                               H                                                                                                                             measurements were conducted for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15-minute periods at three different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COUNTY ROAD 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PIONEER AVE
                                                                             ST-03
                                                                  !
                                                                  H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          times of the 24-hour day in order to
                                                                                                                      EL DORADO DR                                                 ST-02                                                                                                                                                     best estimate the 24-hour, day-night
                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                      H                                                                                                                                                                      average noise level.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FARMERS CENTRAL RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Long-term ambient noise level
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LT-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H                                           measurements were completed for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MIEKLE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             96 continuous hours.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HARRY LORENZO AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST-04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H                       E HERITAGE PKWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                 V
                                                                                                                                                                                                 U
                                                                                                                                                                                                 113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0          0.25         0.5                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013; Yolo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             County, 2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bhatia, 2013; AECOM, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               X 60285491 022 5/13
SE 8-48

                                                                                                                                                                          	
                                                                                                                                                        Figure 8-13:	 Airport Noise Contours
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Safety Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 8-13:
                                                                                                                                                                              Airport Noise Contours
                                                       §
                                                       ¨
                                                       ¦
                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                              Noise Contours
                                                                                                                                                                                        75 CNEL
                                                                                                                                                             V
                                                                                                                                                             U   99                     70 CNEL
                                              k                                                                                                                                         65 CNEL
                                         ee
                                e   Cr                                                                                                                                                  60 CNEL
                        C   ach
                                                                                                                                                                                        55 CNEL
                                                                                                                                                    SACR AME NT O
                                                                                                                                                                                        Sacramento Airport Draft 60dB
                                                                                                                                                       COUNT Y
                                                                                                                                    Sacramento                                          Study Area
                                                                                                                                    International
                                                                                                               Sac r a m
                                                                                                                                                                                        City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                        County Boundaries
                                                                                                                 en t
 Watts-
Woodland
                                                  V
                                                  U
                                                  16
                                                                      Woodland
                                                                                                                    oR
                                                                                                                       iv e                             Sacramento                      Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                        Railroads
                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                                                                      §
                                                                                                                                                                      ¨
                                                                                                                                                                      ¦
                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                         Yo
                                                                                                         lo
                                                                                                          By
                                                                                                    gh
                                                                                               ou
                                                                                                              pa
                                                       Y OL O CO UNT Y                    Sl                  ss
                                                                                    ow
                                                                                   i ll
                                                                                   W
                                                                            V
                                                                            U113
       Yolo County
     Davis - Woodland
                                                                                                                           §
                                                                                                                           ¨
                                                                                                                           ¦   80
                                                                                    Davis                                                              West
                                                                                                                                                    Sacramento
   Putah Cr e ek
                                                                                                                                                                              0          0.75        1.5                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Miles
                                                                                                                                                                              Data Source: City of Woodland, California, 2013; Yolo
                                                                UC Davis
                                                                                                                                                                              County, 2013; SACOG Mapping Center, 2013; Dyett &
                                                                                                                                                                              Bhatia, 2013; Caltrans, 2011; USGS, 2010; SACOG,
SOLANO COUNTY                                                                                                                                                                 1999, 2000, & 2013; URS 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                X 60285491 016 5/13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SE 8-49

        City of Woodland General Plan 2035
          This page intentionally left blank.
SE 8-50
   Table 8-4:	               Noise Exposure from Operation of Typical
                                                                                                                                Safety Element
                                                                                                                                               8
                             Farming Equipment (Tractor)
 Distance from Source (feet)                                                         Calculated Noise Level (dB)
   50                                                                                                                      84
   100                                                                                                                     78
   200                                                                                                                     72
   400                                                                                                                     66
   800                                                                                                                     60
   1,600                                                                                                                   54
Source: 	 Toth, W. J. Noise abatement techniques for construction equipment. U.S. Department of Transportation. National Highway
          Traffic Safety Administration, Washington D.C.
Other Fixed Noise Sources
Commercial and industrial facilities are also a source of noise with-
in Woodland. Mechanical equipment and trucking are the primary
sources of noise associated with these facilities. Industrial process-
es can generate noise, even when the best available noise control
technology is applied. Noise exposure within industrial facilities is
controlled by federal and State employee health and safety regu-
lations (OSHA and Cal-OSHA), but exterior noise levels can be
guided with local standards. These noise sources can be continu-
ous and potentially contain tonal components that may be annoy-
ing to individuals who live nearby. In addition, noise generation
from fixed noise sources may vary based upon climatic conditions,
time of day, and existing ambient noise levels.
From a land use planning perspective, fixed-source noise control
issues focus on (1) limiting the introduction of new noise-produc-
ing uses in areas with noise-sensitive receptors, and (2) limiting
encroachment of noise-sensitive receptors upon existing noise-
producing facilities.The first goal can be achieved by applying noise
level performance standards to proposed new noise-producing
uses. The second goal can be met by requiring that new noise-
sensitive receptors in near proximity to noise-producing facilities
be sited in a manner, and include construction techniques, that help
minimize noise.
                                                                                                                                               SE 8-51
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   Fixed noise sources that are typically of concern include, but are
                                   not limited to, the following:
                                     •	 HVAC systems
                                     •	 Pump stations
                                     •	 Emergency generators
                                     •	 Steam valves
                                     •	 Generators
                                     •	 Air compressors
                                     •	 Conveyor systems
                                     •	 Pile drivers
                                     •	 Drill rigs
                                     •	 Welders
                                     •	 Outdoor speakers
                                     •	 Cooling towers/Evaporative condensers
                                     •	 Lift stations
                                     •	 Boilers
                                     •	 Steam turbines
                                     •	 Fans
                                     •	 Heavy equipment
                                     •	 Transformers
                                     •	 Grinders
                                     •	 Gas or diesel motors
                                     •	 Cutting equipment
                                     •	 Blowers
                                   These noise sources may be found in all kinds of industrial facili-
                                   ties, construction sites, trucking operations, tire shops, auto main-
                                   tenance shops, metal fabricating shops, shopping centers, drive-up
                                   windows, car washes, loading docks, public works projects, batch
                                   plants, bottling and canning plants, recycling centers, electric gener-
                                   ating stations, race tracks, landfills, sand and gravel operations, and
                                   athletic fields. Numerous industrial facilities are dispersed through-
                                   out the Planning Area.
SE 8-52

Construction
                                                                                  Safety Element
                                                                                                        8
Construction can be a substantial, though short-term, source of
noise. Construction is most disruptive when it takes place near
sensitive land uses, or when it occurs at night or in early morning
hours. Typically, diesel engines without sufficient muffling are re-
sponsible for the most disruptive construction noises. However, in
other instances, operations such as impact pile driving or pavement
breaking are the dominant noise source.
Other portable or small-scale pieces of equipment may also pro-
duce noise. Mechanical equipment, such as pumps and fans, may
produce low noise levels, but continuously and for substantial dis-
tances. Portable power equipment, such as leaf blowers and drills,
can produce very high noise levels. Other amplified sounds, such
as automotive audio equipment or loudspeakers, also create noise
exposure.
Ground Borne Vibration
Ground borne vibration is manmade noise caused by vibrations of         Prominent mobile noise sources in
the ground due to explosions, construction, or railway and transit      Woodland include freight rail activ-
                                                                        ity and vehicle traffic on freeways
movement. Ground borne vibration noise from rail systems typi-
                                                                        and major roads.
cally stems from degraded wheel and rail surfaces. In addition, cars
and buses can also cause ground borne vibration, especially when
they travel on rough or uneven roadways.
Additional Noise Sources
Other miscellaneous and intermittent noise sources include those
associated with residential uses (e.g., children at play, barking dogs,
etc.); sources associated with property maintenance (e.g., lawn
mowers, edgers, blowers, pool pumps, power tools, etc.); safety,
warning and alarm devices, including house and car alarms, and
other warning devices; operation of schools typically consisting of
classes and other school-sponsored activities, such as school bands
and school athletic events; and emergency response.
General Plan Noise Standards
With the proposed intensification of land uses in Woodland, es-
pecially Downtown and along key corridors, noise control will be
an increasing consideration for new development, particularly for
infill projects. However, urban development generally experiences
greater ambient (background) noise than rural areas. In order to
                                                                                                         SE 8-53
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                     achieve the increased levels of density and development intensity
                                                     outlined in this General Plan, somewhat greater ambient noise lev-
                                                     els must be acknowledged and accepted.
                                                     Table 8-5 establishes standards that will help the City determine
                                                     the appropriateness of locating specific land uses in noise-prone
                                                     environments. If the measured noise level at a proposed develop-
                                                     ment site falls within the “Normally Acceptable” range for the pro-
                                                     posed land use, conventional construction techniques will typically
                                                     suffice. If the measured noise level falls within the “Conditionally
                                                     Acceptable” or “Normally Unacceptable” ranges, special acoustic
                                                     treatments and noise insulation features may be required in order
                                                     for the development to be approved. If the measured noise level
                                                     falls within the “Clearly Unacceptable” range, the development
                                                     project should generally not be undertaken.
    Table 8-5:	           Land Use Noise Compatibility Standards
                                                              Common Noise Exposure                     INTERPRETATION
                                                                  Ldn or CNEL, dB
           Land Use Category
                                                 55         60      65         70    75       80
                                                                                                        Normally Acceptable
           Residential - Low Density                                                                    Specified land use is satisfactory,
           Single Family, Duplex,                                                                       without any special noise
           Mobile Homes                                                                                 insulation requirements.
           Residential -
           Multi. Family                                                                                Conditionally Acceptable
                                                                                                        New development should be
                                                                                                        undertaken only after a detailed
           Transient Lodging -                                                                          analysis of the noise reduction
           Motels, Hotels                                                                               requirements is made and needed
                                                                                                        noise insulation features included
                                                                                                        in the design. Conventional
           Schools, Libraries,                                                                          building techniques, but with
           Churches, Hospitals,                                                                         closed windows and fresh air
           Nursing Homes                                                                                supply systems or air conditioning
                                                                                                        will normally suffice.
           Playgrounds,
           Neighborhood Parks
           Sports Arena, Outdoor                                                                        Normally Unacceptable
           Spectator Sports                                                                             New development should
                                                                                                        generally be discouraged. If new
           Golf Courses, Riding                                                                         development does proceed, a
           Stables, Water                                                                               detailed analysis of the noise
           Recreation, Cemeteries                                                                       reduction requirements must be
                                                                                                        made and needed noise insulation
         Notes:                                                                                         features included in the design.
         1) Noise levels refer to external ambient noise from permanent land uses. They do not refer to
         noise from non-stationary sources, such as cars, trucks, buses, or trains.
         2) For mixed land uses, defer to the most noise-sensitive use.
                                                                                                        Clearly Unacceptable
                                                                                                        New development should
                                                                                                        generally not be undertaken.
SE 8-54

The noise standards established in Table 8-5 accept 70 dB as be-
ing in the “normally acceptable” range for noise experienced in
                                                                                                                                  Safety Element
                                                                                                                                                              8
outdoor areas. This supports the development of infill projects
Downtown and along key corridors by setting a realistic, achiev-
able threshold of impact for new development that acknowledges
the somewhat greater noise levels associated with a vibrant, urban
environment in appropriate locations.
In addition, various land uses can also be impacted by noise ema-
nating from transportation noise sources, such as roadways and
rail lines. Table 8-6 indicates the acceptable limits of transportation
noise for exterior and interior environments. In some places, noise
attenuation measures may be necessary to meet these standards.
     Table 8-6:	            Noise Level Performance Standards for New Projects and
                            Existing Non-Transportation Sources1,2
                                                                             Daytime (7 am to 10 pm)                       Nighttime (10 pm to 7 am)
     Hourly Equivalent Sound Level (Leq), dBA                                                                  60                                               45
     Maximum Sound Level (Lmax), dBA                                                                           75                                               65
Notes:
1. 	  Each of the noise levels specified above shall be lowered by 5 dB for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or music, or for recurring
      impulsive noises. These noise level standards do not apply to residential units established in conjunction with industrial or commercial uses (e.g., caretaker
      dwellings).
2.	   These standards apply to the noise sources themselves; noise caused by motor vehicles traveling to and from the site is exempt from this standard.
                                                                                                                                                               SE 8-55

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                                             Table 8-7 provides performance standards for noise emanating
                                                             from new projects and from existing stationary, non-transporta-
                                                             tion noise sources. These standards apply to the noise sources
                                                             themselves, though noise caused by motor vehicles associated
                                                             with these uses is exempt. The types of uses that are most likely to
                                                             produce high noise levels include, but are not limited to, industrial
                                                             facilities, automotive servicing, car washes, equipment yards, enter-
                                                             tainment venues, hotels, and shopping centers. The standards are
                                                             intended to limit the noise emanating from any single (non-trans-
                                                             portation related) land use or noise source. Noise from individual
                                                             sources is of particular concern when siting new noise-sensitive
                                                             receptors.
         Table 8-7:	             Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure from Transportation
                                 Sources1
                                                                                Outdoor Activity Areas3,4                                  Interior Spaces
      Land Use2
                                                                                                   DNL/CNEL, dB                   DNL/CNEL, dB                       Leq dB
         Residential                                                                                                   70                            45                  ---
         Transient Lodging                                                                                             70                            45                  ---
         Hospitals, Healthcare Facilities, Nursing                                                                     70                            45                  ---
         Homes
         Theaters, Auditoriums, Music Halls                                                                            ---                           ---                 35
         Places of Worship, Meeting Halls                                                                              70                            ---                 40
         Office Buildings                                                                                              ---                           ---                 45
         Schools, Libraries, Museums                                                                                   ---                           ---                 45
         Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                                                                               70                            ---                 ---
    Notes:
    1. 	   Non-aircraft
    2. 	   As determined for a typical worst-case hour during periods of use.
    3. 	   Outdoor activity areas are considered to be the portion of a property where outdoor activities would normally be expected (i.e., patios of residences and
           outdoor instructional areas of schools). Outdoor activity areas for the purposes of this element do not include gathering spaces alongside transportation
           corridors or associated public rights-of-way.
    4.	    Where it is not possible to reduce noise in outdoor activity areas to the levels specified in this table using a practical application of the best-available noise
           reduction measures, a higher exterior noise level may be allowed provided that interior noise levels are in compliance with this table.
SE 8-56
Roadway Improvement Projects
                                                                        Safety Element
                                                                                       8
New roadway improvement projects will be needed to accom-
modate development permitted according to the Land Use Dia-
gram. Where existing noise-sensitive receptors may be exposed
to increased noise levels due to increased roadway capacity and
increases in travel speeds associated with roadway improvements,
the following criteria will determine the significance of increases in
noise related to roadway improvement projects:
  •	 Where existing traffic noise levels are less than 70 dB Ldn at the
     outdoor activity areas of noise-sensitive receptors, a +5 dB Ldn
     increase in noise levels due to a roadway improvement project
     will be considered significant; and
  •	 Where existing traffic noise levels range between 70 and 75 dB
     Ldn at the outdoor activity areas of noise-sensitive receptors, a
     +3 dB Ldn increase in noise levels due to a roadway improve-
     ment project will be considered significant; and
  •	 Where existing traffic noise levels are greater than 75 dB Ldn at
     the outdoor activity areas of noise-sensitive receptors, a +1.5
     dB Ldn increase in noise levels due to a roadway improvement
     project will be considered significant.
                                                                                       SE 8-57

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    8.9	 Goals and Policies
    Goal 8.A	     Seismic and Geologic Hazards. Minimize the loss of life, injury, and property
                  damage due to seismic and geological hazards.
                  Policy 8.A.1	      Minimize Seismic Risk. Continue to maintain and enforce
                                     appropriate standards to ensure new development is designed
                                     to meet current safety standards associated with seismic activity.
                                     Require public and private development to be located, designed,
                                     and constructed to minimize the risk of loss of life and injury in the
                                     event of a major earthquake or other natural disaster.
                  Policy 8.A.2	      Geologic-Seismic Analysis. Require the preparation of a soils
                                     engineering and geologic-seismic analysis prior to permitting
                                     development in areas prone to geological or seismic hazards (i.e.,
                                     groundshaking, liquefaction, expansive soils).
                  Policy 8.A.3	      Expansive Soils. Evaluate and avoid siting of structures across soil
                                     materials of substantially different expansive properties. Require
                                     appropriate design specification including special slabs where
                                     foundations are in areas of expansive soils.  
                  Policy 8.A.4	      Indian Valley Dam. Work with the Yolo County Flood Control and
                                     Water Conservation District to ensure the continued maintenance
                                     of the Indian Valley Dam in order to protect against potential dam
                                     failure. Require new development in inundation areas to consider
                                     risks from dam failure.
                                     For policies related to flooding from potential levee failure, please refer to
                                     Goal 8.B.
    Goal 8.B	     Flood Hazards and Protection. Protect the lives and property of the citizens of
                  Woodland from hazards and manage floodplains for their open space and natural
                  resource values. 	
                  Policy 8.B.1	      Floodplain Zoning. Continue to implement floodplain zoning and
                                     undertake other actions appropriate and/or required to comply
                                     with State flood risk management requirements, and to maintain the
                                     City’s eligibility under the Federal Flood Insurance Program.
                  Policy 8.B.2	      Flood Hazard Evaluation. Require evaluation of potential
                                     flood hazards prior to approval of development projects. Require
                                     proponents of new development to submit accurate topographic
                                     and flow characteristics information. This will include depiction of
                                     the 200-year floodplain boundaries under fully-developed, pre- and
                                     post-project runoff conditions.
SE 8-58

Policy 8.B.3	
                                                                 Safety Element
              New Development in Flood Hazard Zones. No subdivisions,
              development agreements, or permits that would place development
                                                                                    8
              within a flood hazard zone can be approved unless the City makes
              explicit findings that either existing flood management facilities
              provide an adequate level of protection from flooding, the City has
              conditioned the project to provide an adequate level of protection,
              or the local flood management agency has made adequate progress
              on the construction of a flood protection system that will provide
              adequate protection.
              Specifically, the City is prohibited from:
                      a)	    Approving a discretionary permit or other discretionary 	
                      	      entitlement for all development projects;
                      b)	 Approving a ministerial permit that would result in 	
                      	      the construction of a new residence for a 		
                      	      project (Government Code Section 65962);
                      c)	    Approving a tentative map consistent with the 		
                      	      Subdivision Map Act for all subdivisions;
                      d)	 Approving a parcel map for which a tentative map is not 	
                      	      required, consistent with the Subdivision Map Act for all 	
                      	      subdivisions (Government Code Section 66474.5); or
                      e)	 Executing a development agreement for any property 	
                      		               development (Government Code Section
                      65865.5),
              unless the city finds, based on substantial evidence in the 		
              record, one of the following:
                      (1) 	Flood management facilities provide 200-year level of 	
                      		 protection;
                      (2)	 The City has imposed conditions on the development
                      	      action sufficient to provide 200-year level of protection;
                      (3)	 The local flood management agency has made adequate 	
                      		               progress on the construction/improvement of
                      flood
                      	      facilities that will provide 200-year level of protection by 	
                      	      2025; or
                      (4)	For property in areas without a finding of 200-year
                      	      protection, the property meets the 200-year level of
                      	protection.
              These findings must be based on substantial evidence in the
              record and will require (among other things) an engineer’s report
              demonstrating the technical basis for making the finding.
                                                                                     SE 8-59

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 8.B.4	      Properties within CVFPB Jurisdiction. Require applicants to
                                     secure an encroachment permit from the CVFPB for any project
                                     that falls within the jurisdiction of the Board (e.g. levees, regulated
                                     streams, and designated floodways).
                  Policy 8.B.5	      Protective Structures. Require installation of protective
                                     structures or other design measures to protect proposed building
                                     and development sites from the effects of flooding.
                  Policy 8.B.6	      Facilities for Emergencies and Large Public Assembly.
                                     Prohibit the construction of facilities essential for emergencies
                                     (including hospitals and health care facilities, emergency shelters,
                                     fire stations, emergency command centers, and emergency
                                     communication facilities) and large buildings of public assembly in
                                     the 200-year floodplain, unless the structure and road access are
                                     free from flood inundation, and all required findings of fact can be
                                     made based on substantial evidence in the record.
                  Policy 8.B.7	      Adjacent Property. Require that new flood management projects
                                     or development within areas subject to flooding ensure that
                                     floodwaters will not be diverted into adjacent property to increase
                                     flood hazards on properties located elsewhere unless secured
                                     through a flood easement or fee title buyout.
                  Policy 8.B.8	      Coordination. Coordinate with other local regional, State, and
                                     federal agencies to improve flood risk management. Maintain the
                                     City’s membership on the Reclamation District 2035 Board.
                  Policy 8.B.9	      Flood Management Funding. Actively engage with State and
                                     federal agencies to develop and implement flood protection for
                                     Woodland from both Lower Cache Creek and the Yolo Bypass West
                                     Levee.
                  Policy 8.B.10	     Public Awareness. Promote public awareness activities that
                                     communicate the requirements and risks associated with owning
                                     land and living within a floodplain. Maintain, update, and make
                                     available to the public, community flood evacuation and rescue maps.
                  Policy 8.B.11	     Levee Inundation Areas. Require new development in levee
                                     inundation areas to conduct an analysis of risk from levee failure.
    Goal 8.C	     Fire Hazards. Minimize the risk of loss of life, injury, and damage to property and
                  watershed resources resulting from fire hazards. 	
                  Policy 8.C.1	      Buildings of Public Assembly. Ensure that existing and new
                                     buildings of public assembly incorporate adequate fire protection
                                     measures to reduce the potential loss of life and property in
                                     accordance with state and local codes and ordinances.
SE 8-60

          Policy 8.C.2	
                                                                           Safety Element
                            Education. Continue education programs in schools, service clubs,
                                                                                              8
                            organized groups, industry, utility companies, government agencies,
                            press, radio, and television in order to increase public awareness of
                            local fire hazards and other risks including the ability to recognize
                            these risks and appropriate avoidance techniques.
          Policy 8.C.3	     Smoke Detectors. Encourage and promote the installation
                            and maintenance of smoke detectors in existing residences and
                            commercial facilities that were constructed prior to the requirement
                            for their installation.
          Policy 8.C.4	     Fire Prevention Programs. Develop high-visibility fire prevention
                            programs, including those offering voluntary home inspections and
                            promoting awareness of home fire prevention measures.
          Policy 8.C.5	     Fire Station Siting. Site future fire stations so as to achieve the
                            best response times.
Goal 8.D	 Airport Hazards. Minimize the risk of loss of life, injury, damage to property, and
          economic and social dislocations resulting from airport hazards consistent with
          applicable ALUCPs.
          Policy 8.D.1	     Safety Hazards. Cooperate with Yolo and Sacramento Counties,
                            and the ALUC, to ensure that new development around airports
                            does not create safety hazards such as lights from direct or
                            reflective sources, smoke, electrical interference, hazardous
                            chemicals, or fuel storage in violation of adopted safety standards.
          Policy 8.D.2	     Federal Compliance. Ensure that development within airport
                            approach and departure zones complies with Federal Aviation
                            Administration Regulations.
          Policy 8.D.3	     Notification to Residential Buyers. Disclose information about
                            the presence of nearby airports to prospective buyers of existing or
                            new residential properties located within the SMF Airport Influence
                            Area, in accordance with State law. Require a Recorded Overflight
                            Notification as a condition of approval for residential projects
                            located with the SMF Airport Secondary Approach Area.
                                                                                               SE 8-61
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    Goal 8.E	     Hazardous Materials. Minimize the risk of loss of life, injury, serious illness, damage
                  to property, and negative economic and social impacts resulting from the use,
                  transport, treatment, and disposal of hazardous materials and hazardous materials
                  waste.
                  Policy 8.E.1	       Coordination. Coordinate with Yolo County and other relevant
                                      agencies to ensure that the manufacture, purchase, use, storage,
                                      transportation, and disposal of hazardous materials in the city is
                                      conducted in a responsible manner that complies with local, State,
                                      and federal safety standards.
                  Policy 8.E.2	       Disposal and Storage Plan. Require that applications for
                                      discretionary development projects that will generate hazardous
                                      wastes or utilize hazardous materials include a detailed plan for
                                      hazardous waste reduction, recycling, and storage.
                  Policy 8.E.3	       Buffer Zone. Require that new development for industries that
                                      store and process hazardous materials provide a buffer zone
                                      between the installation and the property boundaries sufficient to
                                      protect public safety.
                  Policy 8.E.4	       Emergency Response. Coordinate with Yolo County to provide
                                      for safe and efficient hazardous waste emergency response and plan
                                      for contaminated site cleanup.
                  Policy 8.E.5	       Hazardous Materials Database. Coordinate with Yolo County to
                                      develop a database and maintain complete and accurate information
                                      on the types, quantities, sources, and management of all hazardous
                                      materials and wastes generated in Woodland to aid in management
                                      planning and emergency response.
                  Policy 8.E.6	       Education. Collaborate with Yolo County to educate residents and
                                      businesses about household hazardous wastes, less toxic materials
                                      that can be used in place of toxic materials, and proper household
                                      and business waste disposal methods.
    Goal 8.F	     Emergency Response. Foster an efficient and coordinated response to emergencies
                  and natural disasters.
                  Policy 8.F.1	       Emergency Operations Plan. Ensure the maintenance of the
                                      Emergency Operations Plan to effectively prepare for, respond
                                      to, recover from, and mitigate the effects of natural disasters,
                                      technological incidents and national security emergencies. Update as
                                      necessary to address potential flooding hazards.
                  Policy 8.F.2	       Coordination. Continue to coordinate emergency preparedness,
                                      response, recovery, and mitigation activities with Yolo County, special
                                      districts, service agencies, voluntary organizations, other cities within
SE 8-62
                                                                              Safety Element
                              the county, surrounding cities and counties, and State and federal
                              agencies. Upon the next update of the Yolo County Operational
                                                                                                8
                              Area Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan, participate in the
                              effort to address topics related to climate change vulnerability, as
                              required by SB 379.
          Policy 8.F.3	       Public Information. Provide periodic public information programs
                              that explain the City’s emergency preparedness programs.
          Policy 8.F.4	       Siting of Critical Facilities. Ensure that the siting of critical
                              emergency response facilities and communications facilities such
                              as the Emergency Operations Center, hospitals, fire stations, police
                              offices and substations, dispatch centers, and other emergency
                              service facilities and utilities have minimal exposure to flooding,
                              seismic and geological effects, fire, and explosions.
          Policy 8.F.5	       Emergency Access and Evacuation. Require areas subject to
                              fires, flooding, and other hazards to have emergency access and
                              evacuation routes that are clearly marked with consistent signage.
                              Make evacuation and rescue maps available to the public.
Goal 8.G	 Noise. Strive to achieve an acceptable noise environment for the environmental,
          health, and safety needs of Woodland residents and workers.
          Policy 8.G.1	       Noise Compatibility for Residential Uses. Ensure that
                              existing and planned land uses are compatible with the current and
                              projected noise environment. However, urban development and
                              increased density, as supported by the City in this General Plan,
                              generally results in greater ambient (background) noise than lower
                              density areas. It is the City’s intent to meet specified indoor noise
                              thresholds, and to create peaceful backyard living spaces where
                              possible, but particular ambient outdoor thresholds may not always
                              be achievable. Where residential growth is allowed pursuant to
                              this General Plan, these greater noise levels are acknowledged and
                              accepted, notwithstanding the land use noise compatibility standards
                              in Table 8-5.
          Policy 8.G.2	       Land Use Noise Compatibility Standards. Use the Land Use
                              Noise Compatibility Standards, shown in Table 8-5, as review criteria
                              for new land uses. For proposed new discretionary development,
                              where it is not possible to reduce noise levels to the “normally
                              acceptable” range using practical application of the best-available
                              noise reduction measures, greater exterior noise levels may be
                              allowed, provided that all available reasonable and feasible exterior
                              noise level reduction measures have been implemented.
                                                                                                  SE 8-63

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 8.G.3	    Noise Exposure from Transportation Sources. Require noise-
                                   reducing mitigation to meet the maximum allowable outdoor and
                                   indoor noise exposure standards from transportation sources in
                                   Table 8-6. Noise mitigation measures that may be approved to
                                   achieve these noise level targets include but are not limited to the
                                   following:
                                     •	 Construct facades with sound insulation to achieve acceptable
                                        interior noise;
                                     •	 Use sound-rated windows for primary sleeping and activity
                                        areas;
                                     •	 Use sound-rated doors for all exterior entries at primary
                                        sleeping and activity areas;
                                     •	 Use setbacks and/or sound barriers where applicable, feasible,
                                        and reasonable;
                                     •	 Use acoustic baffling of vents for chimneys, attic and gable ends;
                                     •	 Install a mechanical ventilation system that provides fresh air
                                        under closed window conditions; and
                                     •	 Maximize site design so that buildings shelter outdoor areas.
                                   (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.11-2a)
                  Policy 8.G.4	    Noise-Sensitive Receptors. For the purposes of environmental
                                   review, consider residentially designated areas, nursing homes,
                                   schools, libraries, and places of worship to be noise-sensitive
                                   receptors.
                  Policy 8.G.5	    New Noise-Sensitive Receptors. Prohibit development of
                                   new noise-sensitive receptors where the noise level due to non-
                                   transportation noise sources will exceed the noise level standards
                                   of Table 8-7 as measured immediately within the property line of
                                   the new development, unless effective noise mitigation measures
                                   have been incorporated into the development design to achieve
                                   the standards. Create peaceful outdoor spaces where possible, but
                                   acknowledge that particular ambient outdoor thresholds may not
                                   always be achievable. Require noise mitigation to assure acceptable
                                   interior noise levels appropriate to the land use type:
                                     •	 45 dB Ldn for residential, transient lodgings, hospitals, nursing
                                        homes, and other uses where people normally sleep; and
                                     •	 45 dB Leq (peak hour) for office buildings and similar uses.
                  Policy 8.G.6	    New Non-Transportation Noise Sources. Require that noise
                                   created by new non-transportation noise sources be mitigated so
                                   as not to exceed the noise level standards of Table 8-7 as measured
                                   immediately within the property line of lands designated for noise-
                                   sensitive receptors.
SE 8-64

Policy 8.G.7	
                                                               Safety Element
               Roadway Improvements. Where existing noise-sensitive
               receptors may be exposed to increased noise levels due to
                                                                                 8
               increased roadway capacity and increases in travel speeds associated
               with roadway improvements, apply the following criteria to
               determine the significance of increases in noise related to roadway
               improvement projects:
                 •	 Where existing traffic noise levels are less than 70 dB Ldn at the
                    outdoor activity areas (defined as the portion of a property
                    where outdoor activities would normally be expected, such as
                    patios of residences and outdoor instructional areas of schools;
                    does not include gathering spaces alongside transportation
                    corridors or associated public rights-of-way) of noise-sensitive
                    receptors, a +5 dB Ldn increase in noise levels due to a roadway
                    improvement project will be considered significant; and
                 •	 Where existing traffic noise levels range between 70 and 75 dB
                    Ldn at the outdoor activity areas of noise-sensitive receptors, a
                    +3 dB Ldn increase in noise levels due to a roadway improvement
                    project will be considered significant; and
                 •	 Where existing traffic noise levels are greater than 75 dB Ldn at
                    the outdoor activity areas of noise-sensitive receptors, a +1.5
                    dB Ldn increase in noise levels due to a roadway improvement
                    project will be considered significant.
Policy 8.G.8	  Site and Building Design. Orient buildings such that the noise
               sensitive portions of a project are shielded from noise sources.
Policy 8.G.9	  Existing Development. Promote the use of noise attenuation
               measures to improve the acoustic environment where existing
               noise sensitive uses are located in noise-impacted environments,
               such as along arterial streets or adjacent to noise-producing uses.
               For non-conforming uses, the burden of noise attenuation falls
               on the non-conforming use. For allowed uses, the burden falls on
               the newest use, subject to possible later reimbursement based on
               benefit received by later use. Allowed uses that are developed
               simultaneously will share the burden of noise attenuation.
Policy 8.G.10	 Right-to-Farm Ordinance. Support the City and County’s right-
               to-farm ordinances, especially as they relate to noise emanating
               from agricultural operations adjacent to urban uses, by requiring
               notification of the potential impacts to adjacent property owners,
               purchasers, residents, and users.
Policy 8.G.11	 Construction Noise. Consider construction noise to be an
               acceptable impact that is an expected byproduct of planned growth,
               so long as the land use is consistent with the General Plan, and noise
               levels are consistent with the General Plan and Construction Noise
               Ordinance.
                                                                                  SE 8-65

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 8.G.12	   Federal Railroad Administration Quiet Zone. Investigate the
                                   potential for establishing a Federal Railroad Administration Quiet
                                   Zone designation for sections of the city’s railroad tracks.
                  Policy 8.G.13	   Noise Attenuation Barriers. Noise attenuation barriers are
                                   strongly discouraged, except to attenuate noise for existing
                                   developed uses, and may be used in the context of new
                                   developments only when no other approach to noise mitigation is
                                   feasible.
                                   (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.11-2b)
                  Policy 8.G.14	   Policy 8.G.14 Vehicle Traffic. New developments shall disperse
                                   vehicular traffic onto a network of fully connected smaller roadways
                                   and minimize funneling of local traffic onto large-volume, high speed
                                   roadways near existing or planned noise-sensitive land uses to the
                                   maximum extent feasible.
                                   (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.11-2b)
                  Policy 8.G.15	   Operational Noise. In new development areas, service, utility,
                                   loading areas, roof-mounted equipment, and noise-generating
                                   equipment shall be screened, designed, and located to reduce
                                   visibility and noise for surrounding properties and pedestrian areas.
                                   (EIR Mitigation Measure 4.11-2b)
SE 8-66

9 Housing Elemen
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                               9.1	 Introduction and
                                                               Purpose
                                               The City of Woodland recognizes the vital role local governments
                                               play in the supply and affordability of housing. The purposes of the
                                               Housing Element are to identify the community’s housing needs; to
                                               state the community’s goals and objectives with regard to housing
                                               production, rehabilitation, and conservation to meet those needs;
                                               and to define the policies and programs that the community will
                                               implement to achieve the stated goals and objectives.
                                               The Housing Element consists of two components. The first, con-
                                               tained in the sections below, defines the goals, policies, and quanti-
                                               fied objectives of the Element. The second component, located in
                                               Appendix E, is designed to meet Housing Element requirements
                                               and to provide the background information and analysis to sup-
                                               port the goals, policies, and quantified objectives provided in this
                                               element.
                                               In this document, the term “affordable housing” means housing af-
                                               fordable to extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income
                                               households, as defined by the California Department of Housing
                                               and Community Development (HCD).
    Woodland’s housing stock consists of a range of densities, types, and architectural styles.
HE 9-2

The Housing Element is organized as
                                                                        Housing Element
                                                                                        9
follows:
•	 Section 9.1: Introduction and Purpose. Introduces the
     topics covered in this Element and outlines the Element’s rela-
     tionship to State law, and the Visioning Statement and Guiding
     Principles.
•	 Section 9.2: Development of Housing. Outlines the city’s
     quantified objectives for housing construction, rehabilitation
     and preservation between 2013 and 2021.
•	 Section 9.3: Goals and Policies.
Relationship to State Law
The Housing Element is one of the seven mandated elements of a
general plan. State law requires that local governments address the
existing and projected housing needs of all economic segments of
the community through their housing elements. The law acknowl-
edges that, in order for the private market to adequately address
housing needs and demand, local governments must adopt land use
plans and regulatory systems that provide opportunities for, and
do not unduly constrain, housing development. As a result, housing
policy in the State rests largely upon the effective implementa-
tion of local general plans and, in particular, local housing elements.
Government Code Section 65583 mandates that the Housing Ele-
ment cover each of the topics listed in Table 9-1.
State law requires cities and counties to address the needs of all
income groups in their housing elements. The official definition of
these needs is provided by the Sacramento Area Council of Gov-
ernments (SACOG) for each city and county within its geographic
jurisdiction. Beyond these income-based housing needs, the hous-
ing element must also address special needs groups such as per-
sons with disabilities, farmworkers, and homeless persons.
                                                                                        HE 9-3

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
      Table 9-1:	        Housing Topics Required by State Law
                                                        Addressed in this     Location if not addressed in this
     Required Topic
                                                        Element               Element
      Assessment of housing needs, inventory             No                    Assessment of each of these topics
      of resources, and constraints relevant to                                can be found in the Housing Element
      meeting the needs, including:                                            Background Data document located in
         •	 Population and employment trends                                   Appendix E.
         •	 Housing needs for all income levels
         •	 Fair share housing allocation
         •	 Household characteristics
         •	 Inventory of land suitable for
            residential development
         •	 Emergency shelter analysis
         •	 Governmental constraints
         •	 Non-governmental constraints
         •	 Special needs housing
         •	 Energy conservation opportunities in
            residential housing
         •	 Assisted units at risk of conversion
      Goals, quantified objectives, and policies         Yes
      that include an eight-year schedule of
      actions
                                              Relationship to Visioning Statement and Guiding
                                              Principles
                                              The Housing Element supports the values expressed in the Vision-
                                              ing Statement and Guiding Principles by ensuring that the com-
                                              munity has a housing supply that meets the needs of current and
                                              future residents. Specifically, this Element directly supports the fol-
                                              lowing Guiding Principle:
                                                •	 Housing Choice: Provide a variety of housing types to meet
                                                   the needs for all generations and income levels.
HE 9-4

9.2	 Development of
                                                                                                                     Housing Element
                                                                                                                                      9
                 Housing
Quantified Objectives
Table 9-2 presents the City’s quantified objectives for construction,
rehabilitation, and preservation for the 2013-2021 period that will
be achieved through the policies and programs described below.
Table 9-2:	             Summary of Quantified Objectives
   Program                                              ELI                 VLI                  LI              M         AM        Total
   New Construction                                         75                 80                  90            349        864       1,458
   Rehabilitation                                           10                 20                  25                                    55
   Conservation /                                              -                 -                   -             -           -           -
   Preservation
Note: There are no subsidized rental housing units at-risk of conversion to market rate during the next 10 years
A diverse mix of housing types provides options for residents at all stages of life.
                                                                                                                                        HE 9-5

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    9.3	 Goals and Policies
    Goal 9.A	     Development of Housing. To promote the provision of adequate housing for all
                  persons in the City, including those with special housing needs and to emphasize the
                  basic human need for housing as shelter.
                  Flexibility in Development Standards
                  Policy 9.A.1	       Planned Development Overlay Zone. The City shall continue
                                      to use the Planned Development Overlay Zone (P-D) to allow for
                                      flexibility in development standards.
                                      Program 9.A.1	        The City shall continue to cooperate with and
                                                            advise developers in the use of the P-D Planned
                                                            Development Overlay Zone to reduce housing
                                                            costs by utilizing various techniques such as:
                                                            zero lot lines, cluster development, private
                                                            streets, parking and setback innovations and
                                                            other creative development approaches.
                                      Primary Responsibility: 	      Community Development Department
                                      Time Frame: 		                 Ongoing
                  Adequate Sites to Accommodate New Housing Needs
                  Policy 9.A.2	       Residential Land. The City shall ensure sufficient land for
                                      residential development, consistent with the City’s fair share
                                      obligation, that promotes efficient use of land and reduces significant
                                      environmental impacts.
                  Policy 9.A.3	       Variety. The City shall ensure that there is sufficient land zoned for
                                      a variety of housing types, residential densities, and housing prices
                                      with convenient access by various travel modes to services, schools,
                                      parks, and other community amenities.	
                  Policy 9.A.4	       Design. The City shall require, through specific plans, neighborhood
                                      design standards, and development review, a mix of housing types,
                                      densities, designs throughout the city
                                      Program 9.A.2	        The City has identified lands for housing that
                                                            can be developed by 2021 and that could
                                                            accommodate Woodland’s share of the regional
                                                            housing needs by income category. Since
                                                            adoption of the 2013 Housing Element, the City
                                                            has rezoned land to R-25 (20 to 25 units per
                                                            acre) and shall rezone at least 5 acres to R-25
                                                            or equivalent zone that has a minimum density
                                                            of 20 units per acre and meets the requirements
HE 9-6

                                             Housing Element
                    of California Government Code Section
                                                                  9
                    65583.2, paragraphs “h” and “i.” The target for
                    rezoning of 5 acres is based on the assumption
                    that 5 acres, developing at 80% capacity, at
                    20 units per acre, which would provide for
                    approximately 80 units, exceeding the City’s
                    shortfall. This additional land to be rezoned is
                    intended to accommodate the City’s Regional
                    Housing Need Allocation (RHNA) of 664 units
                    affordable to households earning 80% or less of
                    the Yolo County median household income.
                    The City has identified several properties with a
                    total land area of approximately 45 acres within
                    the Spring Lake Specific Plan Area that will be
                    considered for re-designation, consistent with
                    the requirements of this program. In addition,
                    there are various vacant and underutilized
                    properties (see Appendix E-1 and Figures
                    E-1 and E-2) that may be appropriate for
                    re-designation and re-zoning to allow higher-
                    density housing development, consistent with
                    this program. Sites shall be a minimum of
                    two acres in land area (or, in infill contexts,
                    adjacent sites that together comprise at least
                    two acres). The areas considered by the City
                    for re-zoning are within existing City limits,
                    near infrastructure, and without substantial
                    environmental constraints.
                    Within 12 months of adoption of the General
                    Plan Update, the City will update the Zoning
                    Code to reflect increased residential densities
                    and housing opportunities resulting from the
                    revised General Plan.
                    If, at any time, the supply of sites zoned for
                    housing falls below the quantity of land required
                    to accommodate the City’s remaining regional
                    housing needs allocation for any income group
                    during the Housing Element planning period, the
                    City shall initiate redesignations and rezonings
                    to provide additional land.
Primary Responsibility:	      Community Development Department
Time Frame: 		                Within 12 months following adoption of 	
				                          the 2035 General Plan.
                                                                    HE 9-7

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   Program 9.A.3	        The City shall provide flexibility on the
                                                         identification of sites for accommodating
                                                         its Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP)
                                                         Allocation as part of the update of the zoning
                                                         code. A request to lower the density of a site
                                                         that is counted towards meeting the City’s
                                                         RHNP Allocation shall include findings that
                                                         justify the rezone and identify an adequate
                                                         replacement site(s) that will provide the
                                                         minimum number of units by income level for
                                                         accommodating the City’s RHNP Allocation and
                                                         is developable during the term of the Housing
                                                         Element planning period.
                                   Primary Responsibility:	        Community Development Director
                                   Time Frame:		                   Ongoing as needed
                  Housing Development for All Economic Segments
                  Policy 9.A.5	    Private and Nonprofit Participation in Housing Programs.
                                   The City shall encourage private and nonprofit housing builders
                                   and developers to participate in federal, state or other programs
                                   that assist in providing and maintaining housing affordable to lower
                                   income and special needs groups consistent with the General Plan
                                   and development regulations.
                  Policy 9.A.6	    City Participation in Housing Programs. The City shall
                                   participate, whenever eligible, in federal, state or other programs
                                   that assist in providing and maintaining housing affordable to lower
                                   income and special needs groups.
                  Policy 9.A.7	    Regional Coordination. The City shall continue to work
                                   cooperatively with neighboring cities,Yolo County, and the
                                   Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG) to ensure that
                                   the region addresses its fair share of affordable housing.
                  Policy 9.A.8	    Cooperation. The City shall cooperate with and seek the advice
                                   of developers, builders, financial institutions, community groups,
                                   nonprofit agencies, and interested citizens on housing needs and the
                                   solutions to housing problems consistent with the City’s General
                                   Plan and development regulations.
                  Policy 9.A.9	    Infill Housing Development. The City shall continue to promote
                                   infill housing development in appropriate locations.
                  Policy 9.A.10	   Age in Place. The City shall allow housing options that allow
                                   residents to age in place such as multi-generational housing.
HE 9-8

Program 9.A.4	
                                           Housing Element
                    The City shall continue to cooperate with
                                                               9
                    and advise developers in the use of the City’s
                    Density Bonus Incentive Program as contained
                    in Section 25-21-25 of the Zoning Ordinance.
                    Bonus incentives are available to developers for
                    including lower-income units in their projects.
                    The City will provide a one-page fact sheet that
                    summarizes the Program and options of density
                    bonuses for distribution to developers at the
                    City’s permit counter.
Primary Responsibility:	     Community Development Department
Time Frame: 	       Prepare fact sheet within 90 days after adoption 	
			                 of Housing Element; otherwise, ongoing
Program 9.A.5	      The City shall continue to cooperate with
                    Yolo County and other cities in the County,
                    and actively work with affordable housing
                    developers interested in multi-family housing
                    bonds.
Primary Responsibility:	     Community Development Department
Time Frame:		                Ongoing
Program 9.A.6	      The City Council shall hold a meeting each year,
                    per Section 65400 of the Government Code,
                    to review accomplishments in implementing
                    the Housing Element and document these
                    accomplishments in a report to State office of
                    Housing and Community Development.
Primary Responsibility:	     Community Development Department
Time Frame:		                Annually
Program 9.A.7	      The City shall seek funds to provide financing
                    to assist housing construction of lower-income
                    units and moderate-income units that serve
                    special needs groups. Funding sources may
                    include HOME, CalHome, and other federal and
                    State sources.
Primary Responsibility:	     Community Development Department
Time Frame:		                Annually
                                                                 HE 9-9

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                   Program 9.A.8	      The City shall allocate CDBG funds for the
                                                       provision of extremely low-income units,
                                                       very low-income units, low-income units, and
                                                       moderate-income housing units. The City shall
                                                       identify sites, establish partnerships, and pursue
                                                       CDBG funds.
                                   Primary Responsibility:	     Community Development Department
                                   Time Frame:	        Annually
                                   Program 9.A.9	      The City shall continue to offer incentives to
                                                       developers of affordable housing such as: (1)
                                                       waiver and/or deferral of all or a portion of City
                                                       development fees; (2) waiver or modification of
                                                       City development standards; or (3) assistance
                                                       in obtaining federal, state, or local financing
                                                       and/or subsidies, as codified in Section 6A-3-
                                                       30 (Affordable Housing - Incentives) of the
                                                       Municipal Code.
                                   Primary Responsibility:	     Community Development Department
                                   Time Frame:		                Ongoing on a case-by-case basis
                                   Program 9.A.10	 The City shall amend its zoning code consistent
                                                       with Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5
                                                       and 17021.6 to further facilitate housing for
                                                       farmworkers. Other programs to facilitate the
                                                       development of affordable housing may include
                                                       fee waivers and reduced development standards.
                                                       Financial and technical assistance will be
                                                       sought from HCD’s Office of Migrant Services,
                                                       the Joe Serna Jr. Farmworker Housing Grant
                                                       Program, the California Tax Credit-Allocation
                                                       Committee’s Farmworker Housing Assistance
                                                       Program, and the USDA Rural Development
                                                       Program.
                                   Primary Responsibility:	     Community Development Director
                                   Time Frame:	        Within 12 months following adoption of the 	
                                   			                 2035 General Plan; provide financial and 	
                                   			                 technical assistance annually, as needed
                                   Program 9.A.11	 The City shall continue to require the provision
                                                       of affordable housing as a component of market-
                                                       rate projects, as codified in Chapter 6A of the
HE 9-10

                                                              Housing Element
                                    Municipal Code. The City shall continue to
                                    implement the affordable housing requirements
                                                                                  9
                                    of South East Area Specific Plan as applicable.
                                    The City shall continue to implement the
                                    affordable housing requirements of the Spring
                                    Lake Specific Plan, as applicable. The City shall
                                    monitor and annually report to the City Council
                                    on the number of affordable ownership units
                                    constructed and converted to unrestricted
                                    market-rate units.
                Primary Responsibility:	     Community Development Department
                Time Frame:		                Ongoing
Homeless,Transitional, and Special Needs Housing
Policy 9.A.11	  Review and Coordination. The City shall periodically review
                homeless, transitional housing, and other special housing needs
                with Yolo County and other cities in the county, and participate in
                coordinated programs with other public agencies and nonprofit
                organizations to meet identified needs.
                Program 9.A.12	 The City shall continue to facilitate the
                                    provision of emergency shelter services through
                                    its participation in the countywide Homeless
                                    Coordination Project that provides services
                                    to the homeless in Yolo County. The Project
                                    includes Homeless Coordination and the Cold
                                    Weather Shelter.
                Primary Responsibility:	     Community Development Department
                Time Frame:		                Ongoing
                Program 9.A.13	 The City shall pursue grant and loan funding
                                    opportunities from federal, State, and other
                                    agencies and coordinate with other agencies
                                    and nonprofit organizations for the provisions
                                    of different sizes, scales, and types of housing,
                                    including transitional housing, efficiency units,
                                    housing with supportive services, and other
                                    special-needs housing, consistent with policies in
                                    the Land Use, Community Design, and Historic
                                    Preservation Element.
                Primary Responsibility:	     Community Development Department
                Time Frame:		                Ongoing
                                                                                  HE 9-11
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                                    Program 9.A.14	 The City shall continue to support the services
                                                         of Yolo County’s Homeless Coordinator.
                                    Primary Responsibility:	      Homeless Coordinator
                                    Time Frame:		                 Ongoing
                                    Program 9.A.15	 The City shall consider options to allow
                                                         Residential Care Homes with more than six
                                                         mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped
                                                         persons or dependent and neglected children
                                                         as a permitted use in the Multiple-Family
                                                         Residential Zone (R-M).
                                    Primary Responsibility:	      Community Development Director
                                    Time Frame:		                 Within 12 months following adoption of 	
                                    				                          the 2035 General Plan
    Goal 9.B	     Maintenance of Housing. To encourage the preservation, maintenance, and
                  improvement of existing housing and the replacement of unsafe or dilapidated
                  housing.
                  Housing Rehabilitation
                  Policy 9.B.1	     Rehabilitation. The City shall continue to support rehabilitation
                                    of substandard residential units using federal and State subsidies for
                                    lower income households.
                                    Program 9.B.1	       The City shall periodically review its eligibility
                                                         for various federal and State programs that
                                                         will provide rehabilitation and maintenance
                                                         assistance for lower-income units and special
                                                         needs groups. The City shall submit applications
                                                         for programs for which the City is eligible, as
                                                         appropriate.
                                    Primary Responsibility:	      Community Development Department
                                    Time Frame:		                 Annually
                  Housing Code Compliance
                  Policy 9.B.2	     Code Compliance Program. The City shall continue
                                    to implement a code compliance program to ensure repair,
                                    rehabilitation, or demolition of unsafe or dilapidated housing.
HE 9-12

Policy 9.B.3	
                                                             Housing Element
                Housing Conditions Survey. The City shall periodically conduct
                a sample survey of housing conditions in targeted neighborhoods
                                                                                 9
                based on code enforcement records to identify substandard
                residential units.
                Program 9.B.2	       The City shall continue to periodically gather
                                     information regarding the status of local housing
                                     conditions to determine the need for housing
                                     rehabilitation and/or the removal of unsafe
                                     units. A housing condition survey that meets the
                                     criteria of the State Department of Housing and
                                     Community Development will be conducted in
                                     targeted neighborhoods.
                Primary Responsibility:	       Community Development Department
                Time Frame:		                  Every 5 years
                Program 9.B.3	       The City shall continue to include funds in its
                                     operating budget for code compliance and
                                     nuisance abatement programs.
                Primary Responsibility:	       Community Development Department
                Time Frame:		                  Ongoing
Housing Retention
Policy 9.B.4	   Downtown Mixed Use. The City shall continue to support a
                mixture of residential and commercial uses in the downtown area
                that will allow housing to be retained or re-established.
                Program 9.B.4	       The City shall continue to implement the
                                     Downtown Specific Plan to encourage
                                     the preservation of existing housing in the
                                     downtown area, the conversion of underutilized
                                     upper floors of commercial buildings to housing,
                                     and construction of infill, mixed-use housing
                                     projects with street-level commercial uses. The
                                     City shall monitor and annually report on the
                                     number of housing units constructed as part of
                                     infill and mixed-use projects in the Downtown
                                     Specific Plan Area.
                Primary Responsibility:	       Community Development Department
                Time Frame:		                  Ongoing
                                                                                 HE 9-13
City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                      Housing Preservation
                      Policy 9.B.5	           Subsidized Rental Housing. The City shall continue to monitor
                                              and work with owners of subsidized rental housing projects to
                                              ensure that they remain affordable to lower-income households or
                                              are replaced if converted to market rate housing.
                                              Program 9.B.5	            No later than one year prior to expiration
                                                                        of affordability, the City will contact property
                                                                        owners of units at-risk of converting to market
                                                                        rate housing to discuss the City’s desire to
                                                                        preserve complexes as affordable housing.
                                                                        The City will seek participation from agencies
                                                                        interested in purchasing and/or managing
                                                                        units at-risk. Funding assistance, which can be
                                                                        leveraged with outside sources by the developer
                                                                        to either transfer ownership, or provide rent
                                                                        subsidies to maintain affordability, shall utilize
                                                                        applicable federal, State, and local financing
                                                                        sources. Where properties are at risk of
                                                                        conversion, the City will work with tenants to
                                                                        provide education regarding tenant rights and
                                                                        conversion procedures pursuant to California
                                                                        law.
                                              Primary Responsibility:	            Community Development Department
                                              Time Frame:		                       Ongoing
    The General Plan supports the preservation and rehabilitation of existing housing in addition to construction of new housing.
HE 9-14

          Policy 9.B.6	
                                                                             Housing Element
                               Energy Conservation and Efficiency. The City shall promote
                                                                                                9
                               greater energy conservation and efficiency in existing housing as a
                               preservation strategy.
                               Program 9.B.6	       The City shall continue to strive for greater
                                                    energy conservation in existing residential
                                                    development. CDBG monies are available for
                                                    energy efficiency work as a part of the local
                                                    housing rehabilitation program. Additionally, the
                                                    City will continue to provide information to
                                                    residents regarding available home rehabilitation
                                                    programs, and increase public awareness of
                                                    self-help and rehabilitation programs through
                                                    outreach.
                               Primary Responsibility:	      Community Development Director
                               Time Frame:		                 Ongoing
Goal 9.C	 Equal Opportunity in Housing. To assure that housing opportunities are open
          to all without regard to income, source of income, marital status, familial status,
          age, sex, sexual orientation, religion, creed, color, race, national origin, ancestry, or
          disability.
          Policy 9.C.1	        Consistency. The City shall ensure that local regulations and
                               programs related to equal opportunity in housing are consistent
                               with State and federal law.
                               Program 9.C.1	       The City shall continue to distribute Fair
                                                    Housing brochures and booklets indicating
                                                    what the Fair Housing laws are and where
                                                    advice, assistance and enforcement activities
                                                    can be obtained. The City will provide this
                                                    information to any person who feels they have
                                                    been discriminated against in acquiring housing
                                                    within the city and to any housing provider
                                                    who requests such information. Information
                                                    will be made available at the City’s website and
                                                    at the City’s Homebuyer Education Seminars.
                                                    These efforts will also focus on special needs
                                                    population groups that might face housing
                                                    discrimination, such as farmworkers and persons
                                                    with disabilities.
                               Primary Responsibility:	      Community Development Department
                               Time Frame:		                 Ongoing
                                                                                                 HE 9-15

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 9.C.2	    Equal Opportunity. The City shall promote housing programs
                                   that maximize equal opportunity and avoid economic segregation.
                                   Program 9.C.2	      The City shall support an Annual Fair Housing
                                                       Open House for rental property owners and
                                                       various social services organization and agencies
                                                       to discuss mechanisms to evaluate tenant
                                                       applications according to fair housing law.
                                   Primary Responsibility:	      Community Development Department
                                   Time Frame:		                 Ongoing
                                   Program 9.C.3	      The City shall continue to provide individuals
                                                       with disabilities reasonable accommodation
                                                       in rules, policies, practices and procedures
                                                       that may be necessary to ensure equal access
                                                       to housing pursuant to the Reasonable
                                                       Accommodations for Persons with Disabilities
                                                       provisions of Section 25.21.85 of the Municipal
                                                       Code
                                   Primary Responsibility:	      Community Development Department
                                   Time Frame:		                 Ongoing
                                   Program 9.C.4	      The City shall continue to implement measures
                                                       to encourage developers to apply universal
                                                       design principles in new housing developments
                                                       so that housing units and the neighborhoods
                                                       in which they are located are as accessible as
                                                       possible to all individuals, regardless of age or
                                                       abilities. Such measures include density bonuses,
                                                       fee reductions/deferrals, or other incentives.
                                   Responsibility:	    Community Development Department
                                   Time Frame:	        Ongoing
                                   Program 9.C.5	      The City shall increase its educational outreach
                                                       efforts by providing fair housing information
                                                       in English and Spanish whenever feasible.
                                                       Financial and technical assistance may be
                                                       sought from California Rural Legal Assistance,
                                                       the Farmworker Justice Fund, the USDA Rural
                                                       Development Program, and HCD’s Office of
                                                       Migrant Services.
                                   Primary Responsibility:	      Community Development Department
                                   Time Frame:		                 Ongoing
HE 9-16

                                              Program 9.C.6	
                                                                                              Housing Element
                                                                     The City shall continue to ensure that
                                                                     relocation assistance is provided to tenant
                                                                                                                  9
                                                                     relocated as a result of removal of housing,
                                                                     in compliance with the federal Housing and
                                                                     Community Development Act of 1974
                                              Primary Responsibility:	       Community Development Director
                                              Time Frame:		                  Ongoing as needed
                     Policy 9.C.3	            Fair Housing Hotline Program. The City shall continue to fund
                                              and support the City’s Fair Housing Hotline Program.
                                              Program 9.C.7	         The City shall affirmatively further fair housing
                                                                     by contracting with the Fair Housing Hotline
                                                                     Project provided through Legal Services of
                                                                     Northern California.
                                              Primary Responsibility:	       Community Development Department
                                              Time Frame:		                  Ongoing
                     Policy 9.C.4	            Enforcement. The City shall support housing discrimination case
                                              processing and enforcement of Fair Housing laws through the State
                                              Department of Fair Employment and Housing.
                                              Program 9.C.8	         The City shall refer fair housing complaints
                                                                     to the Fair Housing Hotline Project provided
                                                                     through Legal Services of Northern California
                                                                     and State Department of Fair Employment and
                                                                     Housing for resolution.
                                              Primary Responsibility:	       Community Development Department
                                              Time Frame:		                  Ongoing
The City will continue to promote infill development where possible.
                                                                                                                  HE 9-17

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
    Goal 9.D	     Energy Conservation and Sustainable Housing Development. To establish
                  development and construction standards which encourage energy conservation and
                  sustainable development practices in residential development.
                  Policy 9.D.1	      Site Design. The City shall encourage innovative site designs and
                                     orientation techniques, which incorporate passive and active solar
                                     designs and natural cooling techniques, low impact development
                                     practices, and water conserving features.
                  Policy 9.D.2	      Infill, Adaptive Reuse, and Mixed Use. The City shall
                                     promote infill development, adaptive reuse, and mixed-uses in new
                                     development, and densification where possible
                                     Program 9.D.1	       The City shall consider citywide application of
                                                          energy conservation policies contained in the
                                                          Spring Lake Specific Plan. These policies include
                                                          but are not limited to the use of energy efficient
                                                          air conditioners, light-colored roofing materials,
                                                          photovoltaic energy systems, and Energy Star
                                                          appliances. The City shall monitor and report
                                                          on the number of housing units constructed
                                                          with energy efficiency features that exceed the
                                                          requirements of the CalGreen Code.
                                     Primary Responsibility:	       Community Development Director
                                     Time Frame:	Monitor and report to the City Council every 	
                                     			                  five years, as a part of the implementation of the 	
                                     			Climate Action Plan.
                                     Program 9.D.2	       Through its General Plan, Zoning Code, and
                                                          Climate Action Plan, the City shall promote
                                                          infill development, including affordable housing,
                                                          in proximity to services, transit, pedestrian and
                                                          bicycle facilities, and other urban amenities;
                                                          mixed use of commercial areas – including
                                                          upstairs spaces in the downtown area (e.g.,
                                                          uses including retail, entertainment, services,
                                                          and residential); and redevelopment of vacant
                                                          or underutilized lots with buildings, including
                                                          second stories for retail, residential, or office
                                                          uses.
                                     Primary Responsibility: 	      Community Development Director
                                     Time Frame: 		                 Ongoing
HE 9-18

                    Policy 9.D.3	
                                                                                                 Housing Element
                                            CALGreen. The City shall continue to promote energy-conserving
                                            construction pursuant to the CalGreen Code and Title 24 of the
                                                                                                                          9
                                            California Code of Regulations (California Building Code Standards).
                    Policy 9.D.4	           Energy Conservation. The City shall promote energy
                                            conservation through education and outreach programs.
                    Policy 9.D.5	           Solar Energy. The City shall promote opportunities for use of
                                            solar energy.
                                            Program 9.D.3	           The City shall continue to promote residential
                                                                     energy conservation practices pursuant to the
                                                                     Title 24 provisions of the California Building
                                                                     Code Standards, including the provisions for
                                                                     sustainable construction and development
                                                                     practices that are contained in the CalGreen
                                                                     Code.
                                            Primary Responsibility:	            Community Development Department
                                            Time Frame:		                       Ongoing
                                            Program 9.D.4	           The City shall coordinate with Pacific Gas &
                                                                     Electric, community-based organizations, other
                                                                     public agencies to provide public education
                                                                     and outreach on energy conservation. Specific
                                                                     actions related to energy conservation will be
                                                                     coordinated through the Climate Action Plan.
                                            Primary Responsibility:	            Community Development Department
                                            Time Frame:		                       Ongoing
Sustainable design features, such as solar panels, align with the General Plan’s energy conservation objectives while helping
residents lower their home energy costs.
                                                                                                                          HE 9-19

City of Woodland General Plan 2035
                  Policy 9.D.6	    Weatherization. The City shall promote a weatherization and
                                   retrofit program for existing housing units that fall below current
                                   state performance standards for energy efficiency.
                                   Program 9.D.5	      The City shall encourage the continued
                                                       affordability of both rental and ownership
                                                       housing by encouraging energy conservation in
                                                       all existing development.
                                   Primary Responsibility:	      Community Development Director
                                   Time Frame:		                 Ongoing
HE 9-20
