

























































































































  SECTION 2: LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                   ii
-
                                                                                                GINIRAL PUN
  INTRODUCTION
  The Land Use Element consists of goals and policies which promote orderly, quality, and
  responsible growth, yet at the same time, minimize the potential for land use conflicts. The Land
  Use Element is the single most important element of the Whittier General Plan, since it regulates
  land uses and development throughout the City. The Element's scope is far greater than that of
  the other elements, although it is directly related to all of them. For example, some of the issues
  that the Land Use Element must consider include the capacity of the existing roadway network
  (Transportation Element), open space and recreation areas (Environmental Resources
  Management Element), areas with earthquake and geologic hazards (Public Safety Element), and
  areas affected by major noise sources (Noise Element).
  The goals and policies in the Land Use Element also serve as a guide for public and private
  decision-making regarding land use issues and future development. The goals acknowledge the
  need to respond to opportunities for growth and development in the area while being sensitive
  to existing land uses and the natural environment. The goals of the Land Use Element also
  address environmental and economic constraints related to topography, geology, flooding
  potential, availability of services and infrastructure, and other factors which may impact future
  development.
- The Land Use Plan is an important part of the Land Use Element. The Plan establishes a
  classification of land uses, designates the general locations and distribution of these uses, and sets
  standards of population density and development intensity of each type of use. The plan is
  designed to accommodate the economic and social activities of a community through the provision
  of areas for these activities.
  A discussion of land use trends, existing land uses, constraints to development and existing plans
  for development in the City is contained in the Land Use Element Background Report. A
  summary of the major land use issues is provided below.
          •      The City of Whittier is a mature urban community. Only a small portion of the
                 City remains vacant and undeveloped. Residential land uses account -for the
                 majority of land uses with over three-fourths of the residential development devoted
                 to single-family homes.
          •      Commercial areas are found along Whittier Boulevard and in the original City
                 center - Uptown Whittier. Industrial uses are found on the western section of the

 Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)                                                        II
                                                                                                 GD11W. PUN
          •      The population of the City of Whittier has shown modest growth during the past -
                 few decades and, in fact, much of the growth has resulted from the expansion of the
                 City boundaries (i.e. annexation).
          •      Future development in Whittier must be sensitive to the presence of the Whittier
                 fault on the northeastern section of the City. Also, very little land remains
                 undeveloped, except for the hillside areas. Other concerns on future development
                 include the age and capacity of existing infrastructure (water lines, sewer lines,
                 storm drainage, etc.) to handle additional loads. The City is continuously upgrading
                 infrastructure facilities to meet current demands.
          •      The City seeks to maintain the character of existing residential neighborhoods and
               · to revitalize underutilized commercial and industrial uses. A healthy balance· of
                 land uses can promote land use compatibility, economic development and
                 community identity. There is a continuing concern for property maintenance and
                 the need for quality development.
         •       The Puente Hills is a major concern for ~esidents. Most of the hills are outside the
                 City's corporate boundaries, but within the City's sphere of influence. The Hills
                 provide aesthetic, safety, ecological and open space values to the Gty. The City
                 desires to actively participate in future planning efforts for the Hills and to explore •
                ways to preserve them.                                                                      W
         •      The City's sphere of influence includes areas which represent opportunities for joint
                 planning. These opportunities include the Puente Hills, the Los Nietos community
                 and adjacent unincorporated county areas. The Oty will continue to explore its
                 options in annexing the areas within its designated sphere of influence.
LAND USE GOALS AND POLICIES
The following goals and policies have been developed to correspond to major land use issues in
Whittier. These issues of concern include land use compatibility, residential, commercial and
industrial uses, parks, and open space areas. A brief discussion of each issue is provided below
and it is followed by the supporting goals and policies which will resolve the City's concerns.
Programs to implement these policies are outlined at the end of the element and are described
in detail in Section 10.

                                                                                              ii
-
  Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)                                                     QINIRAL PLAN
   maintenance and rehabilitation of the area. The City of Whittier seeks to eliminate existing
   problem uses and to prevent the creation of incompatible land uses in the City.
  Goal 1     Establish an orderly, functional, and compatible pattern of land uses to guide the future
             growth and development of Whittier and its sphere of influence, in order to provide a
             high quality of life for the people.
        Policy 1.1    Encourage land uses in the planning area that contribute to making Whittier
                      a desirable community in which to live.
        Policy 1.2    Encourage development in the City that is compatible with surrounding uses,
                      provides for civic improvements, increases the potential for future investment,
                      and fulfills the need for high quality residential areas and shopping and
                      employment centers.
        Policy 1.3    Conduct and carry out appropriate environmental review for new development
                      and substantial renovation of existing developments.
        Policy 1.4    Establish guidelines for land use compatibility in all city ordinances and
                      regulations.
-       Policy 1.5    Infill development must be sensitive to adjacent land uses to promote
                      compatibility between the new development and existing uses.
        Policy 1.6    Promote adaptive re-use of historic s.tructures, where appropriate.
  Issue: Residential Neighborhoods
  The City of Whittier is developed primarily with residential uses. It is important that residents
  enjoy an environment with services and amenities that enhance community life and promote
  public health and safety.
  Goal 2     Develop and maintain cohesive, clean, safe, and stable residential neighborhoods in
             Whittier.
        Policy 2.1    Provide city programs to encourage neighborhood or community beautification,
                      safety, and improvement, and continue to encourage Whittier residents to
                                                                                              Cly OI W1111111r
 S«tion 2: Land Use Elemmt (conlinued)                                                        •
       Policy 2.3     Promote a high degree of personal safety in all residential neighborhoods - -
                      through design that is sensitive to public safety.
       Policy 2.4     Preserve the character of existing neighborhoods and ensure that future
                                                                                                                 •
                      residential development is compatible with the surrounding area and the City
                      as a whole.
       Policy 2.5     Promote the development of quality housing at a variety of densities, with
                      consideration for the environment, aesthetics, and the need for maintaining and
                      expanding the infrastructure's capacity.
       Policy 2.6     Encourage the assemblage of lots to promote the efficient use of land in areas
                      where multiple family housing is permitted, to facilitate the development of
                      high quality housing.
       Policy 2.7     Consider the capacity of existing infrastructure and the potential demand for
                      public services in future planning and review of new development.
       Policy 2.8     Continue to implement ongoing planning efforts and continue to work with
                      private groups and organizations in the implementation of development plans.
ISSl.U!: Commercial Development                                                                                -
Commercial uses in the City provide goods and services to residential neighborhoods in the area.
They also serve as an economic base for the City providing revenue and employment. The
maintenance and development of commercial areas in Whittier is necessary to support other uses.
Goal 3      Promote the development and maintenance of retail and service facilities which are
            convenient to residents of Whittier, provide the widest possible selection of goods and
            services, and supplement the City's tax base.
       Policy 3.1    Promote convenient access and adequate parking areas in all commercial and
                     retail developments and districts.
       Policy 3.2    Encourage the grouping of commercial activities to facilitate access and provide
                     beneficial concentrations of businesses.

                                                                                              ii
-
  Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)                                                     OINllW. PUH
        Policy 3.5    Encourage the establishment and retention of businesses which provide
                      customers with a variety of high quality goods, reasonable prices and
                      outstanding service.
        Policy 3.6    Encourage the development and retention of attractive, safe, and comfortable
                      business buildings and commercial districts.
        Policy 3.7    Require high quali ty design in new commercial development including the use
                                          1
                      of buffer zones (such as parks, landscaped areas, walls, and high density
                      residential development) between commercial and single family developments.
                      Encourage the landscaping of blank walls to improve their appearance and to
                      discourage vandalism.
        Policy 3.8    Encourage building design that promotes energy conservation and efficiency.
        Policy 3.9    Consider the capacity of existing infrastructure and the potential demand for
                      public services in future planning and review of new development.
  Issue: Industrial Land Uses
- While industrial areas in Whittier are limited, tHey serve as major employment centers and tax
  generators. The increasing regulation of industrial processes has led to the reduction in
  environmental hazards that accompany older industrial uses. The City seeks to maintain its
  industrial base, with consideration for its potential risks.
  Goal 4     Encourage the maintenance and continued improvement of industrial areas which
             support and enhance the physical and economic well-being of Whittier.
        Policy 4.1    Encourage new industrial development to be sensitive to adjacent or nearby
                      properties and to be compatible with the environment.
        Policy 4.2    Improve the City's industrial and employment base to meet the needs of
                      Whittier.
        Policy 4.3    Require high quality design in new industrial developments and promote the
                      use of buffer zones between industrial areas and sensitive uses such as schools,
                      parks, or residential areas.
                                                                                             car.,....,
Section 2: Land Use Element (condnued)                                                      II
      Policy 4.6     Consider the capacity of existing infrastructure and the potential demand for - -
                     public services in future planning and review of new development.
Issue: Parks and Reaeation
Parks and recreational facilities provide Whittier residents with a variety of opportunities for
leisure, recreation, and physical well-being. They enhance the quality of residential
neighborhoods and create a sense of community.
Goal S Provide a wide range of safe, attractive and accessible recreational opportunities to meet
           the needs of individuals of all ages, families, community groups, and the physically
           challenged who live in the City.
      Policy 5.1     Develop and retain parks and recreation areas throughout the City to serve the
                     greatest number of residents.
      Policy 5.2     Acquire appropriate sites for recreational activities and land for urban or
                     wilderness parks when possible.
      Policy 5.3     Develop parks and recreational facilities to complement and support other
      Policy 5.4
      Policy 5.5
                     community facilities.
                     Develop park facilities in areas where there are identified deficiencies.
                     Avoid the destruction of an existing park, unless another park of larger size is
                     created in the immediate vicinity.
                                                                                                        -
Issue: Scenic Areas and Open Space
The City of Whittier is an attractive place to live and work due to the amenities in the area. The
preservation of these resources is necessary for recreation, safety, and environmental quality.
Goal 6     Encourage the retention and development of parkways, median strips, green belts, bike
           trails, and other open landscape areas, which provide scenic variety and aesthetic
           improvement.
      Policy 6.1     Promote the retention and development of landscaped buffer zones along major
                                                                                             II
-
  Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)                                                    GINIRAL PUN
        Policy 6.3    Promote the conversion of both active and abandoned railroad right-of-way to
                      multi-use trails, greenbelts, and other recreation open space uses, where
                      appropriate.
        Policy 6.4    Promote the preservation of important ecological resources within the planning
                      area through a variety of means, including setting aside areas for open space,
                      trails, and recreational uses.
        Policy 6.5    Work with property owners and government agencies to promote the
                      preservation of as much of the Puente Hills as possible, for both passive and
                      active recreation.
  Issue: Mixed-Use Development
  Goal 7     Promote mixed-use development in those areas of the City, so designated, to provide
             additional housing and to assist in the revitalization of commercial districts.
        Policy 7.1    Encourage housing development with commercial uses in the designated Urban
                      Design Districts where lots are · underutilized or contain deteriorating
                      commercial and industrial developments.
-       Policy 7.2    Encourage the development of "mixed-use" projects that include commercial
                      and residential uses in areas with excess retail space, including areas along · ·
                      South Greenleaf, Penn Street, Philadelphia Street, Hadley Street, and Whittier
                      Boulevard and ensure that the design and signage is sensitive to surrounding
                      uses.
  Issue: Institutional Land Uses
  Goal 8     Preserve existing institutional land uses in the City.
        Policy 8.1    Continue to preserve and maintain institutional uses to serve the current and
                      future residents in the City.
        Policy 8.2    Work with institutions (churches, schools, etc.) to support the services they
                      provide and ensure that institutional developments are compatible with the
                      community.

                                                                                                                         ii
                                                                                                                                      •
Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)                                                                                  CllNllW. PUN
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
The Land Use Go~ and Policies and Land Use Plan will be implemented through a variety of
programs and measures. Table 2-l identifies the implementation measures that correspond to
each land use policy. Implementation programs are discussed in Section 10.
:i     ,, i:::~~!!lif:!!l:f11~1~;;11:11 : 1 i:J1! t1:~i1)1~, ~ ii:~ifAUlflllllliffl\ltflltiJ:~ilfl111iillll~lllil
                     Goal                                               Polley                       lmplementadoa Measan
   1• .Es..ablishment of                              1.1 Encourage desirable land uses.       General Plan 8t Zoning Ordinance
   Compabole Land Uses                                                                         Consistency
                                                                                               Urban Design District
                                                                                               Non-conforming Uses Abatement
                                                      1.2 Encourage development that is        Design Review
                                                      compatible with surrounding uses.        Pre-application Meetings
                                                                                               Redevelopment Programs
                                                                                               Annexation Program
                                                      1.3 Conduct appropriate environmental    Environmental Review Program
                                                      review for new development.              Mit1aat1on
                                                                                                   • • M onitonng
                                                                                                               • . ~-a ·~-
                                                      1.4 Establish guidelines for land use    General Plan 8t Zoning Ordinance
                                                      compatibility                            Consistency Program
                                                      1.S Promote compatibility between infill Infill Development
                                                      development and existing land uses.      Design Review
                                                      1.6 Promote adaptive reuse of historic   Standards for Adaptive Reuse
                                                      structures.
   2. Maintenance and                                 2.1 Provide neighborhood programs.       Community Participation
   Development of Residential                                                                  Beautifi~tion Program
   Neighborhoods
                                                      2.2 Promote housing preservation and     Housing Rehabilitation Program
                                                      rehabilitation.                          Redevelopment Programs
                                                      2.3 Promote personal safety.             Police and Fare Department
                                                                                               Review

                                                                                                               ii
-
  Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)                                                                      OINIRAL PUN
                ··-.::          ·.:-::: ..... :: .... · TABLE:i•f.· :':     : .. :_
                                   ·.·LAND USE. IMPLEMENTATION= (contiiiued)
                  Goal                                   Policy                          Implementation Measure
   2. Maintenance and                 2.5 Encourage development of quality          General Plan & Zoning Ordinance
   Development of Residential         housing.                                      Consistency
   Neighborhoods (continued)                                                        Environmental Review Program
                                     26 Encourage lot assembly.                     Incentives to Create Larger Lots
                                                                                    Support Organizations
                                     2 7 Require new development to                 Environmental Review
                                      consider infrastructure capacity and          Service Commitment
                                      demand on public services.                    Service Capacity Monitoring
                                     2.8 Implement ongoing planning efforts.        Specific Plan Consistency Program
   3. Maintenance and                3.1 Promote convenient access and              Commercial Development
   development of commercial          parking areas.                                Standards
   and retail uses.                                                                 Parking Standards Review
                                     3.2 Encourage the grouping of                  General Plan & Zoning Ordinance
-
                                     commercial uses.                               Consistency
                                     3.3 Protect the aesthetic qualities of         Redevelopment Programs
                                     commercial areas.                              Design Review
                                     3.4 Discourage large temporary and             Sign Ordinance Review
                                     offsite signs.                   ·
                                     3.5 Encourage a variety of commercial          Support Organizations
                                     uses.
                                     3.6 Encourage attractive, safe,                Redevelopment Programs
                                     comfortable commercial developments.
                                     3.7 Encourage the use of buffers and           Design Review
                                     landscaping.                                   Landscaping and Land Use Buffers
                                     3.8 Promote energy conservation.               Energy Conservation
                                     3.9 Require new development to                 Environmental Review

Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)                                                                                 ii a
                                                                                                                        CllNllW. PUN
                                                     ~·•usE·Th-f~lJ.i6N:i~JiiMi&1:!\;•.: t '{j'.······ :;<if '; ;•.•.
                                                                                                                                         9
                      •ct:•···•······•••••.•·\·. . ·                                                                          •!•• ·:'..
               Goal                                                      Polley                     Implementation Measure
 4. Continued improvement of                         4.1 Encourage industrial developments    Environmental Review
 industrial areas.                                   to be compatiole with adjacent uses.     Design Review
                                                                                              Industrial Rehabilitation
                                                     4.2 Encourage industrial diversification Support Organizations
                                                     in Whittier.                             Promotion of Local Industries
                                                     4.3 Require high quality building design Landscaping and Land Use Buffers
                                                     and promote the use of buffers.          Environmental Review
                                                     4.4 Cooperate with other agencies in     Environmental Review
                                                     limiting adverse impacts of industrial   Inter-agency Coordination
                                                     development
                                                     4.5 Require industrial development to    Environmental Review
                                                                                                                                           -
                                                     meet or exceed safety standards.         Design Review
                                                                                              Inter-agency Coordination
                                                     4.6 Require new development to
                                                     consider infrastructure capacity and     Environmental Review
                                                     demand on public services.               Service Commitment
                                                                                              Service Capacity Monitoring
 S. Provision of Parks and                           5.1 Encourage development and            General Plan & Zoning Ordinance
 Recreational Opportunities                          retention of parks and recreation areas. Consistency
                                                                                              Parks Needs Study Update
                                                     5.2 Purchase new park sites whenever     Parks Needs Study Update
                                                     possible.                                Park Fees
                                                     5.3 Development parks and recreation     Parks Needs Study Update
                                                     facilities to complement other community
                                                     facilities.
                                                     S.4 Encourage park development to        Parks Needs Study Update
                                                     address deficiencies.                    Handicap Access Requirements
                                                     S.5 Discourage the destruction of        Parks Needs Study Update
                                                     existing parks.                          Deed Restriction

            1                -,--~
                                                                                                                        II
-
  Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)                                                                               CllNllW. 111.M
  I ;;·· ..
              .. • · .· :_ ~:ti ~!':!~1ffi '.i•••··········~usE w~1.nmt·t~~ .'I ;;·•• i ;;;r ·'.;:;;. i'.fii)·!ij::i~:
                      Goal                                           Polley                       Implementation Measure
    6. Retention and                              6.1 Encourage landscaped buffer zones.     Landscaping & Land Use Buffers
    development of scenic areas
    and open space.                               6.2 Maintain and develop sidewalks and    Sidewalk and Parkway
                                                  parkways.                                 Development and Maintenance
                                                                                             Program
                                                  6.3 Promote conversion of railroad         Parks Needs Study Update
                                                  rights-of-way to multi-use trails.         Conversion of Railroad Rights-of-
                                                                                             Way
                                                  6.4 Preserve ecological resources in       Puente Hills Cooperative Plannina
                                                  planning area.                             Program
                                                                                             Open Space Acquisition
                                                  6.5 Work with involved individuals and     Puente Hills Cooperative Planning
                                                  agencies to promote preservation of        Program.
                                                  Puente Hills.                              Open Space Acquisition
                                                                                           I
•
    7. Promote mixed-use                          7.1 Encourage new housing in mixed-use     Underutmzect Lots
    development.                                  districts.              ,                  General Plan & Zoning
                                                                                             Ordinance Consistency
                                                  7.2 Encourage the development of           Redevelopment Programs
                                                  mixed-use districts.                       General Plan & Zoning
                                                                                             Ordinance Consistency
    8. Preserve Institutional Uses.             I 8.1  Preserve and maintain institutional   General Plan & Zoning Ordinance
                                                  uses.                                      Consistency
                                                  8.2 Work with Whittier College to          Specific Plan Consistency Program
- LAND USE PLAN
                                                  preserve its campus.                       General Plan & Zoning Ordinance
                                                                                             Consistency
  The Land Use Plan is the primary tool for implementing the goals and policies of the Land Use
  Element. The Plan indicates the location and extent of permitted development in the City to

  Section 2: Land Use Ekment (continued)
                                                '
                                                '                                                m•
                                                                                                 ~---
 requires that these categories also describe standards for development intensity and population - -
density. This ensures that citizens, staff, and policy makers clearly understand the implications of
 the Land Use Plan on both existing and future development.
 Development intensity refers to the size or degree. of development possible within a land use
 designation. Development intensity standards may use a ratio of a building's floor area to the total
 lot area (referred to as a floor area ratio), the number of dwelling units per acre, traffic generation,
or a number of other factors. In the Whittier General Plan, development intensity is measured
using floor area ratios for nonresidential development and units per acre densities for residential
development.
Population density applies generally to residential land use designations and is expressed as the
number of persons per acre. The population density standard is often derived by multiplying the
number of housing units per acre permitted within a particular land use designation by the average
household size in the City.
The land use designations are described in greater detail in the following sections. The General
Plan land use map is shown in Exhibits 2-1 and 2-2.
Residential Land Use Designations and Standardr
Residential land use designations apply to the various densities of residential developments in the.
City. Generally, higher density areas are located near the city center and low density areas are --
located on the hillsides. The residential land use designations are summarized in Table 2-2.
       •      Hillside Residential - The Hillside Residential designation applies to large lot
              development. Approximately 314.27 acres (3.9 percent) of the City is designated as
           -_ Hillside Residential. This designation will allow development of up to three dwelling
              units per acre. The population density within these areas would be 9 persons per acre,
              assuming an average household size of 2.7 persons per household. (The average
              household size reflects 1990 Census estimates.) This designation corresponds to the
              Hillside Residential (H-R) Zone of the City Zoning Ordinance.
      •       Low Density Residential - The Low Density Residential designation refers to single-family
              development which is found throughout Whittier.             Generally, this designation
              characterizes existing residential neighborhoods in the City. This designation will allow
              developments with maximum densities of 6 or 7 units per acre, depending on the

•
                                LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                            D    HIUSIDE RESIDENTIAL
                            D    LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                            C'.J MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                                 MEDIUM HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                            •    HIGH DEt.ISITY REBIJENTIAL
                            ~ GENERAL COMMERCIAL
                            •    ADMINISTRATIVE/PROFESSIONAL COMMERCIAL
                            •    GENERAL INDUSTRIAL
                            ~ URBAN DESIGN DISTl\ICI'
                            •    SPECIFIC PLAN
                            •    ELEMENTARY' SCHOOL
                            •    JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL
•
                            •    HIGH SCHOOL
                            •    PRIYATI! SCHOOL
                            •    PARK
                            @El  GOLF COURSE
                            •    CMC CENTER
                            •    HOSPITAL
                            •    PO&T OFFICE
                            -    LIBRARY
  §.@Ii) DAVID EVANS AND ASSOCIATES.INC.--------------------------------------------------------------
• ii
  GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                EXHIBIT.2-1
                                                                                             LAND USE PLAN
                                                                                         (NORTHWEST AREA)

I
,.
~
   §X§fi} DAVID EVANS AND ASSOCIATES, INC.
•  City of Whlttle1·
                                                 EXHIBIT2-2
   •
   GENERAL PLAN
                                              LAND USE PLAN
                                           (SOUTHEAST AREA)

I 1
     e Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)                                                                   II
                                                                                                                 GINl!RAL PLAN
                  corresponds to the Low-Density Residential (R-1) Zone and includes the Residential (R-
                  E) Zone.
            •     Medium Density Residential - The Medium Density Residential designation applies to
                  areas of the City with densities between 8 dwelling units per acre to 15 dwelling units per
                  acre. Housing within this density range includes a mix of single-family detached and
                  attached units, duplex, triplex, and garden apartments. The Medium Density Residential
                  designation applies to approximately 225.27 acres (2.8 percent) of the City. The
                  maximum population density in these areas is 41 persons per acre, assuming an average
                  of 2. 7 persons per household. This designation corresponds to the Medium Density
                  Residential (R-2) Zone.
            •     Medium-High Density Residential - The Medium-High Density Residential designation
                  reflects areas with housing densities of 16 dwelling units per acre to 25 dwelling units per
                  acre. Developments within this designation include multi-family projects, apartment,
                  condominiums, and planned unit developments. The Medium-High Density Residential
                  designation covers approximately 65.90 acres (0.8 percent) of the City. The maximum
, 'I
                  population density within these areas is 68 persons per acre. The Medium-Hi~ Density
                  Residential designation corresponds to the Medium-High Density Residential (R-3) Zone.
     -      •     High Density ResidenUal - The High Density Residential designation applies to those
                  areas with multi-family developments and special housing projects with densities of 26
                  dwelling units per acre to 35 dwelling units per acre. Approximately 184.34 acres, or 2.3
                  percent of the City, is designated as High Density Residential. The population density.
                  in these areas may reach 95 persons per acre (at 2.7 persons per household). This land
                  use designation corresponds to the High Density Residential (R-4) Zone.
                                                       · TABLE 2.1-:.                        : ;i. ·. · ··
                              SUMMARY OF GENERAL PLAN RESIDE?mAL.DESIGNATIONs:::·>·:                        .. :
                   Land Use Designation        Maximum Density             Permitted              Correspondlng
                                                                         Developments              Zone District
               Hillside Residential              2 units/ acre     Planned residential                     H-R
                                                                   clusters of single-family
                                                                   units and/or multi-
                                                                   family units

 Section 2· Land Use Element (continued)                                                             II
                                                                                                     --.
                                                   TABLE 2·2
                   SUMMARY OF GENERAL PLAN RESIDENTIAL DESIGNATIONS (oontiiJUed)
             Land Use Designation        Maximum Density             Permitted        Corresponclln1
                                                                  Developments         Zone District
         Medium-High Density               25 units/ acre   Multi-family units,            R-3
         Residential                                        condominiums, Planned
                                                            Unit Developments
         High Density Residential          35 units/ acre   Multi-family units,            R-4
                                                            special housing projects
Commercial Designations and Standards
Commercial designations in the Plan reflect the different types of commercial land uses: General
                                                                                                            •
Commercial, and Administrative and Professional Commercial. Commercial designations are
described below and are summarized in Table 2-3.
      •     General Commercial - The General Commercial designation refers to retail, trade and
           service uses, including highway-related commercial ·uses, shopping centers, business
            districts and commercial nodes. Approximately 411.51 acres of the City are designated
            as General Commercial. The average floor area ratio of developments in these areas
           0.25 to 0.50. This designation corresponds to the C-1, C-2, and C-3 Zones of the Zoning•
            Ordinance.
                                                                                                         is-
      •    Administrative and Professional Commercial - The Administrative and Professional
           Commercial designation applies to areas developed with offices serving business, medical,
           professional, and administrative uses. This designation permits an average floor area
           ratio (FAR) of 0.50 to 2.0. Approximately 58.41 acres of the City (0.7 percent) are
           designated Administrative and Professional Commercial. This designation corresponds
           directly to the Commercial Office (C-0) and Light Commercial (C-1) Zones.
                      . .SUMMARY. OF  GENEiw;··~~~~ERCIAL·.D~I~~l"I~~~,;:'.                 , ;; i i ,~:
             Land Use Designation        Maximum Density            Permitted         Corresponding
                                          Average FAR            Developments         Zone District
                                                          I Retail, trade and service

                                                                                                               II
-
   Section 2· Land Use Element (continued)                                                                     Cl!NIRAL PUN
          !'••········ .. ··· .. L~t,E~OF·(;~ PIAN ~~··~~i~l~il~~~~~;;·1::.~t:'.1t
                        Land Use Designation     Maximum Density
                                                   Average FAR
                                                                 I          Permitted
                                                                         Developments
                                                                                               I Corresponding
                                                                                                 Zone District
               Administrative and
               Professional Commercial
                                                  FAR O.S to 2.0 ·1 Business, medical,
                                                                    professional and
                                                                                               I      C-1
                                                                                                      C-0
                                                                    administrative offices,
                                                                    special ·housing projects,
                                                                    high density residential
                                                                    uses
  Urban Design District Overlay
  This land use designation promotes the revitalization and improvement in four key corridors within
  the City. The designation goes beyond the Scenic Corridor designations discussed in the
  Environmental Resource Management Element which focuses on landscaping and the preservation
  and maintenance of amenities. The Urban Design District applies to portions of Whittier
  Boulevard, Greenleaf Avenue, Philadelphia Street, and Hadley Street. It promotes specific urban
  design measures and guidelines and calls for specific types of land uses and accompanying
-
  development standards tailored for each ilse. This designation does not change the maximum
  density allowed by the underlying zoning designations though the overlay expands the development, .
  that is currently permitted under the base zone designations. Table 2-4 summarizes this land use .
  designation and the actions associated with the implementation of the overlay designation for· each ·
  of the districts.
  The Urban Design District desigilation applies to the following:
        •             Whittier Boulevard Urban Design District - This district generally extends along the
                      entire length of Whittier Boulevard and applies to a majority of parcels where infill or
                      design guidelines are desirable. The Plan calls for design guidelines or a specific plan to
                      be prepared and adopted to provide direction related to architectural design, site
                      planning, signage, and streetscape treatments along Whittier Boulevard. The Whittier
                      Boulevard Urban Design District designation will also permit mixed-use developments
                      (which may include a mix of residential and commercial land uses on a single parcel)
                      once design standards have been prepared. In other areas, the intent is to provide for
                      the establishment of commercial nodes and centers to more efficiently utilize the

                                                                                                      m.,
                                                                                                       CIJCll-
 S«tian 2: Land Use ElDnmt (conlinued)
              the need to establish design guidelines for this key roadway while promoting mixed-use. .
              (residential/commercial) .and residential development in those areas where underutilized           •
              properties are found.
                                                                                                                 ...
        •     South Greenleaf Urban Design District - This designation applies to that portion of
              Greenleaf Avenue between Uptown and Whittier Boulevard. This area is included within
                                                                                                                 ...
              the South Greenleaf Redevelopment Project Area and has been the focus of planning
              efforts related to improved urban design. The Overlay designation, as it applies to this
              corridor, also permits mixed-use development (residential/commercial) .am! residential
              development. Commercial development is also permitted under the base zoning.
       •      Philadelphia Street Urban Design District - This street is a highly visible link between
              Whittier Boulevard and the Uptown Area. The overlay designation, as it applies to this
              corridor, focuses on improving the corridor's appearance through design guidelines. The
                                                                                                                 •
              average permitted density in these areas shall be regulated by the density allowed by the
              underlying designation.
   ;:· ;;1~i!'i111~11i~11l;1111111!t:·!i•1~1• 1r=•111a11.•i•
,,             District Name      .     I    MaxlmuDt Average Deasltf     I       AppJlcable S1andards      . 11"
     Whittier Boulevard                    FAR OZ to 2.0 (with the floor   Specific Plan or Design Guidelines
                                            area for the residential use   will be prepared. Base mning will
                                           calculated as part of the FAR)  remain unch•nged along corridor.
                                                                           Commercially zoned parcels may
                                                                           be redeveloped in mixed-use
                                                                           residential/commercial on same
                                                                           parcel
     Hadley Street                         FAR OZ to 2.0 (with the floor   Specific Plan or Design Guidelines
                                            area for the residential use   will be prepared. Base mning will
                                           calculated as part of the FAR)  remain unchanged along corridor.
                                                                           Commercially mned parcels may
                                                                           be redeveloped in mixed-use
                                                                           residential/commercial on same
                                                                           parcel

    Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)                                                                         ii
a
                                                                                                                    GIN1!fW. PUN
                        ·, ...=:. :>: " ·                TABLE'.'24 ·    . . . :.        . ... :. =. . . .
                      . :'SUMMARY OF URBAN DESIGN DISTRICT DESIGNATION:'.(contlnued)=."
                District Name                    Maximum Average Density                      Applicable Standards
      South Greenleaf Avenue                 . FAR 0.25 to 2.0 (with the floor      Specific Plan or Design Guidelines
                                                area for the residential use        will be prepared. Base zoning will
                                               calculated as part of the FAR)       remain unchanged along corridor.
                                                                                    Commercially zoned parcels may
                                                                                    be redeveloped in mixed-use
                                                                                    residential/commercial on same
                                                                                    parcel
      Philadelphia Street                           Base zoning applies             Design guidelines only.
  Industrial Designation
  The General Industrial designation refers to all industrial and manufacturing land uses, including
  warehouses. In Whittier, approximately 262.28 acres (3.3 percent of the City's total land area) are
  designated as General Industrial. The average floor area ratio of these areas is 0.6 to 1.0. The
  General Industrial designation corresponds to the Manufacturing (M) Zone in the Zoning
  Ordinance. The standards are summarized in Table 2-5.                                                                ·
-                                 SUMMARY OF
               Land Use Designation
                                             GENERAL;~~~~~ ri~~~~~~!- •;!~~;:i :;;~!~;Iti
                                                Average FAR                 Permitted
                                                                          Developments
                                                                                                     Correspondln1
                                                                                                      Zone District
            General Industrial                 FAR 0.6 to 1.0       Warehouses, light and                  M
                                                                    heavy industrial uses
  Public and Quasi-Public Designations
  Public and Quasi-Public designations, (summarized in Table 2-6) apply to land uses operated and
  maintained for public administration, and welfare. These land uses include public elementary,
  junior high and high schools, private schools, parks, the Civic Center, hospitals, post offices,
  libraries, and the golf course. The Land Use Plan identifies the different institutional and public
  uses in the City. Approximately 1,232.26 acres of the City (15.4 percent) is designated for the
  different Public and Quasi-Public uses. This designation is consistent with all zoning categories in

                                                                                                            II -
 Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)
                       ... ··.· .·. .· . =   . .   TABLE2~.... :·: .· ·.   : .. _.... . . . :: .. · .
                                                                                                            ---
                .·. '. SUMMARY OF: GENERAL-PLAN PUBLIC/QUASI~PUBUC. DESIGNATION: -
              Land Use Designation          Average FAR               Permitted              Corresponding
                                                                   Developments               Zone District
         Public and Quasi-Public           FAR 0.5 to 2.0 I Schools, institutional                  All
                                                            uses, private clubs and
                                                            organizations, parks and
                                                                                                                -
                                                            recreation facilities,
                                                            cultural and civic
                                                            centers, utility facilities
Specific Plan Designation
Specific Plans are designed to provide specific guidance concerning land use and development
standards, infrastructure requirements (including streets), and design standards for areas included
within a specific plan's boundaries. Once adopted, a specific plan can only be changed. by
amending the plan. The areas designated as Specific Plan correspond to areas of adopted and
future specific plans. Specific plans may be developed for other areas of the City where there is
a need to exercise more control over the development of the area. The following Specific Piansa
are provided for under this General Plan:                                                                     •
      •    The Uptown Whittier Village is located in a specific plan area which contains the City's
            original commercial district. It covers 33 city blocks developed with retail stores, specialty
           shops, restaurants, residences, and offices. The specific plan for Uptown Whittier was
            developed specifically to preserve the historic character of the area. The plan calls for
            rebuilding of the retail commercial base, development of mixed-uses, restoration of
            historic buildings, development of buildings which complement the existing architectural
      •
           style, promotion of the area's retail uses, creation of entertainment opportunities, and
           development of support residential and offices uses.
           The Quad at Whittier Specific Plan covers the area developed with the· Quad shopping
           center on Whittier Boulevard between Painter and Laurel Avenues. The site covers 32.4
                                                                                                                -
           acres.
      •    Whittier College has also been designated a Specific Plan area. This will allow

                                                                                                                       ii
-
   Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)                                                                             GIHIJIAL. PUN
  Land Use Plan
  The Land Use Plan, as shown in Exhibits 2-1 and 2-2, indicates the location and extent of
  development permitted under the Land Use Plan. As indicated previously, most development in
  the City is going to be preserved under this Plan. The focus of future revitalization and
  redevelopment will be along the commercial arterial roadways and in scattered infill.                                              ·
  The development capacity of a city may depend on a number of factors such as availability of
  infrastructure, vacant land, topography, and the maximum development permitted under the
  General Plan. The maximum development possible under a plan is referred to as a build-out.
  Build-out is generally expressed in number of housing units for residential development and square-
  rootage of structural gross floor area for nonresidential.
  Theoretical build-out refers to the development possible if all land uses were developed to the
  maximum intensity permitted under the General Plan. The major limitation of theoretical build-out
  is the assumption that existing development will be replaced by newer development over the life
  of the Plan. Effective build-out is a more realistic measure in that the measure recognizes that new
  development will be limited to certain parcels. Many parcel's configurations will not allow further ·.~\ ·
  development. In communities that are urbanized, effective build-out is generally around 80% of ! i
  theoretical build-out.
- The Whittier Land Use Plan, under effective build-out, will result in approximately 28,451 to 35,564
  housing units, 4.6 to 5.8 million square feet of commercial uses and 5.5 to 6.8 million square feet
  of industrial uses. Table 2-6 indicates the effective and theoretical build-out for the General Plan. . ,
  The effective buildout is 80 percent of the theoretical capacity. It accounts for lot size, irregular
                                                                                                                            .' 1< :    ~ :.r:
  parcels and other areas that cannot accommodate development at maximum density. Assuming
  an average household size of 2. 7 persons per household, the resident population at build-out and
  full occupancy is 96,023 persons. Table 2-7 estimates the Plan's carrying capacity.
                                                                                           '.
                                                                                                 . -                 .   .
                                                  TABLE z;.7                          ....    .. -          .··::·:-= .·".'
                                           LAND USE. PLAN BUILD-OUT.. ·'" · . · "' ,: · ..
        Land Use Designation            Acres          Density/FAR    Total Build-out                Effective Build-out
    Hillside Residential                314.27          2 du/acre                     628                       502
    Low Density Residential            3,785.87         6 du/acre                 22,715                    18,172

Section 2: Land Use Element (continued)                                                                                           ii
                                                                                                                                  ---
                              - -                                                           ·-":
                                                                                              .....·....-·   :.   :;:.;::.::.         ,-_
                                  -_-        ·    TABLE 2~7 - - >· ·.... · ·                                        --:   ·_::::.:.:::-::::;:::;::·.- (:::.::.:::::.-
                                                                                                   .       ,,,
                                                                                                               ..          ::::=:{:::=:::-:·:"\ (:\:\
                                   LAND' USE PLAN BUILD-OUT (cantinuedf                           ·.- ..                      .           ):        --::-:. .. ::=:::.:::-
     Land Use Designation              Acres           Density/FAR       Total Build-out     Etrectlve Build-out
 General Commercial                   411.51         FAR 0.25 to 0.50      4,481,344 sf                  3,585,075 sf
 Administrative and
 Professional Commercial               58.41          FAR 0.5 to 2.0       1,272,170 sf                   1,017,736 sf
 General Industrial                   262.28          FAR 0.60 to 1.0      6,854,950 sf                  5,483,960 sf
 Urban Design District                296.74             25 du/ac            742 du*                            594du
 Public and Quasi-Public
 Elementary School                    166.22             FAR 0.5
 Junior High School                    38.65             FAR 0.5
 High School                          114.74                               7~17,4rl·sf                   5,853,941 sf
                                                         FAR 0.5
 Private School                        16.36             FAR0.5
 Park                                 492.18            FAR 0.01            214~94     sf                    171,515 sf
 Civic Center                          17.27            FAR 0.70            S'J.fJ,597 sf                   42t;rn sf
 Hospital                              27.41          FAR 1.0 to 2.0       1,193,980 sf                     955,184 sf
 Post Office                            1.80             FAR 0.5            39,204 sf                         31,363 sf
 Golf Course                          121.25            FAR 0.01            52,817 sf                         42,2S3 sf
 Library                                1.19             FAR 0.5            25,918 sf                         20,735 sf
Specific Plan                         235.19          FAR 0.5 to 2.0       5,122,438 sf                  4,097,950 sf
Streets                              1,465.79               ---                   --                                --
             TOTAL                   8,005.90                            35,564 units +       28,451 units + 22
                                                                         27 million sq.ft.            million sq.ft.
• Assumes 10% is developed with residential uses at 2S du/ac and with commercial or industrial use calculated
under the base designation.





























































































