VERNON GENERAL PLAN
CIRCULATION AND
INFRASTRUCTURE
ELEMENT
                                                                    Vernon General Plan
                                                Circulation and Infrastructure Element
CIRCULATION AND
INFRASTRUCTURE ELEMENT
1.0     PURPOSE AND FOCUS
1.1     Purpose
The Circulation and Infrastructure Element addresses the
movement of goods and people along roadways and
railways in the City, as well as the distribution of water,
wastewater, stormwater, energy, and information through
various conduits.
Vernon’s industrial nature involves both manufacturing
and logistics. Vernon originally was oriented around rail
transport, but over the years goods movement has relied
increasingly on trucks, thus heightening the importance of
a local street system capable of safely and efficiently
handling multi-axle truck traffic.
In addition to good access to transportation, industrial
businesses demand reliable, high-volume utilities to
properly conduct their operations. Intense land uses
require large amounts of electricity and water, and also
generate large amounts of sewage. Today’s globalized
                                               Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 1

Vernon General Plan
Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                            economy demands fast, high-capacity telephone and other
                            communications systems. To remain competitive as a
                            location for industry, Vernon must be able to deliver or
                            otherwise provide high-quality utility services at
                            competitive prices.
                            1.2     Focus
                            California planning law requires the inclusion of a
                            Circulation Element addressing both transportation and
                            non-transportation infrastructure. While all elements of
                            the General Plan must be consistent with each other, the
                            Circulation Element must, by State law, correlate directly
                            to the Land Use Element.
                            2.0     CIRCULATION PLAN
                            2.1     Regional Circulation
                            Streets and Freeways
                            Vernon lies two miles southeast of the industrial areas of
                            downtown Los Angeles, and both the local roadway and
                            freeway systems directly connect the industrial businesses
                            in Vernon with industrial development in adjacent
                            communities. Key connections include:
                                   Downtown Los Angeles, via Alameda Street and
                                    Santa Fe Avenue;
                                   The Boyle Heights district of the City of Los
                                    Angeles, via Soto Street, Washington Boulevard,
                                    and Downey Road;
                                   The City of Commerce, via Washington Boulevard,
                                    Interstate 710, and Atlantic Boulevard;
                                   The City of Bell, via Bandini Boulevard and
                                    Interstate 710;
                                   The City of Maywood, via Atlantic Boulevard;
                                   The City of Huntington Park, via Slauson Avenue,
                                    Soto Street, Pacific Boulevard, Santa Fe Avenue,
                                    and Alameda Street;
                                   Portions of the City of Los Angeles south of
                                    downtown, connected by many streets across the
                                    shared boundary of Alameda Street, including
                                    Vernon Avenue and Santa Fe Avenue.
                            Of particular note is the Long Beach Freeway, Interstate
                            710.
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 2

                                                                     Vernon General Plan
                                                 Circulation and Infrastructure Element
Interstate 710 provides an important direct connection to
the ports of Long Beach and Los Angeles. Although less
than half a mile of this freeway traverses Vernon, that
portion       contains    the    very      busy       Atlantic
Boulevard/Bandini Boulevard interchange.                  This
frequently congested interchange carries a substantial
amount of truck traffic from Vernon, particularly from the
adjacent Hobart Rail Yard. In August of 2004, the
Gateway Cities Council of Governments made preliminary
recommendations to improve the Atlantic/Bandini
interchange, as well as to build truck ramps directly from
the rail yards to the freeway. Engineering plans and
studies for this interchange will continue in concert with
broader plans for improvements to I-710, with
improvements to the interchange expected be
accomplished prior to 2030. The timing will depend upon
State approvals and funding. Once implemented, the
interchange improvements are expected to relieve a major
traffic bottleneck and improve safety by separating autos
from heavy truck traffic.
The City has undertaken a project to partially relieve
congestion at the Atlantic/Bandini interchange. The
extension of 26th Street to Bandini Boulevard will provide
a means for through traffic to bypass the Atlantic/Bandini
interchange.
Railroads
In the early years of the twentieth century, rail transport
dominated the distribution of materials and manufactured
goods, so an extensive rail network was built in Vernon
with main lines, switching yards, and many spur lines to
serve industrial properties. Over the years, trucks have
come to play a more important role in freight transport,
especially for access to individual businesses. Some spur
rail lines have been abandoned, but rail traffic still plays a
major role in the transport of materials and goods.
Several rail lines cross Vernon, the most important of
which is the Alameda Corridor. The Alameda Corridor,
opened in 2002, serves as the primary connection between
the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach and the rail yards
of Vernon, Commerce, and downtown Los Angeles. The
Alameda Corridor places ten miles of track inside the 30-
foot-deep Mid-Corridor Trench between the northern
                                                Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 3
Vernon General Plan
Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                            boundary of Vernon at 25th Street south to the State Route
                            91 freeway. This has eliminated many dangerous and
                            time-consuming conflicts between surface street traffic and
                            at-grade rail crossings, both in Vernon and elsewhere
                            along the line. While the Alameda Corridor takes much of
                            the container shipping traffic that would otherwise use
                            trucks or the older Union Pacific (UP) or Burlington
                            Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) lines, the older lines do still
                            receive some use.
                            Many at-grade rail crossings remain in the City. These
                            should gradually decrease as the City encourages rail lines
                            to merge facilities, to abandon spur lines, and to
                            participate in separating streets from remaining railways.
                            The Hobart Yard, located in the northeastern portion of
                            Vernon, links the Alameda Corridor and BNSF lines with
                            the wider transcontinental rail system, serving to assemble
                            longer trains and transfer shipping containers between
                            trucks and trains. Vernon is also home to the smaller
                            Malabar Yard (east of Santa Fe Avenue between Fruitland
                            Avenue and Vernon Avenue), the Los Angeles Junction
                            Yard (between Exchange Boulevard and the Los Angeles
                            River), and a portion of the UP East Yard. Other important
                            rail yards are located nearby but outside of the Vernon city
                            limits.
                            2.2     Vernon’s Street System
                            Streets in Vernon generally form a grid pattern, although
                            not a regularly spaced grid. Many of the City’s streets do
                            not extend more than two or three blocks, with many T-
                            intersections. To accommodate large industrial lots, most
                            streets in Vernon are spaced farther apart than is typical in
                            urban residential or commercial areas; most blocks in the
                            City are between 600 and 2,000 feet long.
                            2.2.1 Street Classification
                            Vernon’s street system is differentiated by roadway size,
                            function, and capacity. The four basic types of roadways
                            in Vernon are described below. Figure CI-1 presents
                            schematic cross-sections for each type of roadway that
                            represent desirable standards. Deviations from these
                            standards may occur in cases where physical constraints
                            and/or right-of-way limitations are present. Provision of
                            sidewalks and off-street parking may also affect the
                            specific design of roadways. In addition, the median
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 4

                                                                      Vernon General Plan
                                                  Circulation and Infrastructure Element
width of arterials and collectors will vary according to the
area being served, right-of-way constraints, and turn lane
requirements.
The assignment of these classifications to streets in the City
is shown on the Circulation Plan, Figure CI-2.
Freeway
Freeways are controlled-access, high-speed throughways
included in the State and federal highway systems.
Freeways carry regional through traffic, that is, traffic
passing through Vernon without stopping in the City. The
Atlantic Boulevard/Bandini Boulevard interchange of the
I-710, the Long Beach Freeway, is in Vernon. Access to the
regional highway system for Vernon businesses and
visitors is provided at the interchange between I-710,
Atlantic Boulevard, and Bandini Boulevard. The design,
construction, and maintenance of freeways are under the
jurisdiction of the California Department of Transportation
(Caltrans).
Arterial
Arterial streets, together with freeways, form a network
carrying long-distance, high-speed traffic. Arterial streets
transport large volumes of traffic from one part of the City
to another and connect to the regional street system. The
arterial streets also move traffic between cities in locations
where a freeway does not link the two. Of the roadways
designed, constructed, and maintained by the City,
arterials are designed to have the highest traffic carrying
capacity, the highest speeds, and limited interference with
traffic flow by driveways. Limitations on truck access to
and from abutting properties are most important on
arterial streets to prevent obstructions and delays.
Arterial streets aligned generally north-south in Vernon
are, from west to east:
        Alameda Street
        Santa Fe Avenue
        Pacific Avenue (this curves broadly from north-
         south to east-west before continuing as Vernon
         Avenue)
        Soto Street
        Downey Road
        Atlantic Boulevard
                                                 Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 5

Vernon General Plan
Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                                                      Figure CI-1: Street Cross Sections
                Arterial
                                                                  80 to 120 FT
                                                                  64 to 104 FT
               Collector Streets
                                                                 80 FT Minimum
                                                                      64 FT
               Local Streets
                                                                     60 to 65 FT
                                                                     42 to 49 FT
    NOTES
    1. Total right-of-way width will vary depending upon parkway requirements and existing conditions.
    2. Curb and gutte r, pavement thickness, and striping shall be as specified by the City Enginee r.
    3. American Disability Act (ADA) requirements must be met for all pedestrian access.
    4. Parking on major roadways will depend on land width and available right-of-wa y.
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 6
                     Vernon General Plan
 Circulation and Infrastructure Element
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 7
Vernon General Plan
Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                            Arterial streets aligned generally east-west in Vernon are,
                            from north to south:
                                   Washington Boulevard
                                   Bandini Boulevard (this continues as 37th Street
                                    west of Soto Street)
                                   District Boulevard between Downey Road and
                                    Atlantic Boulevard (this continues as Leonis
                                    Boulevard west of Downey Road)
                                   Slauson Avenue
                                   East Vernon Avenue/Pacific Boulevard
                            Collector
                            Collector streets are intended to serve as intermediate
                            routes, handling traffic between arterial streets and local
                            streets. Collectors are designed primarily to move traffic,
                            but also to provide access to abutting properties.
                            Collectors differ from arterials in that collectors distribute
                            trips from the arterials to ultimate destinations.
                            Conversely, collectors also collect traffic from local streets
                            and channel it onto the arterials. Ideally, collector streets
                            should form a network, but with no one collector
                            extending so far that it functions as an arterial street.
                            Collector streets in Vernon aligned generally north-south
                            include:
                                   Boyle Avenue
                            Collector streets aligned generally east-west in Vernon are,
                            from north to south:
                                   25th Street/26th Street
                                   38th Street/37th Street (these two streets flow into
                                    each other, and continue as Bandini Boulevard east
                                    of Soto Street)
                                   Vernon Avenue (this street is discontinuous and
                                    offset at Santa Fe Avenue)
                                   Leonis Boulevard (this street continues as District
                                    Boulevard east of Downey Road)
                                   District Boulevard east of Atlantic Boulevard
                                   Fruitland Avenue
                            Local
                            Local streets provide direct access to individual parcels.
                            The local street is not designed for through traffic. Rather,
                            local streets should move traffic toward the nearest
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 8

                                                                      Vernon General Plan
                                                  Circulation and Infrastructure Element
collector street. Therefore, speeds on local streets are
relatively low, and on-street parking is usually permitted.
Local streets are two-lane roadways without medians.
When traffic congestion is detected through closed circuit
detection cameras and/or via electronic traffic loops, the
current signal patterns are adjusted to relieve or reduce the
congestion.
2.2.2 Measuring roadway performance
Evaluating the ability of the circulation system to serve
Vernon’s businesses and other users requires establishing
suitable performance criteria. Within the Circulation and
Infrastructure Element, two measures are used to describe
traffic flow on Vernon’s roadways and freeway access
points: Volume to Capacity Ratios (V/C) and Intersection
Capacity Utilization (ICU). These measures are used to
establish Level of Service (LOS) categories describing the
performance of roadways and access points throughout
the City. Each of these measures is described briefly
below.
Volume to Capacity Ratio (V/C)
This measure, consisting of a ratio between volume and
theoretical capacity, is used to measure the performance of
roadway facilities. Volume is established either by a traffic
count (in the case of current volumes) or by a forecast for a
future point in time. Capacity refers to the vehicle
carrying ability of a roadway at free flow speed, and is a
critical component of roadway design. For example, a
roadway that carries 16,000 vehicles per day, with the
capacity to accommodate 20,000 vehicles per day at free
flow speed, has a V/C of 0.80.
Intersection Capacity Utilization (ICU)
This measure is applied using peak hour volumes and
considers the geometric configuration of intersections
when measuring capacity.             Intersection Capacity
Utilization sums the V/C ratios for the critical movements
of an intersection, and thus accounts for the overall
performance of intersections, which are the most critical
limitations within the City roadway system.
Level of Service (LOS)
Level of Service (LOS) describes the efficiency and quality
of traffic operations. Six categories of LOS – the letter
designations A to F – are used to identify traffic conditions,
with LOS A representing excellent conditions and LOS F
                                                 Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 9

Vernon General Plan
Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                            representing extreme congestion. The LOS designations
                            are based upon V/C ratios calculated for freeway access
                            ramps and roadway segments, as well as ICU values
                            calculated for intersections. Table CI-1 shows V/C and
                            ICU ranges and the corresponding LOS, with a description
                            of corresponding traffic conditions. The City of Vernon
                            uses LOS D as its minimum standard for traffic operations.
                                                              Table CI-1
                                                  Level of Service Descriptions
                             Level
                                                                                                     V/C or
                               of                Description of Traffic Conditions
                                                                                                     ICU
                            Service
                                        Very short delays at intersections and free flow             0.00 –
                               A        operation. Vehicles are completely unimpeded                 0.60
                                        and can maneuver freely within traffic.
                                        Short delays of 10 to 20 seconds at intersections.           0.61 -
                                B       Vehicles are completely unimpeded and can                    0.70
                                        maneuver through traffic.
                                        Stable flow, with delays of 20 to 35 seconds at              0.71 –
                                        intersections. Some waiting vehicles may fail to             0.80
                               C        go through the intersection before the green light
                                        turns red. Ability to maneuver and change lanes
                                        at mid-block is somewhat restricted.
                                        Congestion becomes more noticeable, with delays              0.81 –
                                        of 35 to 55 seconds at intersections. Many                   0.90
                               D
                                        vehicles are required to stop at signals, and travel
                                        speeds along these roadways become slower.
                                        Unstable traffic flow, with delays of 55 to 80               0.91 –
                                E       seconds at intersections. Most vehicles are                  1.00
                                        required to wait at least one traffic signal cycle.
                                        Traffic volumes exceed capacity, resulting in                Above
                                        jammed intersections. This can result in delays              1.00
                                F
                                        greater than 80 seconds, and/or two-cycle signal
                                        waits.
                            Source: Highway Capacity Manual 2000, Transportation Research Board, National
                            Research Council
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 10

                                                                       Vernon General Plan
                                                   Circulation and Infrastructure Element
2.2.3 Circulation System Improvements Needed to
        Meet Level of Service Goals
The City is investigating the following programs with the
intent of improving the overall traffic flows throughout
Vernon during morning and evening peak hours. These
programs include physical improvements, such as
widening streets, as well as advanced technological
strategies, such as monitoring traffic flows using video and
computer systems.
Transportation System Management
Although widening some roads in Vernon may help in
reducing traffic congestion, Vernon must pursue
alternative cost effective and efficient methods in
improving traffic flows. Due to narrow streets and limited
right-of-ways, Vernon’s traffic congestion can no longer be
resolved by capacity enhancements such as lane re-striping
or roadway widening.           An alternative strategy is
implementation of Intelligent Transportation Systems
(ITS), which allows a city to control traffic signals by using
advanced computer technologies, monitor traffic using
video monitoring, and provide traveler information to
motorists. The City intends to work toward implementing
ITS systems at strategic locations to improve traffic flows.
The City recommends implementing an ITS program, the
Los Angeles County automated traffic surveillance and
control (ATSAC) system, in an effort to improve traffic
flow and increase capacity throughout the City. Traffic
signal surveillance and control is a developing method of
measuring the efficiency of traffic signal systems. This
approach consists of installation of surveillance cameras
and traffic volume counters to monitor traffic flow.
Implementation of a citywide ATSAC system will improve
many of the deficient intersections to an acceptable level of
service. In addition to the ATSAC system, the following
physical improvements will also help alleviate traffic
congestion in the City.
26th Street Extension
The City is planning to improve east to west access, near
the I-710 Freeway and Atlantic Boulevard, by extending
26th Street easterly across Atlantic Boulevard and
connecting with Bandini Boulevard. This improvement
                                                 Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 11

Vernon General Plan
Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                            will help improve intersection conditions at Atlantic
                            Boulevard/Bandini Boulevard/I-710 Freeway interchange.
                            Atlantic Boulevard Bridge Widening
                            The City of Vernon is planning to widen the Atlantic
                            Boulevard Bridge over the Los Angeles River. The project
                            plans to widen bridge to six lanes.
                            Soto Street Widening
                            Soto Street is a key north-south arterial that brings traffic
                            from Interstate 10 to and through Vernon. Of the north-
                            south arterials in the City, Soto Street has the best ability to
                            handle higher volumes, and particularly through volumes.
                            In 2002, the City of Vernon conducted the Soto Street
                            Corridor Study to identify the best way to improve traffic
                            flow along Soto Street and also relieve peak-hour
                            congestions on parallel arterials. The preferred alternative
                            involves widening Soto Street from four lanes to six lanes,
                            three in each direction.        This configuration requires
                            widening the public right-of-way between 37th
                            Street/Bandini Boulevard and Olympic Boulevard.
                            Widening the public right-of-way will require each
                            property owner with frontage along this section of Soto
                            Street to dedicate between eight and 14 feet of property,
                            depending on location, to public use. The City will require
                            this dedication when a property undergoes a complete
                            redevelopment or substantial improvement. The City may
                            also proactively acquire some rights-of-way to achieve the
                            planned configuration.
                            When fully implemented, this plan will allow traffic to
                            move more freely on Soto Street, improving the Level of
                            Service. It will also have a secondary traffic-moderating
                            effect on nearby streets.
                            I-710 Freeway Improvements
                            In a regional effort to improve truck movement from the
                            ports to inland areas and overall increase the capacity of
                            the I-710 Freeway, Caltrans has embarked on a major
                            improvement program for the I-710 Freeway.                  The
                            following improvements have been identified for the I-710
                            Freeway, between Slauson Avenue and Washington
                            Boulevard, which will significantly contribute to traffic
                            improvements in Vernon:
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 12
                                                                     Vernon General Plan
                                                 Circulation and Infrastructure Element
        The addition of two dedicated truck lanes with
         direct access to Hobart Rail Yard;
        Added general purpose lanes on the Freeway;
        Modication of Atlantic and Bandini Boulevards
         interchange;
        Addition of Slauson Avenue interchange;
        Closure of Washington Boulevard Interchange; and
        Extension of District Boulevard and creation of new
         intersection at Slauson Avenue.
2.3      Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities
Vernon’s streets support a significant load of heavy truck
traffic. Since the street system was developed early in the
twentieth century, streets are typically narrower than
industrial street standards, and the streets were not
designed to handle today’s truck sizes and volume of
traffic.    Large multi-axle vehicles encounter difficulties
maneuvering on the streets, and congestion and traffic
back-ups frequently occur as trucks enter and leave
properties. Many properties have small driveways and
inadequate loading bays, and trucks making these difficult
maneuvers to access properties can block traffic and cause
delays. Further contributing to on-street congestion is
significant on-street parking. Many businesses do not
provide adequate off-street parking for employees, largely
because the properties were developed before parking of
any maginitude was required. As properties transition to
other uses, creating sufficient off-street parking to meet
current zoning standards is extremely difficult.
The City has considered many approaches to addressing
the problems associated with inadequate off-street parking
and loading facilities, including establishing criteria (such
as vacancy in the building for over a year, major alteration
or repair, or increase in square footage of a building) that
would require the owner of a non-conforming property to
bring parking and loading facilities into compliance with
the City’s zoning standards. However, the widespread
nature of the non-conformities makes this a difficult and
costly proposition. Thus, the City will look to implement
over time a variety of techniques to minimize congestion
resulting from on-street parking and undersized or poorly
configured loading facilities, which may include:
        Restricting truck movements at key intersections
         and along key road segments;
                                               Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 13

Vernon General Plan
Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                                    Allowing for development of shared parking
                                     facilities;
                                    Establishing parking restrictions along key travel
                                     corridors; and
                                    Requiring that parking and loading comply with
                                     current zoning code requirements whenever
                                     substantial property modifications are proposed,
                                     the property has been vacant for over a year, or
                                     there is a proposed increase in floor area.
                            2.4      Other Transportation Modes
                            Vernon is served by buses operated by the Los Angeles
                            County Metropolitan Transit Authority (Metro). As an
                            important center of employment, several Metro bus lines
                            serve Vernon, providing an important alternative to
                            personal automobiles as a means of commuting to and
                            from work.
                            Buses are particularly important for Vernon for several
                            reasons. First, they provide transportation for workers
                            who may be low income and cannot readily afford an
                            automobile or gasoline. Second, by reducing the number of
                            cars on the road, they reduce traffic and conflicts between
                            cars and heavy trucks. Third, bus service reduces the
                            strain on employers to provide parking for their workers.
                            Located west of the City of Vernon, the Metro’s Blue Line
                            light rail system also provides an important regional link
                            for Vernon commuters. The Blue Line has a station at
                            Vernon Avenue, approximately one-quarter mile west of
                            the City boundary. From this station or adjacent stations
                            at Washington Boulevard or Slauson Avenue, workers
                            may walk to their workplaces or connect to one of several
                            bus lines.
                            While bicycles represent an additional mode of travel,
                            biking is not encouraged on Vernon’s streets due to the
                            heavy truck traffic and narrow configuration of many
                            streets, which would present dangers to cyclists. The City
                            of Vernon will cooperate with the Metropolitan
                            Transportation Authority and other local agencies in their
                            efforts to complete a bicycle path along the levee of the Los
                            Angeles River connecting downtown Los Angeles with the
                            waterfront in Long Beach.
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 14

                                                                     Vernon General Plan
                                                 Circulation and Infrastructure Element
3.0     MEETING INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS
3.1     Water and Wastewater
Three water agencies supply water to the businesses,
residents, and utilities in Vernon (see Figure CI-3). The
majority of the City’s water is supplied by the City of
Vernon’s Water Department. The area north of the Los
Angeles River and east of a line just west of Indiana Street
is supplied by the California Water Service Company (Cal
Water), East Los Angeles District. The small portion of
Vernon south of the Los Angeles River and east of Atlantic
Boulevard is serviced by Maywood Mutual Water
Company Number 3.
The City of Vernon water system has received a Class I
rating, the highest possible, by the Insurance Service
Organization.      The City’s water distribution system
consists of 250,000 linear feet of pipe, nine wells, seven
ground-level reservoirs, one elevated tank, and a below-
ground reservoir. The total storage capacity is 16 million
gallons. In addition, Vernon has a direct interconnection to
the Metropolitan Water District (MWD). The MWD
connection provides both a supplemental water source and
an emergency supply in the event of a major power
outage. The average pressure in the distribution systems is
about 75 pounds per square inch (psi).
Details of the sources and levels of water consumption
used by the City of Vernon Water Department are
provided in the Resources Element.
The City owns its own sewerge collection system which
discharges into the system managed by the Los Angeles
County Sanitation Districts (LACSD). The majority of
Vernon is within District 23, but also contains territory in
Districts 1 and 2.
                                               Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E 15Th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Em                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e ry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AP
                                                                                                                                                E 25th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Los Palos St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Triggs St                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E 26th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S Herbert Av                                                                 S Sunol Dr                                                      Eastern Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S Bonnie B each Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Noa kes St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   McBird Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E 27th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Holabird Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dunham S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Soto St
                                                                   Alameda St                                                                                                                                                                                 E 28th ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EW
                                                                                             Ross St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Violet Al                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AS
                                               rtin Luther                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S Santa Fe Av
                                              ng Jr Blvd                                                                                                                                                                                                      30th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ian a                                             GT                                                                                        UNIO N PACIFIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BU R                                                                                                                                            ON                                                                                                                          RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sierra Pine Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ING                                                                          In d     She                                              BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TO N                                                                                 ila S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E 37TH ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NO R                                                                                t                                       D
                                              E 40th Pl                                                                                             E 37th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             T HE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BANDINI BLVD                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TA FE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RR
                                               41st S t                                                                                               E 38th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Vernon General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                Irving St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Astor Av
                                               41st Pl
                                                                                                                       Ross St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Seville Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Leo nis St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              u      ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E2
                                               42nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6 Th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           om                 Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ian                                       St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E VERNON AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E Vernon Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S In                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ra
                                              E 43rd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ns
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ch arte r St                                                                                                                                          BAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               No b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S SANTA FE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             el S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     She                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                           E VERNON AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BURLINGTON NORTHERN SANTA FE RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E 44th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ila
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I BL                                                                                                                                                                                                          St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E 45th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VD
                                                                                                                                           E 45th St
                                                    E 45th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Furlong Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Alcoa Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Packers Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BL
                                                                                                                                             E 46th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E 46th St                                                                                                                                                                                                               Exchan ge                                                                   AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SOTO ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Av
                                                                                                                           Hawthorne Av
                                                    E 46th St
                                                                                                                                                                 Saint Charles St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Vernon                                                                                                                                        DOWNEY RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              G   EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         California                                                                                                                                                                                                               LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chambers St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Av                                                                                            AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R                    IVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NG
                                                                                                                                                     E 48th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Water                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EL                                R                                                          Water                                                                                                     Ay e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ES                                                                                                                                                                                                     rs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Seville Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LEONIS BLVD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             JU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DI STRICT                                                                           NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BLVD                                          T IO
                                                    E 48th Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 26 T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E 49th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Division                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Company                                      Ay e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rs   Av
                                                                                                                                                       E 49th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BOYLE AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E 50th St
                                                                                               UNION PACIF IC RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PACIFIC BLVD
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 16
                                                                                ALAMEDA ST
                                                    E 50th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E 49Th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ma ywood              Everett Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Loma Vis
                                                                                                                                                      E 51st S t                                                                                                                                               Hampton S t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FRUITLAND AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ta Av
                                                                 E 51st S t                                                                                                                                                                        Fruitland Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E 50t h St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fruitlan d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E 52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lin
                                               St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         52n d St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d   be rg
                                                                                                                                                       E 52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        hL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n
                                               St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   52n d St
                                              St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               53rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S Soto St                                                                                                         Alcoa Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                      54th St
                                                                                                                                                             E 55th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        UNION PACIFIC RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Di
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        st   ric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              54th St                                                                                                              tB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        lvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E 56th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             55th St                                                                                                                                                    52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       56t h St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N   dP                                                                                                                      Maywood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Maywood Av
                                                                                                                                                             E 57th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Loma Vis
                                                    Holmes Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ta Av                                                                                                                          Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Co ron a Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            56t h St                                   t         hS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E 58th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          57th St                                                                                                                                                     t                                                                                                                                  Mutual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fishbu rn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bickett St                                                                                                                                                                           58th St
                                                                                                                                                E Slauson Av                                                                                                                                                                                            E SLAUSON AV                                                                                                                                                                                    E Slauson Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               57th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           58th St                                                                                                                                               E                                       No. 3
                                                                E 58th Pl                              da St                                                     Laura Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SLAUSON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Seville Av                                             Miles Av                                                  S Boyle Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        58th St                                                  Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Belgrave Av
                                                                                                                                                 Regent St
                                                                                                            S Ala me                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Belgrave Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60t h St
                                                                                                                                                                                    Albany St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E Sla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            59t h Pl
                                                                                                                                          UNION PAC
                                                                                                                                                         IFIC RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             60th Pl                                                  Av
                                              St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ma yflo we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RANDOL                                                                                                                                                                                 Alcoa Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S ATLANTIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Malburg Wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PH ST                                                                                61st S t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ca rme lita                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       59t h Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Gif ford Av
                                                                                              Last Update: EDAW, February 21, 2007.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pine Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lo ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            61st P l                                                                                                                                 61s t S t
                                                                                              Source: City of Vernon, 2006; and Los Angeles County, 2006.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S Santa Fe Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Malabar St                                                Pacific Blvd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   King Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Feet                                                                                                                                               Clarendon Av                                                       Arbutus Av
                                                                                              0                           500                  1,000                            1,500                       2,000                     2,500                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UNION PAC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IFIC RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      61st St                                                                                          ker Av                                                ch Fr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wo odlaw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RANDOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH
                                              LEGEND
                                                                                                            City Boundary
                                                                                                            Vernon Water Division
                                                                                                            California Water Company
                                                                                                            Maywood Mutual No. 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure CI-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WAT E R S E R V I C E
                                                                     Vernon General Plan
                                                  Circulation and Infrastructure Element
These Districts, along with more than a dozen others, are
signatories to a Joint Outfall Agreement. This agreement
provides for the operation and maintenance of an
interconnected Joint Operating System of wastewater
collection, treatment, reuse, and disposal facilities across a
large portion of the urban region. The Joint Operating
System includes the following treatment plants:
       Joint Water Pollution Control Plant, Carson;
       Whittier Narrows Water Reclamation Plant (WRP),
        near South El Monte;
       Los Coyotes WRP, Cerritos;
       San Jose Creek WRP, near Industry;
       Long Beach WRP, Long Beach; and
       Pomona WRP, Pomona.
All of the sewerage generated in Vernon is treated by the
Joint Water Pollution Control agency.
3.2     Storm Drainage
Stormwater runoff in Vernon is conveyed through local
and and Los Angeles County Flood Control District storm
drainage systems. Discharges are regulated under an
existing NPDES permit for municipal stormwater (NPDES
Permit CAS004001, Order No. 01-182, and in particular,
Subsection 8.14.6.3-Industrial Stormwater). This permit
was not written specifically for Vernon; it covers most of
Los Angeles County and includes Vernon as a co-
permittee.     The permit establishes a framework of
requirements for monitoring discharges and water quality,
performing best management practices, and submitting
reports to the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los
Angeles Region.
To address growing concerns with stormwater runoff
contamination in urban areas, the Los Angeles Regional
Water Quality Control Board (LARWCB) looks for co-
permittees to capture and treat runoff on individual
parcels at the time properties are redeveloped. The
LARWCB policy is to seek to infiltrate as much of the
stormwater as practical. In Vernon, this approach is
difficult,primarily due to the industrial nature of the City
and the potential for ground water contamination and the
need to utilize available surface area to meet parking and
loading requirements.        The City supports a more
comprehensive approach and will continue to explore
                                               Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 17

Vernon General Plan
Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                            options to meet NPDES requirements creatively and in
                            ways that can help achieve other City goals as well.
                            3.3     Electrical Generation and Distribution
                            The City of Vernon operates its own Light and Power
                            Department, supplying customers throughout the City
                            with reliable and comparatively low-cost electrical power.
                            The City generates electrical power and also purchases
                            power from third-party suppliers through its connection
                            with the Southern California Edison bulk power system
                            and the Cal-ISO grid at the Laguna Bell Substation.
                            For many years, the City’s power-generating facility has
                            supplied local customers with local power, supplemented
                            as needed through connections to the grid. More recently,
                            the Malburg Generating Station, which is a combined cycle
                            plant with two natural-gas-fired combustion turbines and
                            one steam turbine, has been providing additional power.
                            However, in an effort to be able to supply nearly all of the
                            local electrical demand, the City intends to construct a new
                            natural gas-fired power plant at 3200 Fruitland Avenue.
                            When constructed, the Vernon Power Plant is expected to
                            have a capacity of 914 megawatts of electric power using
                            three natural-gas-fired combustion turbines and one steam
                            turbine.
                            Vernon anticipates that when this facility is operational,
                            Vernon will not need to import electricity from outside
                            sources, and will even be able to contribute to the regional
                            electricity reserves through a line connecting the plant to
                            Southern California Edison’s Laguna Bell substation in
                            Commerce.
                            3.4     Communications and Information
                                    Technology
                            To attract new businesses and to accommodate businesses’
                            ever-changing telecommunications needs, Vernon has
                            established a network of fiber-optic cables in the City. This
                            enables businesses to receive exceptionally clear telephone
                            and internet service, giving Vernon an advantage when
                            competing for business. The City will continue to be
                            proactive in developing telecommunications systems
                            beneficial to businesses, including the development of data
                            centers in the City.
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 18

                                                                     Vernon General Plan
                                                 Circulation and Infrastructure Element
3.5     Gas System
As a means of attracting and retaining industrial users, the
City has developed a system for transporting and
providing natural gas to businesses within the City at
competitive prices.      The City is currently providing
natural gas to the Malburg Generating Plant and other
businesses. A fully developed distribution system exists
and connection is available to all businesses.
4.0     GOALS AND POLICIES
To support the needs of existing businesses in Vernon and
to attract new enterprises consistent with the City’s vision
to remain an industrial city, Vernon will continue to
improve its infrastructure – from the street system to
energy facilities to communications systems.
GOAL CI-1
Provide a balanced transportation system for the safe and
efficient movement of people, goods, and emergency
services throughout the City.
            POLICY CI-1.1: Continue to improve the street
            system to meet the minimum standards
            contained in this Element.
            POLICY CI-1.2: Continue to coordinate with
            the rail companies to provide for efficient rail
            service that minimizes impacts on the local
            street system.
            POLICY CI-1.3: Limit rail yards to areas
            agreed on and consolidate rail spurs where
            feasible.
            POLICY CI-1.4: Evaluate implementing
            measures that reduce the maneuvering of
            trucks on streets with substantial traffic during
            periods of high traffic volumes.
            POLICY CI-1.5: Continue to pursue grade
            separation for railroad crossings on designated
            streets.
            POLICY CI-1.6:        Encourage the continued
            improvement of services provided by the Los
                                               Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 19

Vernon General Plan
Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                                        Angeles       County     Metropolitan       Transit
                                        Authority to Vernon and adjacent cities to
                                        provide good access from home to job and job
                                        to home for persons employed in Vernon.
                                        POLICY CI-1.7: Encourage the use of ride
                                        sharing and public transit for persons
                                        employed in the City to reduce traffic
                                        congestion and the need for off-street parking
                                        in the City.
                                        POLICY CI-1.8:         Continue to work with
                                        Caltrans and neighboring jurisdictions to
                                        improve         the       Atlantic/Bandini/I-710
                                        intersection and to make improvements to the
                                        I-710 Freeway, including direct truck ramps to
                                        the rail yards and exploring the potential for
                                        adding an interchange at Slauson Avenue to
                                        improve access to the City.
                                        POLICY         CI-1.9:   Gradually       eliminate
                                        unnecessary rail spur lines, and permit the
                                        combination of properties across spur lines.
                                        POLICY CI-1.10: Widen Soto Street consistent
                                        with the cross section shown in Figure CI-1.
                                        POLICY CI-1.11:         Consider installing and
                                        maintaining an ATSAC system to improve
                                        traffic flow.
                                        POLICY CI-1.12:           Cooperate with the
                                        Metropolitan Transportation Authority and
                                        other local agencies in their efforts to complete
                                        a bicycle path along the levee of the Los
                                        Angeles River connecting to adjacent
                                        jurisdictions.
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 20
                                                                   Vernon General Plan
                                               Circulation and Infrastructure Element
GOAL CI-2:
Work toward the provision of adequate off-street
parking and loading facilities for each business.
          POLICY CI-2.1:          Implement methods to
          encourage provision of new off-street parking
          and loading facilities.
          POLICY CI-2.2:           Encourage cooperative
          efforts among businesses to resolve off-street
          parking problems and meet zoning code
          requirements.
          POLICY CI-2.3: Explore the potential of
          creating public parking lots for employee
          parking using parking assessment districts or
          redevelopment powers.
          POLICY CI-2.4: Require an existing business
          or property to comply with zoning code
          requirements for off-street parking and loading
          at such time as any nonconforming building or
          use is required to be brought into conformity
          with the Zoning Code.
GOAL CI-3
Maintain the water supply system to meet both normal
demand and emergency needs.
          POLICY CI-3.1: Periodically evaluate the
          entire water supply and distribution systems to
          determine their continued adequacy and to
          attempt to eliminate deficiencies or enhance
          service.
          POLICY CI-3.2:              Require all new
          developments and expansions of existing
          facilities bear the cost of providing adequate
          water service to meet the increased demand
          which they generate.
          .
          POLICY CI-3.3: Implement the programs and
          policies contain in the City’s Urban Water
          Management Plan, including particularly those
          related to reliability planning and conservation
          and reuse.
                                             Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 21

Vernon General Plan
Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                                        POLICY CI-3.4: Use reclaimed water for
                                        cooling and other functions at the Malburg
                                        Generating Station and the future Vernon Power
                                        Plant to the greatest extent feasible.
                            GOAL CI-4
                            Maintain the sewer system to assure the health and
                            safety of all residents and businesses.
                                        POLICY CI-4.1: Periodically evaluate the
                                        sewage disposal system to determine its
                                        adequacy to meet changes in demand and
                                        changes in types of waste.
                                        POLICY CI-4.2:            Ensure that all new
                                        developments bear the cost of expanding the
                                        sewage disposal system to handle any increase
                                        in load that they generate.
                                        POLICY CI-4.3: Investigate and implement
                                        means of financing maintenance and
                                        improvements to the sewer system.
                            GOAL CI-5
                            Maintain the storm drainage system to assure the
                            protection of lives and property of in Vernon.
                                        POLICY CI-5.1: Periodically evaluate the size
                                        and condition of the storm drainage system to
                                        determine its ability to handle expected storm
                                        runoff.
                                        POLICY CI-5.2: Evaluate the impact of all
                                        new developments and expansion of existing
                                        facilities on storm runoff, and require that the
                                        cost of upgrading existing drainage facilities to
                                        handle the additional runoff is paid for by the
                                        development which generates the need to
                                        improve a facility.
                                        POLICY CI-5.3: Monitor the use and storage
                                        of hazardous materials to prevent accidental
                                        discharge into the storm drainage system.
                                        POLICY CI-5.4: Allow new development
                                        projects to creatively implement NPDES
                                        standards and requirements.
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 22
                                                                     Vernon General Plan
                                                 Circulation and Infrastructure Element
GOAL CI-6
Improve the City’s capability to generate and supply
electric power to achieve energy self-sufficiency.
           POLICY CI-6.1:           Expand, operate, and
           maintain an electrical utility system in an effort
           to provide an adequate level of service to
           businesses and other uses in the City.
           POLICY CI-6.2: Improve the electrical utility
           system in an effort to allow the City to meet any
           changes in demand over time.
           POLICY CI-6.3: Cooperate and/or participate
           with other agencies or parties in the expansion
           or development of power generation.
           POLICY CI-6.4: Evaluate the impact of all
           new development on the electrical energy
           system, and require that the cost of upgrading
           existing facilities is paid by the development,
           which necessitates the upgrade.
           POLICY CI-6.5: Expand the City’s capability
           to generate and provide natural gas to enhance
           the power/energy supply system.
GOAL CI-7
Provide the highest quality communications and
information technology services throughout the City.
           POLICY CI-7.1: Work with communication
           and technology service providers to provide for
           state-of-the-art internet, phone, and wireless
           communications equipment and services.
                                               Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 23

Vernon General Plan
Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                                        This page intentionally left blank.
Circulation and Infrastructure Element - 24
VERNON GENERAL PLAN
Adopted February 2013
2014-2021
HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                   Vernon General Plan
                                                             2014-2021 Housing Element
HOUSING ELEMENT
1.0     INTRODUCTION
Vernon is located near the geographic center of Los Angeles
County. The City is bounded on the north and west by Los
Angeles, on the east by Commerce and Bell, and on the south
by Huntington Park and Maywood. Vernon is three miles
southeast of downtown Los Angeles (Figure H-1) and 15 miles
north of major harbor and port facilities in San Pedro and Long
Beach.
The City’s fully industrial nature generally creates conflicts
with housing due to safety and environmental concerns. The
Southern California Council of Governments (SCAG)
historically has assigned Vernon very low housing production
goals – and in the case of this cycle, a Regional Housing Needs
Allocation (RHNA) of two units - in recognition of Vernon’s
unique status as city devoted almost exclusively to industrial
uses.
Past City policy has precluded the development of any new
residential units due to potential conflicts with industry.
However, efforts by the City to create and implement a number
of reforms and initiatives to enhance the accountability and
transparency of its government and better provide for the
                                                                     Housing Element - 1

 Vernon General Plan
 2014-2021 Housing Element
                          welfare of its residents and businesses have led to a policy
                          change regarding housing. Specifically, the City of Vernon has
                          established a policy to increase the City’s population to
                          enhance government accountability through the construction
                          of approximately 30 to 50 new non-City owned housing units,
                          including units specifically designated for low- and very low-
                          income households.
                          Also, the City of Vernon is committed to maintaining the
                          existing, long-established housing stock of 31 units.
      Figure H-1: Regional Location
Housing Element - 2

                                                                      Vernon General Plan
                                                                2014-2021 Housing Element
1.1     State Requirement
The California Government Code is very specific concerning
the preparation and content of a housing element. It is the only
element which must be reviewed by the State for completeness
and compliance with the law before it is adopted. The element
examines existing conditions and, through analysis, identifies
housing needs and presents programs to meet those needs. The
legislature has deemed that the Housing Element is the
appropriate mechanism to implement State-wide goals
regarding the provision of decent and suitable housing for all
persons. The Government Code also makes it clear that the
provision of affordable housing is the responsibility of all local
governments and that they, using vested powers, should make
a conscious effort to see that there are housing opportunities
for all income groups (Section 65580). The intent of the State
housing element requirements is based on the following
concerns (Section 65581):
    1. Local       governments       should     recognize    their
        responsibilities in contributing to the attainment of the
        State’s housing goals;
    2. Cities and counties should prepare and implement
        housing elements coordinated with State and federal
        efforts to achieve the State’s housing goals;
    3. Each local jurisdiction should participate in
        determining the necessary efforts required to attain the
        State’s housing goals; and
    4. Each local government must cooperate with other local
        governments to address regional housing needs.
This Housing Element was prepared in compliance with State
requirements, and covers the 2014-2021 planning period for
jurisdictions in the SCAG region.
Many of the housing goals and programs which are desirable
in non-industrial jurisdictions are not feasible in Vernon. The
noise, dust, vibration, chemical wastes, and odors from
Vernon’s local industries (many of which operate around the
clock) serve as a deterrent to housing development in almost
all locations within the City. Moreover, housing generally
should not be encouraged in close proximity to heavy industry
                                                                        Housing Element - 3

 Vernon General Plan
 2014-2021 Housing Element
                      for health and safety reasons. The Government Code makes it
                      clear that the local government has the responsibility to
                      consider such environmental factors in the Housing Element
                      (Section 65580[e]). Therefore, while each requirement of State
                      housing element law is referenced, this Housing Element
                      reflects the unique realities within the City of Vernon. Potential
                      sites for new housing have been analyzed in detail, including
                      the conduct of a health risk assessment to identify the most
                      preferable sites.
                      1.2     Relation to Other General Plan Elements
                      The Vernon General Plan is comprised of the following six
                      elements:
                                  Land Use;
                                  Circulation and Infrastructure;
                                  Housing;
                                  Safety;
                                  Resources; and
                                  Noise.
                      The Housing Element builds upon the other General Plan
                      elements and is entirely consistent with the policies and
                      proposals set forth by the Plan. The General Plan was
                      comprehensively updated in 2007. As portions of the General
                      Plan are amended in the future, the Plan (including the
                      Housing Element) will be reviewed to ensure that internal
                      consistency is maintained.
                      1.3     Sources of Information
                      The City of Vernon consists of two Census Tracts in the 2010
                      Census, including all of 5324.00 and a small portion of 5323.04.
                      The 2010 Census incorrectly indicates that a portion of Census
                      Tract 5323.02 is located in the City of Vernon; however, any
                      actual overlap of the City boundary and Census Tract 5323.02
                      is a mapping error and does not represent any substantial area.
                      The 2010 Census indicates that there are 29 housing units in
                      Vernon, of which 28 were occupied as of 2010. However, both
                      the 1990 and the 2000 Censuses has incorrectly documented the
                      City’s unit count figures. The State Department of Finance
                      (DOF) provides more up-to-date housing information based on
                      the Census data. For the 2012 DOF housing estimates, the
Housing Element - 4

                                                                     Vernon General Plan
                                                               2014-2021 Housing Element
housing count has been adjusted to accurately reflect Vernon’s
housing count known number of units: 31.. The Southern
California Association of Governments (SCAG) also prepares
growth forecasts for the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP)
and the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) for
cities within the SCAG region. SCAG’s 2012 adopted growth
forecasts identify Vernon as having 30 households in 2008, with
a projection for 30 units in 2035.
The City has verified the existence of 31 units within its
jurisdiction (of which 30 were occupied as of September 2012),
the addresses for which are listed in Appendix C. While
Census and SCAG data are used within the Housing Element,
it is hereby acknowledged these data represent an undercount
of two units and one unit, respectively. In addition, because of
the City’s extremely limited housing stock, combined with the
fact that the City owns 26 of these units, original data from the
City on housing and household characteristics are utilized
where available in place of the Census.
In addition to housing conditions and market information
provided by the City, the following documents serve as
supplemental material to the Vernon Housing Element and are
incorporated by reference:
     1. 2012 SCAG Regional Transportation Plan
         Socioeconomic Projections
     2. 2010 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy
         (CHAS) data; HUD tabulations based on 2006-2010
         American Community Survey Five-Year Estimates
         developed by the U.S Census Bureau
1.4      Public Participation
Section 65583 (c)(6)(A) of the Government Code states: “The
local government shall make a diligent effort to achieve public
participation of all economic segments of the community in the
development of the housing element, and the program shall
describe this effort.”
For purposes of this Housing Element, outreach to the
community was conducted to assess the types of and locations
for housing to be considered as part of the City’s reform
                                                                       Housing Element - 5

 Vernon General Plan
 2014-2021 Housing Element
                      process. The following meetings were held to gather input into
                      the development of the Housing Element:
                                 Housing Commission Workshop, February 9, 2012.
                                  The Housing Element consultant made a
                                  presentation to the Commission that provided an
                                  overview of the City’s housing commitments,
                                  reviewed options to meet those commitments,
                                  identified known constraints, and identified sites
                                  under consideration for potential housing.
                                 Vernon Chamber of Commerce Meeting, March 29,
                                  2012. The Housing Element consultant met with
                                  Chamber representatives and made a presentation
                                  similar to that conducted with the Housing
                                  Commission.
                                 City Council Workshop, April 17, 2012. Based on
                                  input received during the two meetings described
                                  above, the Housing Element consultant refined the
                                  presentation to focus on preferred housing sites,
                                  options for housing types, and potential
                                  environmental and health risks located on or near
                                  the preferred sites.
                      In addition, community residents were provided the
                      opportunity to review and comment on the Draft Element prior
                      to adoption. Upon receipt of comments from the State
                      Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD)
                      on the Draft Element, the City Council conducted a public
                      hearing on the Element. (The City Council has not created a
                      separate Planning Commission, so all public hearings are
                      conducted before the Council.) For all hearings, notice was
                      published in the local newspaper, posted in the City, and
                      mailed to those who have a request for notice on file in
                      advance of the hearing. The Draft Element was available for
                      review online and in the City’s Community Services
                      Department. Copies were made available on request to any
                      person at a nominal charge. The public hearing provided an
                      opportunity for public comment, and recommendations were
                      considered by City Council for incorporation into the Element.
                      In December of 2007, the City adopted a comprehensive
                      revision to its Zoning Ordinance. As part of this process, the
                      City held a series of public meetings with property and
Housing Element - 6

                                                                    Vernon General Plan
                                                              2014-2021 Housing Element
business owners to discuss changes to the document. This
successful outreach process resulted in full support of the
revisions to the Zoning Ordinance. As part of this Housing
Element Update, the Zoning Ordinance was again amended to
create an overlay zone to be applied to sites where housing will
be permitted. A second overlay was created to allow for the
establishment of emergency housing pursuant to Government
Code 65583(a)(4). The City conducted a comprehensive review
of the most viable housing sites in the City, and through the
new overlay districts has established implementing zoning to
facilitate housing development.
The City made the draft Housing Element, with revisions as
recommended by HCD, available to the public in December
2012 through January 2013. Notices of the public hearing held
on February 5, 2013 and availability of the document for review
were mailed to the following service providers:
            Human Services Association, Bell Gardens
            Los Angeles County Social Services Department,
             Cudahy
            St. Matthias Social Service Center, Huntington Park
            Mexican American Opportunity Foundation –
             Community Services, Commerce
            Ability First/East Los Angeles Center, Los Angeles
            Eastern Los Angeles Regional Center, Alhambra
The notice indicated the web location of the draft Element for
download by interested parties, and asked that comments be
directed to S. Kevin Wilson, Director of Community Services
and Water.
                                                                      Housing Element - 7

 Vernon General Plan
 2014-2021 Housing Element
                        2.0      HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                        2.1 Population and Housing Trends
                        City records indicate that Vernon’s housing stock and related
                        resident population base has undergone little change since
                        1980. The City had a 1980 housing stock of 35 dwelling units,
                        supporting a resident population of 85 persons. Only one
                        residential unit has been constructed since that time. Several
                        substandard residential units have been removed from the
                        housing stock, including three units in 1984, one unit in 1985,
                        and one in 1992, bringing the current unit count to 31. These
                        housing units are all located west of Downey Road.
                        Since 1980, the resident population has ranged between 77 and
                        120 persons, with the current population estimated by the 2010
                        Census to be 112 persons. For 2012, the Department of Finance
                        reported 120 persons. The 2006-2010 American Community
                        Survey indicates that the majority of residents in Vernon are
                        employed in management, service, and sales industries.
                                                      Table H-1
                                              Vernon Employment 2010
                                                                         Residents       % of All
                                         Occupation
                                                                         Employed          Jobs
                    Managerial, Business, Science, and Arts                   10            19%
                    Sales and Office                                          19            36%
                    Service Occupations                                       10            19%
                    Production, Transportation, Material Moving                7            13%
                    Natural Resources, Construction, Maintenance              7             13%
                    Farming, Forestry, Fishing                                0             0%
                    Total Employed Residential Jobs                           53           100%
                    Source: U.S. Census 2006-2010 American Community Survey Five-Year Estimates
                        On April 4, 2012, the SCAG Regional Council adopted the
                        2012-2035 Regional Transportation Plan/Sustainable Communities
                        Strategy (RTP/SCS): Towards a Sustainable Future. As illustrated
                        in Table H-2, SCAG projects that in 2035, the households and
                        population in Vernon will remain constant at 30 and 100,
                        respectively. SCAG’s projections were made at a time prior to
                        the City’s reform commitments and thus do not reflect the
                        population and household growth that will result from new
                        housing units.
Housing Element - 8

                                                                           Vernon General Plan
                                                                     2014-2021 Housing Element
                                 Table H-2
        Projected Population and Household Growth 2008-2035
                     2008                   2020               2035
                 Pop     Hshlds       Pop       Hshlds     Pop    Hshlds
SCAG           100      30          100         30        100   30
Source: 2012 SCAG Regional Transportation Plan Growth Forecast
   2.2 Housing Characteristics
   Households
   According to the California Department of Finance, the 31
   housing units in Vernon (see Table H-2) house a population of
   120 persons. Average household size is 4.0 persons per unit.
   Housing vacancy is generally very low in the City, with only
   one rental unit unoccupied according to the 2010 Census. No
   owner-occupied housing is vacant.
   Table H-3 presents 2012 data on housing units per structure, as
   reported to the State Department of Finance. The majority of
   Vernon’s housing stock is comprised of single-family
   dwellings, with only one apartment building located in the
   City. The City owns 84 percent of the total housing stock: 26
   dwelling units, 18 of which are single-family dwellings and one
   of which is an eight-unit apartment building. The City rents
   these units. As part of the reform initiative, the City established
   a lottery system for the units to allow a broader base of persons
   to be eligible to rent units in Vernon.
                                                                             Housing Element - 9

 Vernon General Plan
 2014-2021 Housing Element
                                                        Table H-3
                                      Housing Characteristics 2010 and 2012
                            Housing Characteristics                          2010               2012
                      Total Housing Units                                     31                  31
                                Single, Detached                              19                  19
                                Single, Attached                               2                  2
                                Two to Four Units                              2                  2
                                Five Plus Units                                8                  8
                                Mobile Homes                                   0                  0
                      Occupied Units/Total Households                         28                  30
                      Average Household Size                                  4.0                4.0
                      Vacancy Rate                                          3.45%              3.23%
                      Total Population                                        112                120
                      Source: City of Vernon, 2012 and State of California, Department of Finance, E-5
                      Population and Housing Estimates for Cities, Counties, and the State, 2011 and
                      2012, with 2010 Benchmark. Sacramento, California, May 2012.
                      Housing Condition
                      Given the limited housing stock in Vernon, City staff is able to
                      assess housing conditions on an ongoing basis. Although the
                      housing stock is older (largely built before 1950), City staff has
                      determined that all 31 units, or 100% of the housing stock, is
                      well maintained and in good condition. No units have been
                      determined to need replacement. One unit, which had fallen
                      into disrepair, was demolished by its owner in 1992. A major
                      reason for the unusually good quality of housing conditions in
                      Vernon is the City’s ownership of 84 percent of the housing
                      stock and its responsibility for maintaining these units. As
                      needed, the City performs any required repairs and upgrades.
                      The great demand for industrial space in the City means that
                      unnecessary or poorly maintained units are unlikely to remain
                      unless acquired by the City.
                      Housing Affordability
                      The California Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5
                      provides the following definition of affordable housing cost
                      based on the area median income level (AMI) adjusted by
                      family size and income level:
Housing Element - 10

                                                                               Vernon General Plan
                                                                         2014-2021 Housing Element
                                 Table H-4
                Housing Affordability Based on Income
                                                          Calculation of
                       Calculation of Affordable            Affordable
                        Housing Cost for Owner          Housing Cost for
                                                             Renters
Extremely Low
Income                 30% of 30% AMI                  30% of 30% AMI
(0-30% MFI)
Very Low Income
                       30% of 50% AMI                  30% of 50% AMI
(0-50% MFI)
Lower Income
                       30% of 70% AMI                  30% of 60% AMI
(51-80% MFI)
Moderate Income
                       35% of 110% AMI                 30% of 110% AMI
(81-120% MFI)
 Because the City’s resident population is so small, household
 needs are negligible when traditional needs analysis methods
 are applied. The Comprehensive Housing Affordability
 Strategy (CHAS)—special 2000 Census tabulations developed
 by HUD—provides a specific breakdown of household income
 adjusted for family size. According to CHAS Data, one-quarter
 of the households in Vernon were low income, earning
 between 51 and 80 percent of the Los Angeles County median
 family income (MFI) of $64,800. All other households earned
 more than 80 percent MFI. Due to the fact that the City owns
 and rents most of the housing at unusually low monthly rents,
 housing overpayment is virtually non-existent.1 As of 2012,
 City-owned apartments and houses largely rented at the
 following monthly payments, well below market levels for the
 region:
            1-bedroom apartment           $120
            2-bedroom apartment           $240
            1-bedroom house               $120
            2-bedroom house               $240
            3-bedroom house               $360
 1
   No housing units in the City have been sold in recent years. As such,
 an estimate of ownership housing costs is unavailable. However,
 recent (2012) land sales for large industrial sites have been priced at
 approximately $40 per square foot, depending on location, soil
 condition and necessary demolition costs.
                                                                                Housing Element - 11

 Vernon General Plan
 2014-2021 Housing Element
                      Implementation of the good government reforms now
                      underway will result in annual rent increases for persons
                      currently living in the units.
                      Using the California Health and Safety Code’s updated
                      affordability thresholds, current housing affordability at the
                      County level can be estimated for the various income groups
                      (Table H-5).
                      Housing overpayment occurs when a households pays more
                      than 30 percent of gross monthly income on housing costs. A
                      comparison of housing costs in Vernon and maximum
                      affordable prices for low-income households in Los Angeles
                      County shows that the City’s rental rates are well below the
                      maximum affordable rents for very low-income (less than 50%
                      MFI) households, and some one- and two-bedroom apartments
                      may even be affordable to extremely low-income households
                      (although the CHAS data indicate that there are no very low-
                      or extremely low-income households in the City). As such, no
                      households in Vernon experience a housing cost burden.
                      As rental rates rise over time pursuant to the good government
                      reform initiatives, households will experience increased
                      housing costs. Rental rates are anticipated to transition to
                      market rate costs by 2016, as shown below, through annual
                      increases in rent. Additionally, when there is a change in
                      tenancy, new tenants will pay market rate. Market rate costs
                      will be affordable for very low and moderate income
                      households.
                         1-bedroom unit: $120 to $696
                         2-bedroom unit: $240 to $1,450 to $839 to $1,450
                         3-bedroom unit: $240 to $1,114 to $1,000 to $1,700
                      Certain segments of the population may have a more difficult
                      time finding decent, affordable housing due to special
                      circumstances. Government Code Section 65583(a) requires
                      cities to evaluate the following special needs households in the
                      Housing Element: elderly, disabled persons, developmentally
                      disable persons, large families, female-headed households,
                      farmworkers, and the homeless. Due to the small size of the
                      City’s resident population, the magnitude of households in
                      Vernon with special needs is very small.
Housing Element - 12

                                                                                   Vernon General Plan
                                                                         2014-2021 Housing Element
                                                      Table H-5
                                               Affordability Matrix
                                                        Affordable                                    Maximum
                                                                           Housing Costs
                                                    Monthly Payment                                Affordable Price
    Income Group          AMI adjusted by size
                                                                                   Taxes and
                                                    Renter     Owner   Utilities                   Home        Rental
                                                                                   Insurance
Extremely Low (0-30% MFI)             30% AMI
One Person                              $13,605       $340      $340      $50          $80         $46,078      $290
Small Family                            $17,490       $437      $437     $100          $90         $54,219      $337
Four Person Family                      $19,440       $486      $486     $125          $95         $58,331      $361
Large Family                            $21,000       $525      $525     $150         $100         $60,305      $375
Very Low (30-50% MFI)                 50% AMI
One Person                              $22,675       $567      $567      $85         $115         $80,452      $482
Small Family                            $29,150       $729      $729     $125         $130        $103,889      $604
Four Person Family                      $32,400       $810      $810     $175         $140        $108,549      $635
Large Family                            $35,000       $875      $875     $200         $145        $116,224      $675
Lower (50-80% MFI)        60%AMI       70%AMI
One Person                 $27,210      $31,745       $680      $794     $100         $165        $115,922      $580
Small Family               $34,980      $40,810       $875     $1,020    $150         $190        $149,172      $725
Four Person Family         $38,880      $45,360       $972     $1,134    $200         $210        $158,766      $772
Large Family               $42,000      $49,000      $1,050    $1,225    $250         $220        $165,564      $800
Moderate (81-120% MFI)                   110%
                                         AMI
One Person                              $49,885      $1,247    $1,455    $100         $215        $249,986     $1,147
Small Family                            $64,130      $1,603    $1,870    $150         $260        $320,264     $1,453
Four Person Family                      $71,280      $1,782    $2,079    $200         $280        $350,645     $1,582
Large Family                            $77,000      $1,925    $2,246    $250         $300        $371,880     $1,675
Notes:
 1. Small Family = 3 persons; Large Families = 5 persons
 2. Property taxes and insurance based on averages for the region
 3. Calculation of affordable home sales prices based on a down payment of 10%, annual interest rate of 6.5%, 30- year
     mortgage, and monthly payment 30% of gross household income
 4. Based on Los Angeles County MFI $64,800 and 2012 HCD State Income Limits
 5. Monthly affordable rent based on payments of no more than 30% of household income
                                                                                     Housing Element - 13
 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                      Special Needs Groups
                      Elderly
                      The special needs of many elderly households result from their
                      lower, fixed incomes, physical disabilities, and dependence
                      needs. According to the 2010 Census, 14 residents in Vernon
                      are age 65 and above, representing 12 percent of the
                      population. The proportion of elderly persons in Vernon is
                      likely to remain low as the majority of the City’s limited
                      housing stock is occupied by working-age persons.
                      Disabled Persons
                      Disability is a physical or mental condition that affects the
                      functioning of a person. Physical disabilities can hinder access
                      to housing units of conventional design, as well as limit the
                      ability to earn adequate income. The Census defines a
                      disability as a long-lasting physical, mental, or emotional
                      condition. This condition can make it difficult for a person to
                      do activities such as walking, climbing stairs, dressing, bathing,
                      learning, or remembering. This condition can also impede a
                      person from being able to go outside the home alone or to work
                      at a job or business.
                      The City’s heavily industrial environment presents added
                      constraints to the disabled. Large volumes of street and rail
                      traffic, and delays caused by trains and parked trucks
                      additionally limit the maneuverability of handicapped
                      individuals. In order to address the needs of its handicapped
                      residents and employees, the City enforces requirements for
                      handicapped accessibility in new construction, and has
                      undertaken a program to install curb ramps for wheelchairs.
                      Developmentally Disabled
                      According to Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions Code
                      a "developmental disability" means a disability that originates
                      before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be
                      expected to continue, indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial
                      disability for that individual which includes mental
                      retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term
                      shall also include disabling conditions found to be closely
                      related to mental retardation or to require treatment similar to
                      that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall
                      not include other handicapping conditions that are solely
                      physical in nature.
Housing Element - 14

                                                                            Vernon General Plan
                                                                      2014-2021 Housing Element
The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS)
currently provides community based services to persons with
developmental disabilities and their families through a
statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental
centers, and two community-based facilities. Vernon is served
by the South Central Los Angeles Regional Center and the
Frank d. Lanterman Regional Center. These facilities provide
point of entry to services for people with developmental
disabilities. In Vernon, only one person is a consumer of the
services provided at the local Regional Center.
In order to assist in the housing needs for persons with
developmental disabilities, the City will implement programs
to coordinate housing activities and outreach with the Regional
Center and, encourage housing providers to designate a
portion of new affordable housing developments for persons
with disabilities, especially persons with developmental
disabilities, and pursue funding sources designated for persons
with special needs and disabilities.
Large Families/Overcrowding
Large families are identified as a group with special housing
needs based on the limited availability of adequately sized,
affordable housing units. Large households are often of lower
income, which can result in the overcrowding of smaller
dwelling units and in turn accelerate unit deterioration. The
2010 Census identifies eight renter-occupied households as
having five or more members. The City’s industrial character
presents similar disadvantages for families with children as it
does for the handicapped. Access to residential services, such
as education, recreation, and local retail goods and services, is
along roadways with high levels of truck traffic, railroad
crossings, and loading activities. These conditions make
pedestrian access to residential service facilities difficult and
often unsafe, particularly for children.
In terms of household overcrowding (defined as greater than
1.01 persons per room), the 2010 Census identifies no
overcrowded rental or ownership housing in Vernon2. Thus,
household overcrowding is not an issue.
2 The 2010 Census indicated that 15 rental housing units were
overcrowded, but the margin of error was so high it was not used for
this analysis. Also, because the City owns virtually all units in the
                                                                             Housing Element - 15

 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                      Female-Headed Households
                      Female-headed households tend to have low incomes, thus
                      limiting housing availability for this group. The 2010 Census
                      identifies two female-headed households in Vernon,
                      representing seven percent of all households. The housing
                      needs of female-headed households of lower income can be
                      addressed through the continued provision of the currently
                      existing affordable housing in the City.
                      Farmworkers
                      According to the 2010 Census, no Vernon residents have
                      Farming, Forestry, and Fishing occupations. Due to the lack of
                      opportunities for agricultural operations and the highly
                      industrial nature of the City, no farming operations exist in
                      Vernon. As such, the City has no need for farmworker housing.
                      Homeless
                      Throughout the country, homelessness has become an
                      increasing problem. Factors contributing to the rise in
                      homelessness include the general lack of housing affordable to
                      low and moderate-income persons, increases in the number of
                      persons whose incomes fall below the poverty level, reductions
                      in public subsidy to the poor, and the deinstitutionalization of
                      the mentally ill.
                      According to the Gateway Cities Council of Governments
                      Homeless Action Plan, homeless “hotspots” surveys were
                      conducted during the summer and fall of 2011, during which
                      outreach workers noticed homeless couples and individuals
                      sleeping under bridges and around the Los Angeles River on a
                      nightly basis near the City of Vernon. Other than this one-time
                      observation and casual comment, very few homeless persons
                      have been recorded living in Vernon largely because the City is
                      not desirable for the homeless given the City’s industrial
                      environment and its lack of social and residential services.
                      On October 15, 2007, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger signed
                      into law SB2, which amends Government Code Sections 65582,
                      65583, and 65589.5 of State Housing Element Law. This
                      legislation requires local jurisdictions to strengthen provisions
                      for addressing housing needs of the homeless, including the
                      community, the City can easily assess whether units are
                      overcrowded.
Housing Element - 16

                                                                       Vernon General Plan
                                                                 2014-2021 Housing Element
identification of a zone or zones where emergency shelters are
allowed as a permitted use without a conditional use permit.
Due to very low homeless population in the City and the
industrial nature of the community, the City’s policy position is
that development of emergency shelters in Vernon is not a
good solution for addressing regional homelessness issues.
Placing a homeless shelter in an area that has been deemed
largely inappropriate for new housing due to environmental
concerns—including noxious odors from rendering and
slaughtering, proximity to hazardous waste sites, and truck
traffic    pollution    and     noise—could     raise     potential
environmental justice concerns.
A large number of facilities for homeless individuals and
families are located within a five-mile radius of the City, in
locations that do not have the environmental constraints that
exist in Vernon. For example, the Salvation Army Shelter in the
city of Bell is a regional emergency shelter offering emergency
and transitional care for up to 340 homeless adults, including
154 in the shelter, 128 in the drug and alcohol program, and 49
in longer term transitional housing. In addition to a place to
stay, the Bell Shelter provides case management; substance
abuse rehabilitation; individual and group therapy/counseling;
on-site health care, medical referrals and HIV/AIDS education;
job training; on-site adult education classes and life skills
classes.
However, given that State law requires all jurisdictions to
comply SB2 mandates, the City has established an emergency
shelter overlay zone to be applied to a single parcel at the
northwest corner of the City.
Future Housing Needs
State law requires jurisdictions to provide for their fair share of
regional housing needs. SCAG determines the projected
housing needs for Southern California jurisdictions. Future
housing needs reflect the number of new units needed in a
jurisdiction (future demand), plus an adequate supply of
vacant housing to assure mobility and new units to replace
losses. These needs were forecast by the 2014-2021 Regional
Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA), which considered on a
regional and local level: market demand for housing,
employment opportunities, availability of suitable sites and
public facilities, commuting patterns, type and tenure of
                                                                        Housing Element - 17

 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                      housing need, and housing needs of farm workers. The 2014-
                      2021 RHNA establishes a future housing need of two units in
                      the City of Vernon, with one unit to be affordable to very low-
                      income households and one unit to low-income households.
                      Energy and Water Conservation
                      Compared with Vernon’s energy-intensive industries, housing
                      consumes only a small proportion of the City’s total energy
                      consumption. The City utilizes the California Green Building
                      Standards Code for all construction to minimize energy
                      consumption. Necessary sound insulation on residential units
                      also results in effective heat insulation, thus reducing energy
                      usage.
                      Electric power in Vernon is provided by the City’s local power
                      plant and municipal utility system. The Southern California
                      Gas Company and the City of Vernon Light & Power
                      Department Gas Division provide fuel for most natural gas
                      heating needs, and offers programs for water heater insulation,
                      attic insulation, and water flow limiting devices. Water is
                      provided to all dwelling units either from groundwater
                      pumped by the Vernon Community Services and Water
                      Department or by import from the Metropolitan Water District.
                      Compared to the large local industrial users, residential water
                      use is minimal, and no special conservation steps have been
                      deemed necessary for housing.
                      3.0     HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
                      3.1 Governmental Constraints
                      Historically, housing growth has been virtually nonexistent in
                      Vernon due to City policy that has discouraged, and in 2007
                      precluded, the development of any new residential units. City
                      policy-makers have for decades determined that the pervasive
                      industrial environment and land use incompatibilities related
                      to hazardous materials storage and processing, background
                      contamination, noxious odors, noise pollution, and truck and
                      railroad traffic make Vernon an inappropriate location for new
                      housing. However, as part of the City’s good governance
                      reform initiative, City leaders have agreed to establish a way to
                      allow for a very limited amount of new housing at a location or
                      locations that would not result in significant land use conflicts,
                      would minimize exposure of housing residents to adverse
Housing Element - 18

                                                                     Vernon General Plan
                                                               2014-2021 Housing Element
environmental conditions, and would provide access to stores,
schools, parks, and other amenities that residents would need.
The City has made a commitment to amend the Zoning
Ordinance to allow for the future development of a limited
number of new residential units via a Housing Overlay zone,
to be applied to two or fewer parcels.
Zoning Ordinance
Vernon comprehensively updated its Zoning Ordinance in
2007. The Ordinance did not include any development
processes or standards to allow for residential projects, nor did
the City have permit processing fees, site improvement
requirements, impact fee requirements, or procedures for new
residential development. With establishment of the Housing
Overlay zone, new permitting procedures and development
standards for targeted new residential development are now
available. Given the unique conditions in the City and the fact
that the sites to which the overlay will be applied are owned by
the City, the City permitting process consists of a Development
Agreement. In addition, the Housing Overlay zone allows
transitional and supportive housing subject to the same
permitting processes as other housing in the Housing Overlay
zone without any special regulatory requirements.
A Development Agreement is considered the most appropriate
way to permit housing in Vernon given the unique
characteristics of this industrial city.        A Development
Agreement provides a high degree of flexibility in defining the
development standards for a housing project. Through a
Development Agreement, the City can work with prospective
housing developers to craft the provisions that will apply to
site planning, provision of parking and open space, height
limits, etc. Because the General Plan allows up to 30 units per
acre, a prospective developer can propose innovative
approaches to multifamily housing.
Rather than establish concrete development standards, Section
26.4.5-5 of the Zoning Ordinance sets forth performance
standards for residential development as follows:
                                                                      Housing Element - 19
 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                                  “Sec. 26.4.5-5 Findings. After a public hearing, the
                         City Council shall approve a proposed residential
                         development and related Development Agreement only
                         after first making all of the following findings:
                          a) The design, location, size, and operating characteristics
                              of the proposed residential will be compatible with the
                              existing land uses in the vicinity;
                          b) The proposed density is consistent with density
                              standards and all applicable policies contained in the
                              General Plan;
                          c) The site and site plan are physically suitable in terms of
                              design, location, shape, size, and the provision of
                              public and emergency vehicle access, and public
                              services and utilities, including but not limited to (fire
                              protection, police protection, potable water, schools,
                              sewerage, solid waste collection and disposal, storm
                              drainage, and wastewater collection, treatment, and
                              disposal;
                          d) On-site traffic circulation for pedestrians and vehicles is
                              designed into the development to allow residents to
                              move easily through the development and to avoid
                              pedestrian/vehicular conflicts and further, to ensure
                              appropriate access for fire and police response and
                              surveillance equal to or better than what would
                              normally be created by compliance with the Site
                              Planning Standards of Section 26.4.1-7;
                          e) The proposed project provides suitable, usable common
                              and/or private open space that will meet the passive
                              and/or active recreation needs of the resident.
                              Common open space areas and setbacks are provided
                              with landscaping and other improvements suitable for
                              the development proposed;
                          f) The proposed project provides adequate parking to
                              meet the residents’ needs and to avoid parking impacts
                              on surrounding properties;
                          g) Refuse/recycling collection areas are located to provide
                              easy access to for all residents and collection vehicles,
                              and to minimize noise impacts on residents;
Housing Element - 20

                                                                            Vernon General Plan
                                                                      2014-2021 Housing Element
     h) To the extent feasible, the project design incorporates
         sustainable development features.”
Given the flexibility of these standards and the need to address
unique conditions in Vernon, the requirement for a
Development Agreement is not considered a constraint. In
fact, in response to a request for proposals for housing
development on the site on 52nd Street, the City received five
submittals and selected the one which can achieve objectives
for providing affordable housing.
Renovation, Restoration, Maintenance, and Repair
The City will continue to permit the renovation, restoration,
maintenance, and repair of existing residential uses. Residential
rehabilitation projects are permitted in Vernon, and the
rehabilitation is a “Minor Alteration or Repair,” as defined in
the Zoning Ordinance (less than 50 percent of the fair market
value of the buildings on the lot).3 As a practical matter, the
expansive definition of “Minor Alteration or Repair” and lack
of development standards result in limited governmental
constraints (other than complying with the building code) that
would prevent a homeowner from upgrading or improving a
residence within the existing square footage.
If the hard costs of improvements equal or exceed, over a three-
year period, 50 percent of the then-current fair market value of
the building, then the improvement, if voluntary, will be
defined as a “Major Alteration or Repair” and terminate the
legal nonconforming status of the residence. A Major
Alteration or Repair is considered to be the functional
equivalent of a tear-down and re-build, which the City does
not permit, for the same reasons that it does not permit new
construction of residences. However, if the Major Alteration or
Repair is necessitated by a natural disaster, such as an
earthquake or fire, the owner does have the right to rebuild the
residence. At that time, the development standards for the
home would be developed. The City did not undertake to
3 A minor alteration is that for which the hard costs charged,
incurred, or paid for such renovation, alteration, or repair, over a
three year period, commencing when the permit required is issued, or
if no permit is required, when the physical portion of the renovation,
alteration, or repair is commenced, is less than 50 percent of the
current fair market value of all of the buildings located on the same
lot.
                                                                             Housing Element - 21

 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                      develop those criteria at this time since there are only five
                      private residences in Vernon.
                      The Major Alteration provision does not constrain the
                      maintenance of the existing housing stock, as property owners
                      are permitted to undertake a broad array of improvements that
                      extend the life of residential structures and improve unit
                      conditions. Under State law, any and all such improvements
                      can be pursued consistent with Health & Safety Code Section
                      17922(d) and Section 17958.8 relating to the alteration and
                      repair of existing buildings. Section 17922(d) relates to the
                      standards adopted by the State, which the Zoning Ordinance in
                      no way invalidates. This section discusses the use of original
                      materials and methods for the repair, replacement, or extension
                      as long as it meets Building Code standards. The Zoning
                      Ordinance has no provisions or limitations on the construction
                      materials utilized. Section 17958.8 is similar, as it is addresses
                      the use of original construction materials and methods.
                      Nothing in the Zoning Ordinance or Building Code prohibits
                      the use of original materials and methods, with the exception
                      of an unreinforced masonry structure, which would have to be
                      seismically retrofitted. As no residential units in Vernon are
                      constructed of unreinforced masonry, this does not affect any
                      housing units.
                      All residential units in the City are in good condition, with no
                      units requiring a major alteration during the planning period.
                      Of those units owned by the City, the City intends to renovate
                      seven units due to age, although all are currently in good,
                      habitable condition. These seven units have had new HVAC
                      systems installed in recent years.
                      No residential property owners have proposed major
                      renovations to their properties. Residential property owners
                      participated in the recent Zoning Ordinance revision process,
                      and none expressed opposition to the standards that apply to
                      existing, nonconforming residential structures in the City,
                      including the prohibitions on increasing square footage and
                      undertaking major alterations. All residences – whether owned
                      by the City or others – are in good condition, according to City
                      staff. As described above, residential rehabilitation that
                      constitutes a minor alteration (costing, over a three year period,
                      less than 50 percent of the market value of the building) is
                      permitted. Because minor alterations are permitted and
                      existing standards will allow renovations of these units, the
                      limit on major alterations is not considered an impact to the
Housing Element - 22

                                                                     Vernon General Plan
                                                               2014-2021 Housing Element
maintenance and improvement of the City’s housing stock. As
discussed later in this section, to accommodate housing needs
of the disabled, the Zoning Ordinance has be revised to remove
restrictions on major alterations as needed through the
implementation of reasonable accommodation procedures.
It is the City’s intent to encourage and actively participate in
the rehabilitation of existing residential units. The process is
straightforward and not burdensome; there is no entitlement
process required for rehabilitation projects. Residential
rehabilitation projects that are Minor Alterations or Repairs
and do not exceed the existing square footage require only a
building permit. The building permit process timeframe
depends on the complexity of the renovation. Complex
renovations involving new electrical systems, plumbing, etc.
can take up to three weeks to process. The City has no intention
of removing any of the 31 units in the City, as all units are in
good condition.
Replacement of housing units that have been demolished or
destroyed due to force majeure (defined as an event that is not
within the control of the owner of the property, including,
without limitation, earthquake, flood, fire, and acts of war or
terrorism) are permitted. A building permit would be required,
and a housing unit would be permitted to be rebuilt up to the
existing building square footage. The development standards
for the reconstructed dwelling would be determined at that
time.
Building Code Amendments
The City has adopted the California Building Code with some
minor local amendments related primarily to industrial
buildings in the City. Per Health and Safety Code Sections
17958.5 and 17958.7, the City made required findings and filed
such findings with the California Building Standards
Commission. The amendments include administrative
processes such as the establishment of City permit fees and
appeals boards, as well as requirements specific to hazardous
and industrial uses such as fire access roads, spray booths, and
storage of explosive and flammable materials. Vernon has also
made additional amendments to protect the safety of workers
and residents within the City. Specifically, the City requires all
wiring to be in a metallic conduit, to protect workers and
residents from hazards of accidentally driving a nail or screw
through wiring. There is a marginal cost increase associated
                                                                      Housing Element - 23

 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                      with this precaution, but the benefit associated with safer
                      installation outweighs the cost. The City has also made
                      amendments to require Class A and B roofing material, which
                      is more fire resistive and can stop the potential spread of
                      fire. While this type of roofing material may be more expensive
                      than some standard materials, this amendment is necessary to
                      prevent and quickly extinguish fires that may have far more
                      costly impacts. As such, no restrictions or amendments have
                      been adopted in the Building Code that would constrain
                      housing in the City.
                      Permit and Infrastructure Fees
                      The City assesses various fees to cover the costs of permit
                      processing (Table H-6). Most of the fees charged are flat fees
                      based on the cost of services, or tiered fees based on the size
                      and cost of the improvement. Fees charged are comparable to
                      surrounding communities in Los Angeles County, and as such,
                      do not pose a constraint to housing maintenance and
                      preservation. Owners intending to renovate or improve
                      existing residential units are required to obtain a building
                      permit for a minor alteration. The fee, which is reviewed
                      annually, is based on the cost of the improvement.
                      Because future residential development will occur on no more
                      than two parcels on properties owned by the City, no special
                      fees will be required for processing development applications.
                      The vehicle for approving projects will be through a
                      Development Agreement with the City.
                      Because the development will occur on existing lots well
                      served by streets, water lines, sewer lines, and all other urban-
                      level infrastructure, no off-site improvements will be required
                      to allow housing development to proceed.
Housing Element - 24
                                                                                         Vernon General Plan
                                                                                2014-2021 Housing Element
                                                    Table H-6
                                      Permit and Processing Fees
                                                Building Permits
              Cost of Renovation                                             Fee
  $1.00 to $2,000                                    $80
  $2,001 to $5,000                                   $80 for the first $2,000 plus $4 for each
                                                     additional $100
  $5,001 to $25,000                                  $200 for the first $5,000 plus $10 for each
                                                     additional $1,000
  $25,001 to $50,000                                 $400 for the first $25,000 plus $7.50 for each
                                                     additional $1,000
  $50,001 to $100,000                                $587.50 for the first $50,000 plus $5.50 for each
                                                     additional $1,000
  $100,001 to $500,000                               $862.50 for the first $100,000 plus $4 for each
                                                     additional $1,000
 $500,001 and up                                     $2,462.50 for the first $500,000 plus $3.10 for
                                                     each additional $1,000
                                         Inspection and Other Fees
                             Description                                             Fee
 Inspection Outside of Normal Hours (minimum of 4                     $89.70/hour (minimum of
 hours)                                                               $358.80)
 Reinspection Fee                                                     $89.70/hour
 Additional Plan Review                                               $150/hour
 Final, Parcel, or Tentative Map                                      $1,250 - $2,000
 Conditional Use Permit                                               $2,875
 Zoning Variance or Amendment                                         $2,000
 Building Code Variance                                               $1,000
Source: City of Vernon Fees, Effective July 1, 2008
Housing Maintenance
The Vernon Department of Community Services is responsible
for code enforcement and the maintenance and upkeep of all
City-owned units. Enforcement of building code standards
does not constrain the improvement of housing in Vernon but
instead serves to maintain or improve the condition of the
limited, existing housing stock.
Of the 31 units in the City, only five are not owned by the City.
City staff has investigated and determined that none of these
                                                                                           Housing Element - 25
 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                      five units requires significant rehabilitation. At this time, an
                      active code enforcement program is unwarranted due to the
                      limited number of privately owned units (five) and the fact all
                      units are currently in good condition and continue to be well
                      maintained by the owners. The City encourages active
                      maintenance of the housing stock, as evidenced by the
                      extensive rehabilitation the City has undertaken on those
                      housing units that it owns. Community Services Staff is active
                      in the community, and will respond to any visible code
                      enforcement violations or complaints that may require
                      rehabilitation of units.
                      Property owners are permitted and encouraged to perform
                      proper upkeep and maintenance, which can include
                      renovations, as long as the existing square footage is not
                      exceeded and the cost of the renovation, over a three-year
                      period, does not exceed 50 percent of the market value of
                      buildings on the lot. For all practical purposes, all other
                      controls, permit processes, and fees do not constrain the
                      maintenance and preservation of the City’s housing stock.
                      Constraints to Housing for Persons with Disabilities
                      The City has adopted the California Building Standards Code.
                      Standards within the Code of the City of Vernon (through the
                      adoption of the California Building Standards Code) include
                      provisions to ensure accessibility for persons with disabilities.
                      These standards are consistent with the Americans with
                      Disabilities Act. No local amendments that would constrain
                      accessibility or increase the cost of housing for persons with
                      disabilities have been adopted, except that the Zoning
                      Ordinance would not permit the floor area of the residence to
                      be increased or permit any major alterations that equal or
                      exceed 50 percent of the current fair market value of the
                      buildings on the lot. These restrictions have been addressed the
                      implementation of a reasonable accommodation procedures to
                      accommodate housing needs of the disabled (discussed below).
                      Definition of Family
                      Sometimes, a city’s definition of “family” can limit access to
                      housing for persons with disabilities when the word is
                      narrowly defined. This can illegally limit the use of housing as
                      group homes for persons with disabilities, but not limit
                      housing for families. The Vernon Zoning Ordinance does not
                      define family, and therefore is nondiscriminatory in its
                      application.
Housing Element - 26

                                                                         Vernon General Plan
                                                                   2014-2021 Housing Element
Reasonable Accommodation
The Fair Housing Act, as amended in 1988, requires that cities
and counties provide reasonable accommodation to rules,
policies, practices, and procedures where such accommodation
may be necessary to afford individuals with disabilities equal
housing opportunities. While fair housing laws intend that all
people have equal access to housing, the law also recognizes
that people with disabilities may need extra tools to achieve
equality. Reasonable accommodation is one of the tools
intended to further housing opportunities for people with
disabilities. Reasonable accommodation provides a means of
requesting from the local government flexibility in the
application of land use and zoning and building regulations or,
in some instances, even a waiver of certain restrictions or
requirements because it is necessary to achieve equal access to
housing. Cities and counties are required to consider requests
for accommodations related to housing for people with
disabilities, and to provide the accommodation when it is
determined to be “reasonable” based on fair housing laws and
the case law interpreting the statutes.
State law allows for a statutorily based four-part analysis to be
used in evaluating requests for reasonable accommodation
related to land use and zoning matters and can be incorporated
into a reasonable accommodation ordinance or procedures.
This analysis gives great weight to furthering the housing
needs of people with disabilities and also considers the impact
or effect of providing the requested accommodation on the City
and its overall zoning scheme. Developers and providers of
housing for people with disabilities must be ready to address
each element of the following four-part analysis:
            The housing that is the subject of the request for
             reasonable accommodation is for people with
             disabilities as defined in federal or state fair housing
             laws;
            The reasonable accommodation requested is
             necessary to make specific housing available to
             people with disabilities who are protected under
             fair housing laws;
            The requested accommodation will not impose an
             undue financial or administrative burden on the
             local government; and
                                                                          Housing Element - 27

 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                                  The requested accommodation will not result in a
                                   fundamental alteration in the local zoning
                                   ordinance.
                      The City abides by the Fair Housing Act, and has instituted a
                      clearly defined process for making requests for reasonable
                      accommodation to provide exceptions in zoning, land-use,
                      permitting processes, and building codes. The City has
                      developed reasonable accommodation procedures in its Zoning
                      Ordinance and will provide information on the procedures on
                      the City’s website (Housing Element Program 4).
                      The State has removed any City discretion for review of small
                      group homes for persons with disabilities (six or fewer
                      residents). The City does not impose additional zoning,
                      building code, or permitting procedures other than those
                      allowed by State law.
                      The City does not impose special permit procedures or
                      requirements that could impede the retrofitting of homes for
                      accessibility. A retrofit would be permitted as a minor
                      alteration (requiring a building permit), as long as the cost of
                      the retrofit was less than 50 percent of the market value of the
                      buildings. The City’s requirements for building permits are
                      standard, straightforward, and not burdensome. No CUP or
                      other special permitting requirements are required for
                      retrofitting homes for accessibility.
                      The City’s adopted reasonable accommodation procedures are
                      ministerial and include, but not be limited to, identifying who
                      may request a reasonable accommodation (i.e., persons with
                      disabilities, family-members, landlords, etc.), timeframes for
                      decision-making, and provision for relief from the various
                      land-use, zoning, or building regulations that may constrain
                      the housing for persons of disabilities. The procedure also
                      includes consideration of allowing an increase in habitable
                      floor area of an existing residence to accommodate disabled
                      persons.
                      The City will also explore the feasibility of offering fee
                      reductions for permit processes that involve retrofitting
                      residences for accessibility purposes.
Housing Element - 28

                                                                          Vernon General Plan
                                                                    2014-2021 Housing Element
3.2 Non-governmental Constraints to Housing
In Vernon, limited land is available which would be suitable
for the development of housing. The Housing Element
inventory of vacant and underutilized sites identifies two
potential sites for residential development. The limited sites
available for residential development are due to serious
environmental conditions which render the majority of sites
throughout Vernon unsuitable for residential development.
Environmental        factors   affecting     potential    residential
development are related to hazardous materials storage and
processing, background contamination, noxious odors, noise
pollution, and truck and railroad traffic generated by the City’s
pervasive industrial land uses. Inadequate access to residential
services is an additional constraint to residential development
in the City. These factors contribute to the limited number of
sites available for residential development.
Market Constraints
Government Code Section 65583(a)(5) requires communities to
include an analysis of potential and actual nongovernmental
constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or
development of housing for all income levels, including the
availability of financing, the price of land, and the cost of
construction.
Based upon information regarding the Vernon commercial and
industrial market, recent (2012) sales for large developed
industrial sites have been priced at approximately $96 per
square foot, depending on location, soil condition, and
necessary demolition costs.4 Effective land costs, which also
include remediation required to make old industrial sites
developable for residential use, make the cost of land
significantly higher. Land costs for vacant sites have been
priced at approximately $1.4 million per acre of land ($31 per
square foot of vacant land). 5 Additional costs that would also
have to be incurred to make land suitable for residential
development include testing for ground contamination,
remediation for residential development, and providing
minimum safety and nuisance improvements. Although these
4
  Loopnet.com Industrial Properties for Sale Search. August 15, 2012.
<http://www.loopnet.com>
5
  Loopnet.com Industrial Properties for Sale Search. August 15, 2012.
<http://www.loopnet.com>
                                                                           Housing Element - 29

 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                      additional costs might be feasible if the sites were otherwise
                      suitable for residential development, the environmental
                      problems from surrounding uses are so severe that both
                      private market and assisted housing development is precluded
                      on any site in the City.
                      Because the majority of the City’s housing stock is owned and
                      managed by the City, maintenance and improvements are
                      overseen and funded by the City. As such, there are no market
                      constraints on the maintenance of housing in the City. The City
                      actively performs maintenance and repairs on all City-owned
                      buildings.
                      Hazardous Materials
                      With its history as an industrial City dating to incorporation in
                      1903, heavy and prolonged industrial use in Vernon is reflected
                      in the following conditions (refer to Figure H-2):
                             A high concentration of both underground (38 facilities
                              with 82 underground storage tanks) and above-ground
                              hazardous material storage tanks throughout the City.
                              There are also 20 leaking underground storage tanks
                              clean-up sites.
                      Within the City, approximately 570 businesses handle/store
                      hazardous materials. Thirty-eight of these businesses handle
                      high levels of extremely dangerous materials regulated by the
                      State.
                             Numerous underground pipelines throughout the City,
                              many carrying potentially explosive materials
Housing Element - 30

                                                                                      E 22N d
                                                                                                     St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lugo St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Union Pacific Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E 24th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E 15Th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Em                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S      t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AP
                                                                                                                                                                                     E 25th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Los Palos St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Triggs St                                                                                                D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E 26th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S Herbert Av                                                           S Sunol Dr                                            Eastern Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S Bonnie Beach Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        th S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Noakes St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           McBird Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E 27th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Holabird Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dunham St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Soto St
                                                                                                          Alameda St                                                                                                                                                                           E 28th ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EW
                                                                                                                                      Ross St                                                                                                                                      Violet Al                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t                           AS
                                                                            Martin Luther                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S Santa Fe Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ind
                                                                            King Jr Blvd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GT                                                                                            UNION PACIFIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BUR                                                                                            iana                                                    ON                                                                                                     RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sierra Pine Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NGT                                                                                S   She
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ON                                                                                      ila   St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B LV
                                                                                     E 40th Pl                                                                                            E 37th St                                                                                                                                                                      E 37TH ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       THE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BANDINI BLVD                                                                                                                                                                                                          RN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TA         FE R
                                                                                     E 41st St                                                                                             E 38th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Irving St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Astor Av
                                                                                     E 41st Pl
                                                                                                                                                             Ross St                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Seville Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Leon is St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s   Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      St
                                                                                     E 42nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           In d                                     6Th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E VERNON AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E Vernon Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    aS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s om
                                                                                     E 43rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Charter St                                                                                                                                   BA N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Nob
                           LONG BEACH AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S SANTA FE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      el S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D IN                                                                                                                                                                                                      She                                                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BURLINGTON NORTHERN SANTA FE RR
                                                                                                                                                                                E VERNON AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E 44th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I BL                                                                                                                                                                                            ila   St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E 45th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VD
                                                                                                                                                                                 E 45th St
                                                                                         E 45th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Furlong Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Alcoa Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Packers Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BL
                                                                                                                                                                                  E 46th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E 46th St                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exchange
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SOTO ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Av
                                                                                                                                                                Hawthorne Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NG
                                                                                         E 46th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DOWNEY RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Saint Charles St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L   AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Chambers St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                       Staunton Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Av                                                                                  AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S            AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RIV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                          E 48th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GE                      E               R                                                                                                                                                                  Aye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LE                                                                                                                                                                                                           rs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Seville Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LEONIS BLVD                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DIS TRIC T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BLVD                                            N
                                                                                         E 48th Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        26T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           hS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E 49th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Aye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rs   Av
                                                                                                                                                                                           E 49th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BOYLE AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E 50th St
                                                                                                                                       UNION PACIFIC RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PACIFIC BLVD
                                                                                                                       ALA MED A ST
                                                                                         E 50th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E 49Th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Maywood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Everett Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Loma Vist
                                                                                                                                                                                           E 51st St                                                                                                                                          Hampton St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FRUITLAND AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a Av
                                                                                                      E 51st St                                                                                                                                                                     Fruitland Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E 50th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fruitland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E 52nd St
                                            E 52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dbe
                                                                                                                                                                                            E 52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rgh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln
                                                E 53rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     52nd St
                                            E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E 54th St                                                                                           S Soto St                                                                                                            Alcoa Av                                                                                                                                                                                 53rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                54th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                  E 55th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UNION PACIFIC RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                54t h St                                                                                                             tB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             55th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                      lvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E 56th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ta Av                                                                                                                                                                                                              52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             56th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Maywood Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P    l
                                                                                         Holmes Av                                                                                                E 57th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Loma Vis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cor ona Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               56th St                                         th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E 58th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     57th St                                                                                                                                                                St
                                           METRO BLUE LINE/SPT CO RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fishburn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Bickett St                                                                                                                                                                     58th St
                                                                                                                                                                                     E Slauson Av                                                                                                                                                                                     E SLAUSON AV                                                                                                                                                                              E Slauson Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        57th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              58th St                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                     E 58th Pl                                                                                           Laura Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SL AUSO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BLVD
                                                                                                                                                     da St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Seville Av                                     Miles Av                                                      S Boyle Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     58th St                                     Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Belgrave Av
                                                                                                                                                                                      Regent St
                                                                                                                                              S Alame                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Belgrave Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Albany St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E Sla uso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     59th Pl
                                                                                                                                                                               UNION PAC
                                                                                                                                                                                                  IFIC RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60th Pl                                         Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ma yflower
                                              E 60th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RA NDOL                                                                                                                                                                          Alcoa Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S ATLANTIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Malburg Wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PH ST                                                                            61st St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         59th Pl
                                                Last Update: Hogle Ireland, August 2012,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Car me lita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Giff ord Av
                                                Source: PCR, Constraints Analysis of Potential Housing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  61st Pl                                                                                                                          61st St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pine Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Long
                                                Sites in Vernon, 2012.                                                                                                                                                                                            S Santa Fe Av                          Malabar St                                             Pacific Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Clarendon Av                                                        Arbutus Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          King Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      UNION PAC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Frwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Woodlawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IFIC RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    61st St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RA NDOL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Av                                                                                         each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Wa lker Av
                       ´                                0                                                              1,200                                                        2,400                                                               3,600
                       LEGEND
                                                                                                      Companies with Regulated Substances Exceeding Threshold Quantities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Vernon General Plan
                                                                                                      California Accidental Release Prevention (CalARP) Program
                       City Boundaries
                                                                                             Vernon City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure H-2
                                                                                             Vernon Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H i g h l y To x i c R e g u l a t e d S u b s t a n c e s
Housing Element - 31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2014-2021 Housing Element

 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                             Residual soil contamination resulting from prior
                              manufacturing activities on the sites and from
                              previously abandoned chemical waste, open disposal
                              pits, aeration ponds, landfills or petroleum related
                              activities (a high lead content in the soil is common). Six
                              sites in Vernon are on the EPA Superfund List, but none
                              of them are on the National Priority List.
                             Approximately 130 miles of railroad track historically
                              treated with herbicides for weed control. Rights-of way
                              show patterns of contamination from spilling,
                              overfilling, or transfer of chemicals.
                             Four California EPA-permitted hazardous             waste
                              treatment, storage and disposal facilities
                             Ten closed landfill sites
                      Overfilling storage tanks, leaking pipes, and leaking tanks have
                      resulted in residual soil contamination in Vernon. Sixteen sites
                      have been declared Proposition 65 sites (determined by
                      laboratory tests to have excessive carcinogenic or teratogenic
                      chemical contamination). Remediation plans are required to
                      decontaminate the soil.
                      Due to high background and other petroleum contamination
                      and lack of feasible clean-up options, several sites were
                      remediated with covenants being recorded to advise future
                      purchasers of the presence of contamination. Due to public
                      health concerns, these sites would be unsuitable for future
                      sensitive land uses such as housing.
                      A significant potential for chemical spills or accidents exists
                      due to the high concentration of underground storage tanks in
                      Vernon. The City’s Underground Tank Program has resulted in
                      the removal of over 1,000 tanks. Additionally, where structures
                      were threatened by tank removal, numerous underground
                      tanks were abandoned in place.
                      Another component of hazardous materials control in Vernon
                      is the “right to know” program. All businesses in the City are
                      required to submit inventories of all hazardous materials used
                      or stored. The City currently has 571 businesses that handle or
                      store hazardous materials. Class C businesses with very high
                      maximum daily volumes (2,001 to 1,000,000 pounds) are the
                      most prevalent, and are located throughout the City. The risk
Housing Element - 32

                                                                       Vernon General Plan
                                                                 2014-2021 Housing Element
of upset from businesses handling such high volumes of
chemicals, many of which are toxic, is a factor that must be
considered in land use planning.
If high levels of certain highly toxic chemicals are present in a
business’ hazardous materials inventory, these businesses are
further regulated through the California Accidental Release
Prevention Program (CALARP). Such businesses are required
to provide the City’s Environmental Health Department with a
CALARP report detailing how they plan to prevent the release
of such chemicals, as well as presenting a plan for clean-up and
notification if there were an accidental release. Such regulated
chemicals include ammonia and chlorine gas and could impact
a large geographic area if released. As illustrated in Figure H-2,
Vernon currently has 38 businesses regulated under CALARP.
The locations of businesses throughout the community with
underground storage tanks and/or use or storage of chemical
materials indicate that the entire City is subject to chemical
spills or accidents, thereby illustrating its inappropriateness for
future residential development.
In summary, Vernon’s prolonged history as an industrial City
has resulted in significant background contamination.
Industries that store or use hazardous materials are pervasive
throughout the City.
Noxious Odors
Numerous industries that generate noxious odors operate in
Vernon, including several focused on the slaughtering and
rendering of animals. Overlay districts have been designated in
the City’s General Plan and Zoning Ordinance to isolate the
locations of offensive industrial uses responsible for excessive
noxious odors. These overlay districts include a “Slaughtering
Overlay” for uses which involve the slaughtering of animals,
and a “Rendering Overlay” for the location of rendering
facilities. These uses generate significant adverse effects related
to odor and release of toxic materials, making residential land
uses highly incompatible within their vicinity. Revisions to the
Zoning Ordinance will include new standards to address odor
control in the Rendering and Slaughtering Overlay Districts.
                                                                        Housing Element - 33

 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                      Noise
                      As could be expected in a highly industrial city, properties in
                      Vernon are exposed to high levels of noise emanating from
                      stationary industrial activity, as well as from trucks,
                      automobiles, and railroad operations. Numerous companies
                      operate equipment such as large presses and pumps which
                      produce excessive vibrations and generate noise well beyond
                      the level of acceptability for noise-sensitive land uses within
                      the vicinity. Arterial roadways in Vernon have a very high
                      proportion of truck traffic (approximately 30 percent), thereby
                      intensifying noise levels along the City’s roadways. In addition,
                      four main railroad lines and a number of switching operations
                      are located in the City, and these generate significant levels of
                      noise day and night.
                      Figure H-3, derived from the Noise Element, presents noise
                      contours developed for Vernon in 2007 as part of the update to
                      the General Plan. The Zoning Ordinance establishes a one-hour
                      standard of 65 dB(A) between 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. within
                      0.10 mile of a school or residence, and a 60 dB(A) standard
                      between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. within 0.10 mile of a school or
                      residence.
                      As evidenced by the contour map, most properties in Vernon
                      are exposed to noise levels of 65 CNEL6 or greater, and
                      therefore are normally incompatible with sensitive land uses.
                      The noise contours are based on roadway traffic and do not
                      account for stationary noise sources. The probability is that
                      areas mapped as being outside the 65 dB CNEL may in fact
                      experience excessive noise levels from intermittent or other
                      sources.
                      Truck and Railroad Traffic
                      Vernon is traversed by approximately 130 miles of railroad
                      tracks, with approximately 96 at-grade and seven grade-
                      separated railroad crossings. As previously mentioned, truck
                      traffic is extremely heavy, comprising nearly one-third of all
                      traffic in the City. These conditions not only contribute to
                      excessive noise levels, but also create safety hazards for
                      pedestrians, particularly a problem for the elderly, persons
                      with disabilities, and families with children.
                      6 Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is a noise measure that
                      accounts for increased human sensitivity to noise at night.
Housing Element - 34

                                                                                      E 22N d
                                                                                                     St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lugo St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Union Pacific Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E 24th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E 15Th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L    EG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Em
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ery                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                                                                                    E 25th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Los Palos St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Triggs St                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    65                                                                                                                                                               E 26th St       65                                                                              65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S Herbert Av                                                                                                                       Eastern Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70                                                                                                            E 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S Sunol Dr
                                                                                                                                                70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S Bonnie Beach Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Noak es St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        McBird Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E 27th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Holabird Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dunham St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Soto St                                                                                                                                       80
                                                                                                          Alameda St                                                                                                                                                                            E 28th ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60                                                                                                                                                                                   80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EW
                                                                                                                                    Ross St                                                                                                                                         Violet Al                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t                        AS
                                                                            Martin Luther                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          iana                                   HIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S Santa Fe Av
                                                                            King Jr Blvd                                                                                                                                                                                                        30th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GT                                                                                              UNION PACIFIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BUR                                                                                                    S                                                   ON                                                                                                                      RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sierra Pine Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   70                                                LIN                                                                                          Ind       She
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GTO                                                                                         ila
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NOR                                                                                       St                                                      D
                                                                                     E 40th Pl
                                                                                                                                                           60                            E 37th St                                                                                                                                                                             E 37TH ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          THE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BANDINI BLVD                                                  70                                                                                                                                                                     RN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TA
                                                                                     E 41st St                                                                                            E 38th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Irving St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Asto r Av
                                                                                     E 41st Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                           Ross St                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Seville Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Leon is St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    St                              E 26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    uts
                                                                                     E 42nd St                                  60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65                                                                                                               dia                                            St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   70                                                                                                                                                                               E VERNON AV                                                                                                                                                                   70                                                                                                                                                      na
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E Vernon Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        som
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 75                                                                  S In
                                                                                     E 43rd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Charter St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   75                       BA N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Nobe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S SANTA FE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l
                           LONG BEACH AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D IN                                                                                                                                                                                                            She                                                                          St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BURLINGTON NORTHERN SANTA FE RR
                                                                                                                                                                               E VERNON AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E 44th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I BL                                                                                                                                                                                                     ila   St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E 45th St                         60                                                                                                        60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VD
                                                                                                                                                                               E 45th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                         E 45th St                            65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Furlong Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Alcoa Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Packers Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LO                                                                                                                 75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BL
                                                                                                                                                                                 E 46th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       65                                                                                                E 46th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Exchange
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SOTO ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Av
                                                                                                                                                              Hawthorne Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NG                            60
                                                                                         E 46th St                                                                                                                                                    60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               70                                                                                                            NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DOWNEY RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Saint Charles St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60                                                                                                                    EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Chambers St
                                                                       Staunton Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Av                                                                                        AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S            AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RIV                                                                                                                              75                                                                                                                                                  S
                                                                                                                                                                                         E 48th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GE                                     ER                                                                                                                                                                       Aye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Seville Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LEONIS BLVD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S                                                                                                                                                                                                              rs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JU
                                                                                                                                                                      60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   65                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DIS TRICT                                                                             NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BLVD                                              IO
                                                                                         E 48th Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60                                                                   65                                                                                                                                                                                                     65                                                                                                                                                                                                            N                                                                                                                                                                                                                             80                                               26T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E 49th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Aye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rs   Av
                                                                                                                                                                                          E 49th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BOYLE AV
                                                                                                                                     UNION PACIFIC RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          65                                                                                        E 50th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PACIFIC BLVD
                                                                                                                       ALAMEDA ST
                                                                                         E 50th St                                                                                                                      60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60                                                                                                   E 49Th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Maywood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Av                                                                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Everett Av
                                                                                                                                                                                          E 51st St                                                                                                                                            Hampton St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FRUITLAND AV                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Loma Vista
                                                                                                      E 51st St                                  60                                                                                                                                  Fruitland Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   70                                                                                                                                                                                                               E 50th St                                             70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            65                                           Fruitland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E 52nd St                                                                                   70
                                            E 52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dbe
                                                                                                                                                                                           E 52nd St                                                                               65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rgh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ln
                                                E 53rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  52nd St
                                            E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E 54th St                                                                                                 S Soto St                                                                                                                    Alcoa Av                                                                                                                                                                                              53rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                              54th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65
                                                                                                                                                                                                 E 55th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UNION PACIFIC RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             54th St                                                                                                              t   Blv                                   80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E 56th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 55th St                                                                                                                                                                   52                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         65                                                                                                                                                      56th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            65         Maywood Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P    l
                                                                                                                                                65                                               E 57th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Loma Vist
                                                                                         Holmes Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cor ona Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           56th St                                            th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fishburn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E 58th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               57th St                                                                                                                                                                    St
                                           METRO BLUE LINE/SPT CO RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   70                                                                                                                                                                                                         Bickett St                                                                                                                                                                                   58th St
                                                                                                                                                                                    E Slauson Av                                                                                                                                                                                            E SLAUSON AV                                                                                                                                                                                           E Slauson Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       57th St                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          58th St                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                     E 58th Pl                                                                                          Laura Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            65                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SL AUSON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nd
                                                                                                                                                   da St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AV                                                                                                                                                                                              52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Seville Av                                     Miles Av                                                            S Boyle Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        58th St                                           Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Belgrave Av
                                                                                                                                                                                     Regent St
                                                                                                                                            S Alame                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Belgrave Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Albany St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E Slauson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    59th Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S ATLANTIC
                                                                                                                                                                             UNION PAC
                                                                                                                                                                                       IFIC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60th Pl                                             Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                    RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mayflower
                                              E 60th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RA NDOL                                                                                                                                                                                  Alcoa Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BLV D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Malburg Wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH ST                                                                           61st St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Car melita                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                59th Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Giff ord Av
                                                Last Update: Hogle Ireland, August 2012,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              61st Pl                                                                                                                                     61st St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pine Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Beac
                                                Source: City of Vernon, 2007.                                                                                                                                                                                    S Santa Fe Av                            Malabar St                                                  Pacific Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Clarendon Av                                                         Arbutus Av                                                            60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 King Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Woodlaw                                                                                           Long
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UNION PAC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IFIC              RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     61st St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RA NDOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n Av                                                                                             Frwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Wa lker Av
                       ´                                0                                                              1,200                                                       2,400                                                                 3,600
                       LEGEND                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Vernon General Plan
                       Noise Contours (2007)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City Boundaries
                                                                                              80 CNEL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vernon City Boundary
                                                                                              75 CNEL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vernon Sphere of Influence
                                                                                              70 CNEL
                                                                                              65 CNEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure H-3
Housing Element - 35
                                                                                              60 CNEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2007 Noise Contours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2014-2021 Housing Element

 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                      Although the construction of the Alameda Corridor has
                      consolidated rail traffic between the Ports of Los Angeles and
                      Long Beach and downtown Los Angeles, no plans have been
                      announced to vacate existing mainline railroads. Some spur
                      tracks have been eliminated, but have been replaced by truck
                      transportation. Also, the rail lines are being considered as
                      routes for future transit rail traffic connecting Orange County
                      to downtown Los Angeles’ Union Station. Figure H-4 indicates
                      the principal transportation elements that contribute to noise
                      and pollution in the City of Vernon: the Long Beach Freeway,
                      arterial roadways, collector streets and mainline railroads.
                      Residential Service Adequacy
                      Residential development requires the provision of services to
                      meet the needs of the resident population. Services provided at
                      the municipal level include education, recreation, and local
                      retail goods and services. While few such residential services
                      are situated within Vernon, they are generally located within
                      close enough proximity to adequately serve currently existing
                      residences in the City via car or public transportation.
                      However, access to these residential services is along roadways
                      with high levels of track traffic, railroad crossings, and loading
                      activities. These conditions make pedestrian access to
                      residential service facilities difficult and unsafe, particularly for
                      children. However, areas that border the residential
                      neighborhoods of the adjacent city of Maywood are in close
                      proximity to community services, including schools, parks, and
                      local shopping.
                      Summary of Constraints to Residential Development
                      Environmental degradation related to hazardous materials and
                      background contamination, noxious odors, noise pollution and
                      truck and railroad traffic present land use conflicts for future
                      residential development in the City. In addition, the lack of
                      adequate, safe access to residential services acts to constrain
                      housing opportunities in Vernon. Although extensive
                      industrial development throughout Vernon has resulted in
                      environmental conditions that limit new housing sites, one or
                      two areas along the City’s southern boundary could potentially
                      accommodate a very limited amount of new residential
                      development to meet the City’s good governance commitment
                      to the State legislature.
Housing Element - 36

                                                                 E 22Nd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lugo St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TE
                                                                                       St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Union Pacific Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E 24th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Em                     E 15Th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e   ry S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RA
                                                                                                                                                  E 25th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Triggs St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E 26th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Los Palos St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E 26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Noake s St                                                                                                                                           Eastern Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         th S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S Herbert Av                                               S Sunol Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E 27th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Holabird Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dunham St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S Bonnie Beach Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   McBird Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Soto St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E 28th ST
                                                                                       Alameda St                                                                                                                              S Santa Fe Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AS St
                                                 Martin Luther Ross St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BU R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HIN
                                                 King Jr Blvd                                                                                                                                                                                    30th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LING                                                                             ia na                                        GT                                                             UNION PACIFIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Violet Al                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TON                                                                  Sh e                                     ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NO R                                               In d        il   aS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sierra Pine Av
                                                                 E 40th Pl                                                                         E 37th St                                                                                                                                         E 37TH ST                                                                                                 BANDINI BLVD                                                                                                                                                                              TH E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AN T
                                                                 E 41st St                                                                          E 38th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A FE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                           As tor Av
                                                                                                                                                                                               Irvin g St
                                                                 E 41st Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t                                                                                                                                                                                 Leonis St                                                                v
                                                                                                                                Ross St                                                                                                                                                                                        Seville Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E2                                                                                                                                                                                                                 St                  sA
                                                                 E 42nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dia                          6T h                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E VERNON AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    na                                 St                                                                                                                                                                                            so m               Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E Vernon Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S
                                                                 E 43rd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S In
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Charter St                                                                                                       D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Nob
                                                                                                                                 E VERNON AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sh e                                                              el S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E 44th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I NI                                                                                                                                                               il   aS                                                           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E 45th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B LV                                                                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S SANTA FE AVE
                                                                                                                                                E 45th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LO
                          LONG BEACH AV
                                                                        E 45th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BURLINGTON NORTHERN SANTA FE RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SA
                                                                                                                                                E 46th St                                                   Furlong Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Alcoa Av          Packers Av                                                                                                           NG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E 46th St                                                                                                                                                             Ex ch ange
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TI
                                                                        E 46th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LO   EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   v                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                 Hawthorne Av                                                                                                                                                                                                         SOTO ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Chambers St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SA                                ES                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LA
                                                                                                                                                                Saint Charles St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NG                                                                                                                                                                            sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DOWNEY RD
                                                          Staunton Av
                                                                                                                                                    E 48th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LEONIS BLVD                                                                                                                                                                                            ES                          IVE                                                                                                                            Aye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Seville Av                                                                                                                                                                                                             DISTRICT                                                               J                            R                                                                                                                       r                                                                    S
                                                                        E 48th Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 26 T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BLVDUNCTI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E 49th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ON                                                                                   Aye                                                                                                                         h        St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RR                                                                                r   sA
                                                                                                                                                    E 49th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E 50th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            v
                                                                        E 50th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BOYLE AV
                                                                                                             UNION PACIFIC RR
                                                                                                ALAMEDA ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E 49Th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PACIFIC BLVD                                                                                                                                                                                                             Maywood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Av
                                                                                                                                                    E 51st St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ev ere tt Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FRUITLAND AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Lo ma Vis
                                                                                     E 51st St                                                                                                                                                Fruitland Av                          Hampton St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E 50th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fru itland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ta Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E 52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lin
                                  E 52nd St                                                                                                         E 52nd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           52 nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              dbe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rg h
                                   E 53rd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          52 nd St
                                  E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               54 th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                53 rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S Soto St              E 54th St                                                                     Alcoa Av
                                                                                                                                                     E 55th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tri c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       54 th St                                              52                                         tB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E 56th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   55 th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N                                                  lvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UNION PACIFIC RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    56 th St                                                                                                                                                                                                        dP
                                                                                                                                                      E 57th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Maywood Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lo ma Vis
                                                                         Holmes Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      56 th St                                     th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ta Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E 58th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 57 th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Corona Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fishb urn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  58 th St
                                                                                                                                                 E Slauson Av                                                                                                                                                            E SLAUSON AV                                                Bickett St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E Slauson Av
                                     METRO BLUE LINE/SPT CO RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     57 th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      58 th St                                                                                                               E
                                                                              E 58th Pl                          ed a St                                        Laura Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SLA USON                                                                                                                                                                                            nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AV                                                                                                       58 th St                           52
                                                                                                                                                    Regent St                                                                                               Belgrave Av                                                         Seville Av                    Miles Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Belgrave Av                       S Boyle Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Av                                                       Pl
                                                                                                                       S Alam                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60 th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E Slauson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Av
                                                                                                                                                                                   Albany St
                                                                                                                                  UNION PA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         59 th Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LANTIC BL
                                                                                                                                                          CIFIC RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60 th Pl
                                   E 60th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R AN D O L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH S T                            61st St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         59 th Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mayflower
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Alcoa Av              Malburg Wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lo ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Carm elita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            61 st Pl                                                                                                 61 st St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Gifford Av
                                                 Last Update: Hogle Ireland, July 30, 2007.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pin e Av     S AT                                                                                                    n Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Clarendon Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B ea
                                                 Source: City of Vernon and Los Angeles County, 2006.                                                                                                                                                 Malabar St                                          Pacific Blvd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Kin g Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      UNION PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S Santa Fe Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           61 st St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Arbutus Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CIFIC RR                                                                                                               RANDOL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rw y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PH S T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Wood law
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ch F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Wa lke r Av
                        ´                        0                                                  1,200                                          2,400                                                          3,600
                       LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Vernon General Plan
                       Major Transportation Corridors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                City Boundaries
                                                                                      Collector Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Vernon City Boundary
                                                                                      Arterial Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Vernon Sphere of Influence
                                                                                      Freeway
                                                                                      Railroad
Housing Element - 37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure H-4                              2014-2021 Housing Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Majo r Tran s po rt atio n C or rid or s

 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                      4.0     HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
                      As described in Section 3.0, due to inherent incompatibilities
                      between residential uses and the City’s heavy industrial
                      environment, future residential development is for the most
                      part not desirable or recommended anywhere in Vernon. The
                      City’s policy over many decades has been to discourage
                      development of any new housing units. However, given the
                      City’s commitment to the State legislature to expand the voter
                      base, sites must be identified where 30 to 50 new units could be
                      built in Vernon, provided that impacts associated with
                      pervasive     industrial    operations   and extensive       site
                      contamination can be wholly addressed, and further provided
                      that housing sites provide new residents with suitable access to
                      schools, open space, and shopping.
                      Proposed sites for new residential housing would be preferred
                      along Vernon’s boundaries, near residential neighborhoods in
                      the adjacent cities of Maywood and Huntington Park. These
                      areas are less impacted from Vernon industrial uses and
                      trucking traffic, but also have good access to services and
                      amenities that support established residential neighborhoods
                      in these adjacent cities.
                      To assess the current potential for residential development in
                      Vernon as required under Housing Element statutes, staff has
                      identified both vacant properties and underutilized buildings,
                      defined as dilapidated and/or unreinforced masonry
                      structures suitable for demolition.
                      City staff conducted a field survey of vacant and underutilized
                      properties throughout the entire City. Although some of these
                      sites are located throughout the City, staff subsequently
                      narrowed the potential sites down to areas in the City that are
                      in close proximity to community services and amenities.
                      Potential sites within the Commercial Overlay District were
                      also dismissed due to the potential impacts to residential uses
                      being close to industrial uses. In addition, a key consideration
                      was to ensure that any new residential development would not
                      impede the ability of existing or future adjacent industrial
                      properties to attract a broad range of industrial users,
                      consistent with the City’s mission.
                      To permit housing at the potential sites identified, the City is
                      amending the Land Use Element to establish a Housing
                      Overlay, where residential uses are permitted at a density of up
Housing Element - 38

                                                                       Vernon General Plan
                                                                2014-2021 Housing Element
to 30 units per acre. A similar approach is being used in the
Zoning Ordinance to correspond to the General Plan
designation. In the Zoning Ordinance, the Housing (-H)
overlay district will allow housing development with approval
of a Development Agreement. This approach is being used
given Vernon’s unique character as an industrial city. The
Development Agreement will provide for maximum flexibility
for development standards while ensuring appropriate
features are incorporated into a project to address surrounding
industrial businesses in Vernon. The Zoning Ordinance
provisions for the Housing overlay district include that all
Development Agreements, at a minimum address those
standards outlined on pages 20 and 21 of this element.
Potential Residential Housing Sites
Two vacant sites and underutilized properties were considered
to have some limited potential for residential development,
and one site was identified as having the potential to
accommodate emergency housing. These sites are described in
Table H-7. The following discussion evaluates these sites in
terms of environmental safety and residential service
adequacy.
                                   Table H-7
                          Potential Housing Sites
Site                                Maximum     Assumed              Total
 No.     Location       Zoning       Density     Density   Acreage   Units
Potential Sites for Housing
A      4675 E. 52nd   General       30 du/ac    24 du/ac       2.06     49
       Drive          Industry (I)
B      4459 E. 52nd   General       30 du/ac    24 du/ac       0.52     12
       Drive          Industry (I)
                                                    Total      2.58     61
Site A
Site A is a 2.1-acre site located along the northern side of 52nd
Drive and owned by the City of Vernon. The south side of 52nd
Drive is a residential neighborhood located in Maywood. The
site is approximately 500 feet southeast of the Atlantic
Boulevard and District Boulevard intersection, and several
hundred feet south of the Los Angeles River. Site A is entirely
vacant. North of the site is a railroad line, and to the southeast
                                                                        Housing Element - 39

 Vernon General Plan
 Housing Element 2014-2021
                      is Sanchez Upholstery Supply. Cal SDM, Inc., a custom metal
                      fabrication shop and steam boiler company, is located to the
                      northeast, across from the railroad tracks.
                      Site B
                      Site B is a half-acre site located in the southwestern portion of
                      Vernon, near the intersection of District Boulevard, Fruitland
                      Avenue, and Cudahy Avenue. The site is bounded by 52nd
                      Street to the south, Fruitland Avenue to the north, and Cudahy
                      Avenue to the east. The property shares three of its property
                      boundaries with the City of Maywood. The site includes a
                      dilapidated warehouse structure built in the 1930s that
                      occupies nearly 50 percent of the site. The remaining site
                      includes an asphalt area overgrown with weeds. Site B is
                      surrounded by Pacific Coast Chemical (in Vernon) to the north,
                      a parking area (in Maywood) to the west, residential uses (in
                      Maywood) to the south, a union assembly hall (in Maywood)
                      to the east, and Maywood Elementary School (in Maywood) to
                      the southeast.
                      Potential Emergency Shelter Sites
                      Site C
                      Site C is a 1.6-acre site located on the southeast corner of
                      Alameda Street and 25th Street, immediately east of the
                      Alameda Corridor. The site is primarily vacant and includes
                      the remains of a building foundation. The site is bounded by
                      produce distributors to the south, a pallet storage business to
                      the southeast, a warehouse building to the east, and the
                      Alameda Corridor to the west and north.
                      Environmental Safety
                      Environmental conditions in Vernon are generally
                      incompatible with residential uses. However, the sites chosen
                      for potential residential development and emergency shelters
                      are located along the City’s periphery. The land uses
                      surrounding the sites listed in Table H-9 include vacant lots,
                      residential uses, a chemical distributor, an upholstery supply
                      warehouse, an assembly hall, and an elementary school.
                      All of the sites are exposed to truck traffic due to their locations
                      near Alameda Street, Atlantic Boulevard, and District
                      Boulevard. Site B is located near the intersection of 52nd Street
                      and District Boulevard, which are both Collectors. Site C is
Housing Element - 40

                                                                      Vernon General Plan
                                                                2014-2021 Housing Element
located at the intersection at Alameda Street, an Arterial, and
25th Street, a Collector. Site C is located along the Alameda
Corridor, which includes a below-ground, triple-tracked rail
line.
The Noise Contour Map (Figure H-3) shows that 2007 noise
levels exceed 70 CNEL all along the Alameda Corridor and I-
710 freeway, indicating residential uses are normally
incompatible and should be discouraged. This would primarily
affect the Site C, a potential location for emergency shelters.
Site A and B are exposed to noise levels below 70 CNEL.
Noxious odors are primarily related to numerous industries in
Vernon involved in the slaughtering and rendering of animals,
geographically concentrated within the General Plan
Slaughtering and Rendering Overlay Districts east of Soto
Street. All of the potential housing sites (Sites A, B, and C) are
located more than one-half mile from these districts, and will
not likely be subjected to the odor impacts, depending on
prevailing wind conditions.
City records indicate that all three potential housing and
emergency shelter sites are exposed to levels of hazardous
materials from underground tanks, soil contamination, and
chemicals used for operations in the adjacent area. With
approximately 570 businesses currently using or storing
hazardous materials, over 80 underground storage tanks, and
four hazardous waste treatment facilities, the presence of
hazardous materials and hazardous waste is evident
throughout the City. A total of 37 businesses utilize regulated
substances containing highly toxic materials (CALARP). If an
accidental release were to occur at any of these 37 facilities,
evacuation would be required for a large geographic area.
Table H-8 and Table H-9 describe the locational characteristics
of each site and the nearby sources of toxic materials.
                                                                       Housing Element - 41
                                                                                      E 22N d
                                                                                                     St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Lugo St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Union Pacific Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E 24th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E 15Th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Em                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AP
                                                                                                                                                                                   E 25th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Los Palos St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Triggs St                                                                                                D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E 26th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S Herbert Av                                                             S Sunol Dr                                            Eastern Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S Bonnie Beach Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      th S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Noakes St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  McBird Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E 27th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Holabird Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dunham St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Soto St
                                                                                                          Alameda St                                                                                                                                                                         E 28th ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EW
                                                                                                                                    Ross St                                                                                                                                      Violet Al                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t              AS
                                                                            Martin Luther                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HI N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S Santa Fe Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ind
                                                                            King Jr Blvd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GT                                                                                                UNION PACIFIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BUR                                                                                          iana                                                        ON                                                                                                         RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sierra Pine Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NGT                                                                              S   She
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ila
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Vernon General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NOR                                                                                    St                                                            D
                                                                                     E 40th Pl                                                                                          E 37th St                                                                                                                                                                      E 37TH ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      THE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BANDINI BLVD                                                                                                                                                                                                           RN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TA         FE R
                                                                                     E 41st St                                                                                           E 38th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
Housing Element - 42
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Irving St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Asto r Av
                                                                                     E 41st Pl
                                                                                                                                                           Ross St                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Seville Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Leon is St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                St
                                                                                     E 42nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6Th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       In d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E VERNON AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     iana                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E Vernon Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         s om
                                                                                     E 43rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Charter St                                                                                                                                  BA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Nob
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                           LONG BEACH AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S SANTA FE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             el S
                                                                                                                                                                              E VERNON AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D IN                                                                                                                                                                                                                She                                                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BURLINGTON NORTHERN SANTA FE RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E 44th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I BL                                                                                                                                                                                                      ila   St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E 45th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        V         D
                                                                                                                                                                               E 45th St
                                                                                         E 45th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Furlong Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Alcoa Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Packers Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BL
                                                                                                                                                                                E 46th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E 46th St                                                                                                                                                                                                         Exchange                                                       AN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SOTO ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Av
                                                                                                                                                              Hawthorne Av
                                                                                         E 46th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Saint Charles St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DOWNEY RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L   AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Chambers St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S
                                                                       Staunton Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Av                                                                                  AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S            AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RI V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S
                                                                                                                                                                                        E 48th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GE                                ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Housing Element 2014-2021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Aye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LE                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Seville Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LEONIS BLVD                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DIST RICT                                                              CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BLVD                                                                   IO
                                                                                         E 48th Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              26T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E 49th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Aye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rs   Av
                                                                                                                                                                                         E 49th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BOYLE AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E 50th St
                                                                                                                                     UNION PACIFIC RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PACIFIC BLVD
                                                                                                                       ALAMEDA ST
                                                                                         E 50th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E 49Th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Maywood
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Everett Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Loma Vist
                                                                                                                                                                                         E 51st St                                                                                                                                          Hampton St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FRUITLAND AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a Av
                                                                                                      E 51st St                                                                                                                                                                   Fruitland Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E 50th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fruitland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E 52nd St
                                            E 52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 be rg
                                                                                                                                                                                          E 52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   hL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                                                E 53rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      52nd St
                                            E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E 54th St                                                                                            S Soto St                                                                                                             Alcoa Av                                                                                                                                                                                53rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                 54th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                E 55th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UNION PACIFIC RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 54th St                                                                                                                t   B lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E 56th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ta Av                                       55th St                                                                                                                                                                      52                                                      d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            56th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Maywood Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P   l
                                                                                         Holmes Av                                                                                              E 57th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Loma Vis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cor ona Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                56th St                                            th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E 58th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      57th St                                                                                                                                                                      St
                                           METRO BLUE LINE/SPT CO RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fishburn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bickett St                                                                                                                                                                      58th St
                                                                                                                                                                                   E Slauson Av                                                                                                                                                                                     E SLAUSON AV                                                                                                                                                                               E Slauson Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            57th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               58th St                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                     E 58th Pl                                                                                         Laura Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SL AUSON                                                                                                      BLVD                                                                                                                              nd
                                                                                                                                                   da St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AV                                                                                                                                                                                               52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Seville Av                                     Miles Av                                                      S Boyle Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             58th St                                      Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Belgrave Av
                                                                                                                                                                                    Regent St
                                                                                                                                            S Alame                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Belgrave Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Albany St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             60th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E Sla uso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         59t h Pl
                                                                                                                                                                             UNION PAC
                                                                                                                                                                                            IFIC RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60t h Pl                                         Av
                                              E 60th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ma yflowe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RAND OL                                                                                                                                                                           Alcoa Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S AT LA NT IC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Malburg Wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PH ST                                                                            61st St                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Car melita                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            59th Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Gifford Av
                                                Last Update: Hogle Ireland, August 2012,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 61s t Pl                                                                                                                       61st St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pine Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Long
                                                Source: City of Vernon, 2012.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S Santa Fe Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Malabar St                                             Pacific Blvd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    King Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Clarendon Av                                                        Arbutus Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UNION PAC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Frwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IFIC             RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           61s t St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Woodlawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RA ND OL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Av                                                                                         each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Wa lker Av
                       ´                                0                                                              1,200                                                      2,400                                                               3,600
                       LEGEND
                       Housing Sites                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City Boundaries
                                                                                              General Plan and Zoning Housing Overlay District                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Vernon City Boundary
                                                                                              Site for Housing Consideration                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Vernon Sphere of Influence
                                                                                              General Plan and Zoning Emergency Shelter Overlay District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure H-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Housing Sites

                                                                               Vernon General Plan
                                                                                     Housing Element
                                                Table H-8
      Characteristics of Vacant and Underutilized Sites in Commercial/Industrial Zones
                                                 Site          GP
Site       Assessor                             Size      Designation                  Current
No.        Parcel #              Location      (Acres)      and Zone             Site Improvements
Potential Sites for Housing
A      6314-002-900        4675 E. 52nd       2.06      Industrial          Vacant land
                           Drive
B      6313-022-030        4459 E. 52nd       0.52      Industrial          Dilapidated warehouse
                           Drive                                            building (built in the 1930s)
Potential Sites for Emergency Shelters
C      6302-009-039        25th Street        1.61      Industrial          Vacant land
Source: City of Vernon, Community Services Department.
                                               Table H-9
                         Characteristics of Vacant and Underutilized Sites
                                    in Commercial/Industrial Zones
                                                                                   Nearby Sources of
                                                                                     Toxic Materials
 Site     Surrounding Land           Truck                         Railroad         Released into Air
 No.              Uses               Traffic   Noise      Odor     Hazards          (within 1/2 mile)
Potential Sites for Housing
A       Residential, small          Moderate Low        Low        Low           Trichloroethane, Certain
        assembly hall,                                                           Glycol Ethers, Copper
        Maywood Elementary                                                       Compounds, Lead
        School, parking lot,                                                     Compounds, Methyl
        chemical distributor                                                     Ethyl Ketone, Methyl
                                                                                 Isobutyle Ketone, N-
                                                                                 Butyl Alcohol, Toluene,
                                                                                 Xylene (Mixed Isomers)
B       Residential, vacant lot,    Moderate Low        Low        Moderate      Ethylene Glycol,
        railroad tracks,                                                         Ethylene Oxide,
        upholstery supply                                                        Propylene Oxide
        warehouse
Potential Sites for Emergency Shelters
        Alameda Corridor,           Moderate Moderate   Moderate   High          Lead Compounds
        pallet storage yard,
C       produce distributer,
        material goods
        distribution warehouse
Source: City of Vernon, Community Services Department and Environmental Protection Agency, Toxic Release
Inventory, 2012.
http://www.epa.gov/enviro/facts/tri/search.html
                                                                                    Housing Element - 43
Vernon General Plan
Housing Element
                     Residential Service Adequacy
                     Existing infrastructure in the City—including water, sewer, and
                     all dry utilities—is sufficient to accommodate existing housing in
                     the City, and could accommodate development on the sites
                     discussed in this inventory. However, new residential
                     development in Vernon would also require that the new residents
                     be provided basic residential services. The services provided at
                     the local level include education, recreation, and grocery
                     shopping. The estimated distances to these facilities from each site
                     are presented in Table H-10. The California Tax Credit Allocation
                     Committee (TCAC) has established criteria for appropriate
                     distances between residential uses and services, and provides the
                     basis for evaluating residential service adequacy in Vernon.
                     TCAC’s distance criteria for public elementary, middle and high
                     schools is a maximum of one-half mile from residential
                     development. The nearest elementary school to potential
                     residential Sites A and B sites is Maywood Elementary in
                     Maywood; the nearest middle school is Nimitz Middle School in
                     Huntington Park; and the nearest high school is Maywood
                     Academy High School in Maywood. As indicated in Table H-9,
                     both Sites A and B meet the one-half mile locational criteria for
                     elementary schools.
                     The TCAC has established a maximum one-mile distance criteria
                     within inner city areas for the distance between residential
                     development and a full-scale supermarket where grocery staples,
                     fresh meat, and produce are sold. The closest full service grocery
                     store to the potential residential sites in Vernon is a Food 4 Less,
                     located on Slauson Avenue in Maywood. Review of Table H-9
                     indicates that both Sites A and B meets are located within one-
                     mile of a Food 4 Less in Maywood.
                     The TCAC’s locational criteria for public parks is a maximum of
                     one-half mile from residential development. The nearest park to
                     Sites A and B is Maywood Park at the intersection of 58th Street
                     and Heliotrope Avenue in the City of Maywood. Adjacent to the
                     park is the Maywood Activity Center, which includes a
                     community center, gym, and indoor basketball court. Site A meets
                     the one-half mile locational criteria for parks facility (Maywood
                     Park). Site B is located approximately one mile away from
                     Maywood Park.
Housing Element - 44

                                                                         Vernon General Plan
                                                                            Housing Element
                                 Table H-10
       Residential Service Characteristics of Unimproved and
         Underutilized Sites in Commercial/Industrial Zone
              Nearest      Nearest      Nearest      Nearest    Nearest
  Site     Elementary      Jr. High      High        Grocery   Park/Rec.
   No.        School        School      School         Store    Center
 A         ½ mile         1 ½ miles   1 mile       ¾ mile     ½ mile
 B         500 feet       1 ½ miles   1 mile       ½ mile     1 mile
Source: City of Vernon, Community Services Department.
Both Sites A and B are located across the street from residential
uses in the City of Maywood. Both sites are within walking
distance to Maywood Elementary School and less than two miles
from a junior high school, high school, grocery store, and park
and community center. Due to the close proximity to Maywood’s
residential neighborhoods, it makes if easier for children and
adults to walk to residential services and avoid the truck traffic
and railroad crossings typically found in the center of Vernon.
Summary of Housing Opportunities
Although future residential development is inappropriate in
Vernon due to its pervasive industrial character, the shift in policy
to allow for an increase in the City’s population to enhance
government accountability has led the City to identify two sites
for potential housing development and one site for emergency
shelters. The potential sites are suited for residential use since they
are generally close to schools and groceries stores located in
adjacent communities. The number of residential units that would
be could be built on these two sites will be able to accommodate
the City’s RHNA of two future housing units.
The following describes the City’s quantified objectives for the
2014-2021 planning period by income group. Since most of the
City-owned residential dwelling units have undergone some
rehabilitation since 2007, the City anticipates rehabilitating only
seven City-owned residential units. As the remaining seven that
were not renovated become vacant, the City will consider
rehabilitating these units. (New HVAC systems were installed in
these units in recent years.) The five privately owned residential
units are considered in good condition and not in need of major
repair; therefore, for this planning period, no rehabilitation of
dwelling units are planned. In quantifying dwelling unit
                                                                            Housing Element - 45

Vernon General Plan
Housing Element
                     production goals in Vernon, the City wants to conserve and
                     preserve all existing 31 housing units in the City. The City would
                     like to produce up to 49 dwelling units, where at least two are for
                     low and very low income categories.
                                                 Table H-11
                                    Quantified Objectives for 2014-2021
                                      Very Low        Low        Moderate       Above
                        Category        Income      Income         Income     Moderate
                                                                                Income
                     New                   2           47             0            0
                     Construction
                     Rehabilitated         0            0             7            0
                     Conserved             0            0            31            0
Housing Element - 46
                                                                    Vernon General Plan
                                                                       Housing Element
5.0     HOUSING PLAN
The Housing Plan for the Vernon Housing Element sets forth
goals, policies, and implementing programs to address the
housing needs particular to the City of Vernon. Prior to presenting
the goals, policies, and programs, an evaluation of the programs
in the previous Housing Element (2000) is presented as a
foundation for developing the Plan for the 2008-2014 Housing
Element.
5.1     Evaluation of Previous Accomplishments
State law (California Government Code Section 65588(a)) requires
each jurisdiction to review its housing element as frequently as
appropriate and evaluate:
   The appropriateness of the housing goals, objectives, and
    policies in contributing to the attainment of the state housing
    goal;
   The effectiveness of the housing element in attainment of the
    community’s housing goals and objectives; and
   The progress in implementation of the housing element.
Table H-12 shows the progress the City made in implementing the
2008-2014 Housing Programs. An analysis of the effectiveness and
continued appropriateness of these programs is provided, and the
goals, policies, and programs from the 2008-2014 Housing
Element have been updated to reflect this evaluation.
The major focus of housing policy in Vernon is to preserve the
existing housing stock in the City and to ensure that existing
housing in the City is well maintained. A secondary goal is to
identify a site or sites suitable for new housing pursuant to the
City’s good governance initiative, and a site that can
accommodate emergency shelters pursuant to the requirements of
SB2.
The Housing Element addresses the health and safety of residents
living on or adjacent to industrial sites. The City actively
discourages the occupation or construction of dwelling units on or
near industrial sites since activities on industrial sites includes
operations potentially hazardous to residents. In addition, all
units are required to have adequate insulation, air conditioning,
approved air and water filtration systems, and sound insulation to
                                                                       Housing Element - 47

Vernon General Plan
Housing Element
                     reduce potentially adverse air quality and noise-related impacts
                     from adjacent industrial uses.7
                     7 Vernon does not require an adequate sites implementation/rezone
                     program per Government Code Section 65584.09; the City’s RHNA of
                     zero required no sites during the previous planning period.
Housing Element - 48

                                                                                     Vernon General Plan
                                                                                          Housing Element
                                                     Table H-11
                       Housing Element Accomplishments for 2008-2014 Planning Period
             Policy/Program                                              Accomplishments
Goal H-1: Ensure that all housing units are maintained in decent, safe, and sanitary condition.
           Continue to enforce all relevant  Progress: The City's Department of Community Services is responsible
           building and zoning codes to      for code enforcement activities. Due to the limited number of units in
Policy 1.1
           ensure that all residential units the City, staff can accurately monitor all units and has determined that
           are adequately maintained.        all are in good repair.
                                             Effectiveness: The City has been effective in maintaining housing
           Maintenance of City-Owned         conditions in the City, and responds to complaints as needed. By 2008,
Program 1
           Residences                        the City completed fully renovating 19 City-owned dwelling units and
                                             added heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems and
                                             upgraded the insulation in seven other units.
Program 2  Code Enforcement                  Continued Appropriateness: Code enforcement is an important
                                             component that ensures that the limited number of units in the City
                                             remains in good repair.
                                             Progress: The City actively pursues maintenance on City-owned units,
                                             providing renovations on vacated units and repairs as needed on
                                             occupied units.
           Require any remodeled             Effectiveness: The City successfully completed the renovation of 19
           residential units to be equipped  units in 2008. Renovations included adding HVAC systems, and
           with air conditioning and         providing insulation for sound protection and energy conservation
Policy 1.2 sound insulation to protect       purposes.
           residents from exposure to        Continued Appropriateness: The City owns a majority of residences in
           adverse environmental             Vernon. The City is fully involved with the maintenance and upkeep of
           conditions.                       the properties, and will continue to provide these services on other
                                             units, as they are needed. All remodeled units will be required to
                                             provide HVAC systems and sound insulation protection, such as dual
                                             paned windows.
                                             Progress: No residential units were demolished during the last
           Mitigate any residential
                                             planning period.
           displacement impacts occurring
           as a result of residential        Effectiveness: The City is committed to maintaining the existing
Policy 1.3 demolition.                       housing units in the City.
                                             Continued Appropriateness: The City's primary housing goal is to
                                             preserve the existing housing units. The City is committed to
                                             mitigating residential displacement impacts, should they occur.
                                                                                         Housing Element - 49
    Vernon General Plan
    Housing Element
                                                     Table H-11
                        Housing Element Accomplishments for 2008-2014 Planning Period
              Policy/Program                                               Accomplishments
Goal H-2: Maintain all existing dwelling units within the City.
                                              Progress: All units in the City were retained during the last planning
                                              period.
            Provide for the retention of      Effectiveness: The 31 residential units in the City have all been
            existing residential units in the determined to be in good condition.
Policy 2.1
            City that are economically and    Continued Appropriateness: The major focus of housing policy prior
            physically sound.                 to 2012 in Vernon was to preserve the existing housing stock and
                                              maintain safe and viable housing units.
            The City will accommodate the     Progress: As of 2012, there are no assisted housing units in the City.
            needs of disabled residents       The City did not allow new housing prior to 2012.
            through establishment of a        Effectiveness: While there are no federally or state-assisted units in
Policy 2.2
            reasonable accommodation          Vernon, the City owns 26 of the 31 housing units in Vernon. These
            ordinance or procedures for       units are rented at levels that are affordable to very low-income
            existing units.                   tenants. City policy focuses on retention and maintenance of the 31
                                              existing housing units, with no plans for removal of any units, City-
                                              owned or otherwise.
                                              Continued Appropriateness: While there is no assisted housing in the
Program 3   Preservation of Assisted Housing
                                              City that requires monitoring, the City continued this program in the
                                              2008 Housing Element, discussing assisted housing to address
                                              Government Code Section 65583(a)(8).
Goal H-3: Continue to promote the availability of a range in existing unit types and sizes, and equal housing
opportunity in the City’s housing market on the basis of age, race, sex, marital status, ethnic background, source
of income, and other factors.
                                              Progress: The City has not been advised of any discriminatory practices
            Prohibit discrimination in the    that have occurred in regards to the availability of housing. The City
Policy 3.1
            availability of existing housing. will take a proactive approach in enforcing antidiscrimination laws.
                                              Effectiveness: The City has received no complaints regarding any
                                              discriminatory actions and will continue to enforce all fair housing law.
            Housing Opportunities for
Program 4                                     Continued Appropriateness: Prior to 2012, the City's Zoning
            Residents with Special Needs
                                              Ordinance did not allow the development of new housing in the City.
                                              As such, housing discrimination related to the siting of housing was
                                              not an issue. This program was updated in 2008 to address a range of
Program 5   Equal Housing Opportunity         fair housing concerns related to the existing housing stock, including
                                              access for persons with disabilities or special needs, providing greater
                                              access to equal housing opportunity.
    Housing Element - 50

                                                                     Vernon General Plan
                                                                        Housing Element
5.2    Goals and Policies
GOAL H-1:
Ensure that all housing units are maintained in decent, safe, and
sanitary condition.
            POLICY H-1.1: Continue to enforce all relevant
            building and zoning codes to ensure that all residential
            units are adequately maintained.
            POLICY H-1.2: Require any new or residential units
            undergoing a major alteration to be equipped with air
            filtration systems (such as HVAC systems) and sounds
            insulation (such as dual-paned windows) to protect
            residents from exposure to adverse environmental
            conditions.
            POLICY H-1.3: Mitigate any residential displacement
            impacts occurring as a result of residential demolition.
GOAL H-2:
Maintain all existing dwelling units within the City.
           POLICY H-2.1: Provide for the retention of existing
           residential units in the City that are economically and
           physically sound.
           POLICY H-2.2: Continue to accommodate the needs of
           disabled residents through the adopted reasonable
           accommodation procedure.
GOAL H-3:
Create opportunities for the development of new housing in
areas of the City that have the least potential for adverse impacts
associated with established industrial uses and truck routes.
Locate such new housing nearby community services.
           POLICY H-3.1: Implement the Housing Overlay Zone
           via the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning map to allow for
           a limited amount of new housing construction.
            POLICY H-3.2: Strategically locate sites for new
            housing so as to minimize noise, vibration, smoke,
            noxious gases, glare, heat, dust, odors, air pollution,
            and other adverse impacts associated with industrial
            uses, slaughtering and rendering uses, businesses that
                                                                        Housing Element - 51
Vernon General Plan
Housing Element
                                 release toxic materials, and trucking and railroad
                                 facilities and routes.
                                 POLICY H-3.3: Encourage development of residential
                                 uses in strategic proximity to schools, recreational
                                 facilities, commercial areas, parks and other public
                                 spaces, and transit routes.
                     GOAL H-4:
                     Continue to promote the availability of a range in existing unit
                     types and sizes, and equal housing opportunity in the City’s
                     housing market on the basis of age, race, sex, marital status,
                     ethnic background, source of income, homelessness, physical
                     disabilities, and other factors.
                                 POLICY H-4.1: Prohibit discrimination          in   the
                                 availability of existing and new housing.
                                 POLICY H-4.2: Address the housing needs of special
                                 populations and extremely low-income households
                                 through emergency shelters, transitional housing,
                                 supportive housing, and single-room occupancy units.
                     5.3    Programs
                     As discussed in this Element, the Vernon City Council has
                     adopted several good governance reform measures, including a
                     commitment to at least double the housing stock within the City.
                     Residential development is will be permitted at strategic locations
                     in Vernon. SCAG adopted a future housing need of two units in
                     Vernon as part of the 2014-2021 Regional Housing Needs
                     Assessment, recognizing that although incompatibility of locating
                     housing in such a heavy industrial environment may not be
                     appropriate, there may be certain areas in Vernon where housing
                     may be suitable. As such, programs to increase the City’s housing
                     stock are included below. As indicated in the goals and policies,
                     the primary goals of the Housing Element is to ensure the
                     maintenance of the City’s existing housing stock and to allow for
                     limited new housing opportunities. The following programs will
                     implement these goals.
                     Program 1: Maintenance of City-Owned Residences
                     The City owns 26 of the total 31 housing units in Vernon, all of
                     which are rented. The City is responsible for the maintenance and
                     upkeep of these units. As indicated in Section 2.0, Housing Needs
                     Assessment, of this Housing Element, all of the City-owned units
Housing Element - 52

                                                                      Vernon General Plan
                                                                         Housing Element
were determined to be in good repair. In addition, in recent years
the City initiated an extensive project on all City-owned units to
ensure the continued longevity of existing units. In 2007, the City
renovated 12 units, and an additional 14 units were renovated
between 2008 and 2011. Since 2007, all 26 units have undergone
renovations. The City will continue to provide maintenance to
these units, thus ensuring upkeep for the majority of Vernon’s
housing stock.
        Responsible Agency: Department of Community Services
        Project Funding: Departmental Budget
        Timeframe: Ongoing as needed.
Program 2: Code Enforcement
Of the five non-City owned units located in Vernon, none was
determined by the City to be in need of substantial rehabilitation.
Due to the limited number of privately owned units in the City, a
code enforcement program would have limited application.
However, it is nonetheless imperative that residential units be
adequately maintained for health, safety, and aesthetic concerns.
Community Services staff is active in the community and will
enforce the City’s code to eliminate and prevent unsafe conditions
in residential units. Community Services staff responds quickly to
code enforcement complaints in Vernon. Community Services
staff is active in the community and will actively monitor all
residential units in the City to ensure the health and safety of City
residents. Staff will respond to reports of code violations within
the week that they are reported, and enforce applicable laws to
ensure the safety and preservation of all housing units within the
City.
        Responsible Agency: Department of Community Services
        Project Funding: Departmental Budget
        Timeframe: Ongoing
Program 3: Preservation of Assisted Housing
State law (Chapter 1451, Statutes of 1989) requires the City to
identify, analyze and propose programs within the Housing
Element to address the potential conversion of all federal, State
and locally assisted housing developments eligible to change to
non-low-income use during the next ten-year period (2008-2018).
Government Code Section 65583(8) defines assisted housing
developments as the following: “multi-family rental housing that
                                                                         Housing Element - 53

Vernon General Plan
Housing Element
                     receives governmental assistance under federal programs listed in
                     subdivision (a) of Section 65863.10, state and local multi-family
                     revenue bond programs, local redevelopment programs, the
                     federal Community Development Block Grant Program, or local
                     in-lieu fees. Assisted housing developments shall also include
                     multi-family rental units that were developed pursuant to a local
                     inclusionary housing program or used to qualify for a density
                     bonus pursuant to Section 65915-65917.”
                     Vernon has no assisted housing in its jurisdiction, as confirmed by
                     City and State HCD staff, and through review of “Inventory of
                     Federally Subsidized Low-Income Rental Units at Risk of
                     Conversion” (California Housing Partnership Corporation), and
                     the “Use of Housing Revenue Bond Proceeds - 1994” (California
                     Debt Advisory Commission). As a result, there is no housing at
                     risk of losing its subsidized status that must be considered in the
                     Housing Element.
                             Responsible Agency: Department of Community Services
                             Project Funding: Departmental Budget
                             Timeframe: Ongoing
                     Program 4: Housing Opportunities for Residents with Special
                     Needs
                     The Fair Housing Act, as amended in 1988, requires that cities and
                     counties provide reasonable accommodation to rules, policies,
                     practices, and procedures where such accommodation may be
                     necessary to afford individuals with disabilities equal housing
                     opportunities. The City has adopted procedures in their Zoning
                     Ordinance for housing for persons with disabilities and will
                     provide information to residents through the City’s website.
                             Responsible Agency: Department of Community Services
                             Project Funding: Departmental Budget
                             Timeframe: Ongoing
                     Program 5: Priority Water and Sewer Services
                     In accordance with Government Code Section 65589.7, after the
                     Vernon Housing Element is adopted by City Council, a copy will
                     be immediately delivered to all public agencies or private entities
                     that provide water or sewer services to properties within Vernon.
                             Responsible Agency: Department of Community Services
                             Project Funding: Departmental Budget
                             Timeframe: 2013
Housing Element - 54

                                                                      Vernon General Plan
                                                                         Housing Element
Program 6: Provision of Adequate Sites
The Land Use Element Housing Overlay policy allows up to 60
residential dwelling units citywide, which is more than adequate
to meet RHNA objectives for all income levels (two units).
According to the sites inventory capacity analysis, the 2.1-acre
housing site (Site A) located at 4675 52nd Drive is estimated to
accommodate up to 49 units. The 0.5-acre housing site (Site B)
located at 4675 52nd Drive can accommodate up to 12 units.
Adequate zoning is in place for Site A, via the Housing Overlay.
Site B may be considered as a potential housing site in the future.
Together, these two sites can accommodate the total dwelling
units identified under the Housing Overlay policy, not to exceed
60 units.
As described on pages 37-38, the Housing Overlay allows
residential uses with approval of a Development Agreement. This
permitting process is applied to all residential applications and is
considered necessary given Vernon’s unique industrial character.
Through a Development Agreement that City can assure that
measures will be in place to create the best possible housing
solutions. The Development Agreement must at a minimum
ensure that adequate emergency access is provided, that the
development includes suitable open space amenities, and parking
be provided to meet the anticipated needs of residents.
On the two sites where the Housing Overlay applies, Zoning
Ordinance regulations will allow for densities of up to 30 units per
acre. The overlay exclusively allows for residential uses (no
mixed use). Given the size of the largest site, at least 16 units can
be constructed, per Section 65583.2(h) and (i) of the Government
Code. The Housing Overlay is being adopted in conjunction with
adoption of the Housing Element.
The site on 52nd Street is to be developed with units all affordable
to lower-income households, with the developer seeking Low
Income Housing Tax Credit funding.              In the event this
development project does not move forward, the City will
continue to seek a developer who can provide similar housing.
While no density bonus has been deemed necessary to incentivize
development of affordable housing, the City recognizes that
developers can request a density bonus pursuant to State law.
Because land use policy will not allow for additional housing
development beyond the two sites identified in this element and
given that densities are sufficient to encourage affordable housing
                                                                         Housing Element - 55

Vernon General Plan
Housing Element
                     projects, the City does not see the need to adopt specific
                     regulations for density bonuses. Thus, the City Zoning Ordinance
                     will be amended simply to reference State law.
                     With regard to housing persons in need of emergency shelter, in
                     conjunction with adoption of the Housing Element the City has
                     adopted Zoning Ordinance to establish an Emergency Housing
                     overlay zone. This zone, applied to a large property in the
                     northwest portion of Vernon, allows emergency shelters by right
                     (see Figure H-5). The property is over five acres in size and can
                     accommodate one or more shelters. Like all other properties in
                     Vernon, the site is surrounded by industrial uses. However, this
                     particular site is easily accessible from transit routes along Santa
                     Fe Avenue and Alameda Street. The site is currently vacant and
                     owned by the Alameda Corridor Transportation Agency.
                             Responsible Agency: Department of Community Services
                             Project Funding: Departmental Budget
                             Timeframe: Development of housing to accommodate the
                             RHNA by 2015; amend Zoning Ordinance by May 2013 to
                             include reference to State law regarding density bonus
                             provisions; immediate availability of Emergency Housing
                             Overlay site for any application for such use.
                     Program 7: Equal Housing Opportunity
                     The Vernon City Clerk’s Department is responsible for referring
                     equal housing opportunity questions. Any questions or concerns
                     raised by residents will be accepted by the City Clerk and brought
                     before City Council for resolution. In order to disseminate
                     information on fair housing resources more broadly, the City will
                     place a link on the City’s website that refers to the Housing Rights
                     Center Frequently Asked Questions webpage on housing
                     discrimination.
                     Also, persons in need of transitional and supportive housing can
                     readily be accommodated within any housing development
                     proposed in the Housing Overlay zone. In conjunction with
                     adoption of this Housing Element, the City has amended the
                     Zoning Ordinance to define transitional and supportive housing
                     as a standard residential uses of property permitted within the
                     Housing Overlay zone. Any proposal for such housing is subject
                     to the same permitting requirements (approval of a Development
                     Agreement to define the site plan and development parameters)
                     as any other type of housing.
Housing Element - 56

                                                                      Vernon General Plan
                                                                         Housing Element
        Responsible Agency: Department of Community Services;
        City Clerk
        Project Funding: Departmental Budget
        Timeframe: June 2013
5.3     Redevelopment Agency Dissolution
On December 29, 2011 the California Supreme Court issued a
ruling upholding AB 1X 26, legislation that called for the
elimination of hundreds of local redevelopment agencies in the
state, including the Redevelopment Agency for the City of
Vernon.
The City of Vernon elected to become the Successor Agency of the
former Vernon Redevelopment Agency and established an
Oversight Board. As the Successor Agency, the Oversight Board
oversees certain fiscal management of former Agency fund. This
includes carrying out existing projects that are in various stages of
development.
The City was not required to set aside 20 percent of the tax
increate collected in the Industrial Redevelopment Project Area to
be used by the Agency to increase the City’s supply of affordable
housing, because it determined that were was no housing need in
the City. Therefore, there are no existing housing set-aside funds
for the Industrial Redevelopment Project Area.
                                                                         Housing Element - 57

Vernon General Plan
Housing Element
                     This page intentionally left blank.
Housing Element - 58
VERNON GENERAL PLAN
LAND USE ELEMENT

                                                                 Vernon General Plan
                                                                   Land Use Element
LAND USE ELEMENT
1.0     PURPOSE AND FOCUS
1.1     Purpose of this Element
This Land Use Element establishes the broad, general policies
for how properties are used in Vernon, including location,
distribution, type, and intensity of development, with the
overarching goal of maintaining Vernon as an industrial city.
The Land Use Policy Map graphically illustrates the planned
pattern of land use in Vernon and the City’s sphere of
influence, which consists of unincorporated lands adjacent to
Vernon which have a bearing and influence on properties in
the City.
The General Plan and Land Use Element goals and policies
provide guidance to the City Council and City officials
regarding zoning, land subdivision, public improvements, and
physical development programs.
The Land Use Element and the circulation portion of the
Circulation and Infrastructure Element are closely tied. It is
intended that the land use patterns and intensities permitted by
Land Use Element policies be supported by the streets,
                                                                    Land Use Element - 1

Vernon General Plan
Land Use Element
                     highways, and other transportation systems planned in the
                     Circulation and Infrastructure Element. Vernon recognizes
                     that its street system is constrained by long-established
                     development patterns, and land use policies have been crafted
                     accordingly to minimize the adverse effects of specific land
                     uses on the local street system. To continue to attract and
                     support industrial businesses, the City must be able to
                     accommodate the vehicular traffic associated with desired uses.
                     With regard to housing, long-standing City policy has been to
                     discourage housing, recognizing that the traffic, noise, and
                     odors that industrial uses produce are generally incompatible
                     with residential development. In the past, land use policy
                     limited housing to existing, long-established single-family
                     homes and apartments. However, in 2011 the City Council
                     committed to implementing new good governance practices
                     that included adopting land use policies aimed at increasing
                     the voting populous. Specifically, the City has identified
                     specific locations where a limited amount of new housing can
                     be constructed, and has adopted implementing zoning
                     regulations. Recognizing Vernon’s mission to remain and
                     industrial city, the locations for housing have been selected to
                     minimize adverse interface between industrial and residential
                     uses. Vernon’s city boundaries blur and blend into urban Los
                     Angeles County, and many of the people working in
                     businesses in Vernon live relatively close by in communities
                     removed from industrial conditions and where they have
                     access to parks, grocery stores, pharmacies, and other
                     residential amenities. Thus, it is appropriate that new housing
                     opportunities in Vernon remain very limited.
                     1.2     Focus
                     The key policy objective of the City is to remain almost
                     exclusively an industrial city, serving the needs of industry,
                     including local, national, and international consumers of goods
                     produced by manufacturers. To fulfill this objective, this
                     Element describes a limited range of land use categories,
                     establishes standards of use and intensity, and sets forth
                     policies relating to use of properties.
                     1.3     Flood Management
                     In 2007, the State adopted legislation that strengthened the
                     long-existing requirement that a General Plan address flood
                     management by specifically mandating that the Land Use
                     Element identify flood-prone areas mapped by either the
Land Use Element - 2

                                                                  Vernon General Plan
                                                                     Land Use Element
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the State
Department of Water Resources. Flood Insurance Rate Maps,
which are prepared by FEMA, identify potential flood zones.
Please refer to the Safety Element, which addresses this issue in
detail.
2.0     LAND USE PLAN
The Land Use Plan consists of the Land Use Policy Map and
text that describes the types and intensities of permitted uses.
The Land Use Plan, along with the Zoning Ordinance, provides
guidance and direction for all planning and land use decisions.
2.1     Land Use Terms and Concepts
In discussing how properties may be developed, this Element
uses the following planning terms and concepts.
Land Use Designations
“Designation” means a generalized category of land use type,
with associated standards of use and development.
Intensity
Intensity is used to describe the level of development existing
or permitted on a lot or parcel of land. Intensity applies to
industrial and commercial land uses. Intensity means the total
building square footage, percent of lot coverage, or floor-area
ratio established on a property.
The measure of intensity Vernon has adopted is the floor-area
ratio. Floor-area ratio, or FAR, describes the relationship
between the total square footage of development on a lot and
the area of that lot. In general, the FAR can be determined by
dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the
land area of the lot. A precise definition is contained in the
Zoning Ordinance.
FAR and factors such as building square footage, building
height, and the percent of the lot devoted to parking, open
storage, and similar uses are all interrelated. For example, a
20,000 square-foot building on a 40,000 square-foot lot has a
FAR of 0.50:1. This 0.50:1 FAR can accommodate a single-story      Figure LU-1: Floor Area Ratio
building that covers half the lot or a two-story building with
reduced lot coverage. Figure LU-1 illustrates different FAR
calculations.
                                                                      Land Use Element - 3

          Vernon General Plan
          Land Use Element
                               Density
                               For residential uses, the term density describes the level of
                               development permitted. New residential uses, in addition to
                               existing homes, are permitted only at a few limited locations in
                               the City. Land use policy limits housing at these locations by
                               establishing a maximum allowable density. Density is
                               described in terms of the number of dwelling units allowed per
                               net acre (du/acre). Net acre is defined as the gross project or
                               lot area, less that portion of the site to be used or dedicated for
                               use as a public road and for flood control purposes.
                               Substantive Improvements
                               Several land use policies call for the City to take action, or for
                               new requirements to take effect, when land uses change or
                               when substantive improvements are made to a property. In
                               general, if a building with a nonconforming use is vacant for
                               more than two years, there is a voluntary major alteration or
                               repair (defined as an alteration or repair costing more than 50%
                               of the building’s fair market value), or an increase in square
                               footage, such change will require conformity with the
                               permitted uses and development standards of the Zoning
                               Ordinance. The requirements for bringing nonconforming uses
                               into conformity with the Zoning Ordinance are described in
                               detail in the Zoning Ordinance.
A Vernon icon: the Farmer
John meat processing plant
          Land Use Element - 4

                                                                  Vernon General Plan
                                                                    Land Use Element
2.2     Land Use Designations and Land Use Policy
        Map
The Land Use Policy Map, Figure LU-2, identifies the planned
distribution of land use in Vernon. In recognition of Vernon’s
unique status as an exclusively industrial city, the General Plan
contains one land use category (Industrial), and five Overlay
Districts (Commercial, Rendering, Slaughtering, Housing, and
Emergency Shelter).
Industrial (I) – The industrial designation is purposefully
structured to allow for a broad range of uses that support the
City’s desire to maintain its status as a regional manufacturing
and industrial center. The Industrial land use designation
allows manufacturing, industrial uses, refrigerated and cold
storage warehouses, data centers, general warehousing,
industrial gas manufacturing, and any use or activity
undertaken by the City. Refineries, energy generating facilities,
hazardous waste facilities, trash to energy facilities, petroleum
related uses, and other complementary uses may be permitted
with special approval such as a Conditional Use Permit (CUP).
Certain ancillary uses may be permitted in accordance with
Zoning Ordinance requirements. The maximum permitted
FAR is 2:1.
Overlay Districts
All uses allowed in the Industrial category are permitted in the
Overlay Districts. Each Overlay District allows certain
specialized uses not permitted in other areas of the City. The
Zoning Ordinance may impose conditions on the permitted
uses and may identify appropriate development standards.
The Plan provides for five Overlay Districts:
       Commercial
       Rendering
       Slaughtering
       Housing
       Emergency Shelter
Commercial Overlay District – The Commercial Overlay
District, encompassing approximately 535 acres, is established
along Santa Fe Avenue, Pacific Boulevard, Atlantic Boulevard,
and Slauson Avenue, and along portions of Soto Street – as
indicated on the Land Use Policy Map – to accommodate retail,
commercial, service, and restaurant uses that support the needs
                                                                     Land Use Element - 5

Vernon General Plan
Land Use Element
                     of the daily employee population. Such uses may be permitted
                     with a Conditional Use Permit.
                     Rendering Overlay District – A Rendering Overlay District,
                     encompassing 164 acres, exists in the area indicated on the
                     Land Use Policy Map. With a Conditional Use Permit, lots
                     over one acre may be used for rendering.
                     Slaughtering Overlay District – The Slaughtering Overlay
                     District, encompassing 83 acres, is designated in the area
                     indicated on the Land Use Policy Map. With a Conditional Use
                     Permit, lots over one acre may be used for slaughtering of
                     animals.
                     Housing Overlay District – The Housing Overlay District is
                     applicable only to sites that have been specifically identified by
                     the City and determined to be the best locations for housing,
                     given surrounding uses, proximity to services and amenities,
                     and distance from large-scale industrial operations. Residential
                     uses are permitted in this overlay with discretionary review,
                     such as via a Development Agreement, given the ubiquitous
                     nature of industrial businesses in Vernon. No more than 61
                     units shall be permitted within the Housing Overlay District
                     citywide.
                     Emergency Shelter Overlay District – The Emergency Shelter
                     Overlay District is applicable only to sites that have been
                     specifically identified by the City and determined to be
                     appropriate locations for emergency shelters. This Overlay is
                     established to comply with requirements of Government Code
                     Section 65583(a)(4).
                     2.3      Implications of Land Use Policy
                     Vernon is virtually built out, and at any point in time, few, if
                     any, vacant parcels are available for development. New
                     development only occurs as a result of land recycling, with
                     newer, more modern industrial buildings replacing older
                     facilities. Because many of the oldest buildings cover
                     properties from lot line to lot line (with little or no on-site
                     parking or loading spaces), new development frequently
Land Use Element - 6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vernon General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Land Use Element
                                                           E 22Nd
                                                                           St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lugo St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Union Pacific Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E 24th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E 15Th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L   EG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Los Palos St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S Bonnie Beach Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Em
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e   ry S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S Herbert Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Eastern Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S Sunol Dr
                                                                                                                                                           E 25th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Triggs St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E 26th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             McBird Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             th S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Noakes St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Soto St
                                                                                Alameda St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E 27th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Holabird Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dunham St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E 28th ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S Santa Fe Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sierra Pine Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Violet Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AS
                                                Martin Luther
                                                                                                          Ross St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        na S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HI N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GT                                                                                              UNION PAC IFIC
                                                King Jr Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L IN                                                                               In dia                                                        ON                                                                                                                           RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G TO                                                                                        Sh e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B LV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NN                                                                                           aS                                               D
                                                          E 40th Pl                                                                                             E 37th St                                                                                                                                                                            E 37TH ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ORT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BANDINI BLVD                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AN T
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Irvin g St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A FE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BURLINGTON NORTHERN SANTA FE RR
                                                          E 41st St                                                                                              E 38th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      As tor Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Seville Av
LONG BEACH AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S SANTA FE AVE
                                                                                                                                  Ross St
                                                          E 41st Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Le onis St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  St                           E2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ut
                                                          E 42nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6T h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   St                  Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E VERNON AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S In                                            St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         so m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E Vernon Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   na                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ran
                                                          E 43rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Charter St                                                                                                                                                 BAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Nob
                                                                                                                                                      E VERNON AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    el S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DOWNEY RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sh e                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E 44th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I BL                                                                                                                                                                                                          il   aS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VD                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SOTO ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E 45th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Furlong Pl
                                                                                                                                      Hawthorne Av
                                                                                                                                                                            Saint Charles St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Alcoa Av
                                                                                                                                                      E 45th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VD
                                                               E 45th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SA
                                            Staunton Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Packers Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                                                        E 46th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E 46th St                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ex ch an ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Av                                        NG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N   TI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EL
                                                               E 46th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Chambers St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LO                                             RIV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Seville Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ER                                                                                                                                                                                      v                                                                                S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PACIFIC BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GE
                                                                                             ALAMEDA ST
                                                                                                                                                                E 48th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Aye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LE                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LEONIS BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOYLE AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UN
                                                                                                            UNION PAC IFIC RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DISTRICT                                                                            CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BLVD                                                 IO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                26 T
                                                               E 48th Pl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E 49th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Aye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r   sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mayw oo d
                                                                                                                                                                  E 49th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E 50th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ev ere tt Av
                                                               E 50th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ta Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hampton St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E 49Th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lo ma Vis
                                                                                                                                                                 E 51st St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fruitland Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FRUITLAND AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E 50th St
                                                                            E 51st St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fruitlan d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                UNION PACIFIC RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E 52nd St
                 E 52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            52 nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d be
                                                                                                                                                                  E 52nd St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rgh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ln
                     E 53rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S Soto St                                                                                                               Alcoa Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               52 nd St
                 E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             53 rd St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E 54th St                                                                                                                                                                                    54 th St
                METRO BLUE LINE/SPT CO RR
                                                                                                                                                                        E 55th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Di
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Maywood Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ict
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Av                                                                                                                                                  54 th St                                                                                                                     B lv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E 56th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          55 th St                                                                                                                                                                        52                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lo ma Vista
                                                               Holmes Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   56 th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N   dP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Coro na Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l
                                                                                                                                                                        E 57th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fishburn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bickett St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   56 th St                                         th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E 58th St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        57 th St                                                                                                                                                                        St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             58 th St
                                                                                                                                                           E Slauson Av                                                                                                                                                                                           E SLAUSON AV                                                                                                                                                                                       E Slauson Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            57 th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S ATLANTI
                                                                                                                   eda St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S Boyle Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  58 th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Seville Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Miles Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SLAUSON
                                                                                                                                                            Regent St
                                                                           E 58th Pl                                                                                         Laura Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AV                                                                                                                                                                                                   52
                                                                                                                        S Ala m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   58 th St                                          Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                Albany St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Belgrave Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Belgrave Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        May flo we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60 th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E Slau so
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Malburg Wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         59 th Pl
                                                                                                                                                     UNION PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Alcoa Av                                                                                                                                            Carmelita
                                                                                                                                                                CIFIC RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60 th Pl
                   E 60th St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R AN D O L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PH S T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Av                                                           Giffo rd Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S Santa Fe Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                61st St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   59 th Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pacific Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pi ne Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Malabar St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lo ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Arbutus Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ki ng Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        61 st Pl                                                                                                                                    61 st St                                                                                                                                                                                             Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Be ac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Woo dla wn
                                                           Last Update: MIG|Hogle Ireland, October 1, 2014.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Clarendon Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UNION PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Walker Av
                                                           Source: City of Vernon and Los Angeles County, 2011.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     F rwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CIFIC RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          61 st St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RANDOL
                                                                                                                                                            Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PH ST
                                                           0                 500                    1,000                         1,500                  2,000
Land Use Designation                                                                                                                        Overlay Districts                                                                                                                                                            Base Map
              Industrial                                                                                                                                                                       Housing                                                                                                                                                                 Vernon City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                               Emergency Shelter                                                                                                                                                       Vernon Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                               Commercial                                                                                                                                                              Freeway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure LU-2
                                                                                                                                                                                               Rendering                                                                                                                                                               Railroad
                                                                                                                                                                                               Slaughtering                                                                                                                                                            Los Angeles River                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LAND USE POLICY MAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Land Use Element - 7
Vernon General Plan
Land Use Element
                     This page left intentionally blank
Land Use Element - 8
                                                                               Vernon General Plan
                                                                                 Land Use Element
results in reduced lot coverage and thus reduced building
space, as the new use is required to provide parking and
loading per current zoning regulations. Thus, implementation
of land use policy over time is not anticipated to notably
increase the overall intensity of development in Vernon.
Rather, uses will shift among the various permitted industrial,
manufacturing, and limited commercial and retail uses. Also,
up to 61 additional residential units are anticipated to be
constructed within the Housing Overlay District.
Total building square footage and the number of employees in
Vernon has steadily declined since the early 1990s. The Land
Use Element anticipates a continuing decline in building
square footage and employees during the period of this
General Plan. Table LU-1 identifies the building square footage
and employment for the baseline year (2007) and the decline in
square footage and employment. This anticipated decline is
taken into account in developing land use policy set forth in
the Land Use Policy Map and the goals and policies contained
in this Element.
Table LU-1
Non-Residential Building Square Footage and Employment
Projections
                     Net           Baseline Year             Build-out Year         Net
Land Use           Acreage              (2007)                   (2025)          Increase/    Percent
Designation          (A)           Development               Development         Decrease     Change
                                                            Building Square Footage
                                            62,636,000              61,412,300    -1,223,700     -2.0%
Industrial            2,775
                                                                Employment (B)
                                                 44,600                 43,700          -900     -2.0%
Note:   (A) Net Acreage does not include streets or the Los Angeles River.
        (B) Number of employees
The City of Vernon has, in the past, discouraged new housing
development due to potential conflicts with industry. The City
has revised this policy to permit very limited new residential
development in specifically designated areas, with the goal of
increasing the voting population and enhancing government
accountability. Land use policy will permit up to 61 new
housing units via the Housing Overlay District. The population
increase associated with this land use policy is estimated to be
216 additional Vernon residents, assuming the average Vernon
household size reported in the 2010 Census. This land use
                                                                                  Land Use Element - 9
Vernon General Plan
Land Use Element
                      policy would triple the baseline 2010 resident population from
                      112 persons to an estimated 328 persons.
                      2.4     Relationship of Land Use Policy to the Zoning
                              Ordinance
                      The Zoning Ordinance is the primary implementation tool for
                      the Land Use Element. Both the Element and the Ordinance
                      describe the distribution and intensity limits for development.
                      Whereas the Land Use Element sets forth the broad policies for
                      future development, the Zoning Ordinance provides specific
                      detail, enforcement mechanisms, development standards, and
                      provides for deviations through Conditional Use Permits,
                      Variances, and amendments to the Zoning Ordinance.
                      The Zoning Ordinance includes the following zoning districts
                      to implement land use policy:
                                                 Table LU-2
                       Relationship of Land Use Categories and Zoning Districts
                           Land Use Designation       Corresponding Zoning District
                        Industrial                     General Industrial (I)
                        Commercial Overlay             Commercial - 1 (C-1)
                                                       Commercial - 2 (C-2)
                        Slaughtering Overly            Slaughtering Overlay (S)
                        Rendering Overlay              Rendering Overlay (R)
                        Housing Overlay                Housing Overlay (H)
                        Emergency Shelter Overlay      Emergency Shelter Overlay (ES)
                                                       Trucking and Freight Terminal
                                                       Overlay (TF)
                      3.0     GOALS AND POLICIES
                      Land use goals and policies related to land use and its
                      distribution and intensity reflect the industrial nature of
                      Vernon. Vernon incorporated in 1905 for the stated purpose of
                      being an exclusively industrial city. This founding purpose has
                      remained largely unchanged over the last century, with the
                      focus of City land use policy on providing suitable sites for
                      industry and providing the infrastructure and services
                      required to serve industrial activities.
Land Use Element - 10
                                                                  Vernon General Plan
                                                                    Land Use Element
GOAL LU-1
Promote and maintain manufacturing and other industrial
uses as the primary land use within the City.
           POLICY LU-1.1: Designate all properties in Vernon
           for manufacturing and industrial use, and permit
           other uses only with a Conditional Use Permit or
           other discretionary review process. Permit certain
           uses only in specified Overlay Districts with a
           Conditional Use Permit or other discretionary
           review process.
           POLICY LU-1.2: Accommodate, at limited and
           specific areas of the City, those commercial, service,
           and retail uses that complement but do not detract
           from the purposely established industrial character
           of the City. Limit such uses to the Commercial
           Overlay District, and permit only with a
           Conditional Use Permit or other discretionary
           review process.
           POLICY LU-1.3: Permit limited ancillary uses on
           industrial sites, such as limited office use and
           showrooms, as necessary to support basic industrial
           activities.
           POLICY LU-1.4: Permit only housing and
           emergency shelters as may be required by State law
           and as necessary to foster the City’s good
           governance practices. Ensure adequate review of
           housing development proposals to minimize
           potential industrial/housing conflicts.
           POLICY LU-1.5: Permit truck and freight terminals
           on a limited basis to minimize the impacts
           associated with heavy trucking activity. Designate
           such permitted areas using an overlay zoning
           district or similar mechanism.
           POLICY LU-1.5: Continue to maintain up-to-date
           information regarding flooding hazards consistent
           with the Safety Element.
GOAL LU-2
Phase out aging industrial building and sites through
modernization and replacement.
                                                                    Land Use Element - 11

Vernon General Plan
Land Use Element
                                POLICY LU-2.1: Require private upgrading of off-
                                street parking and loading facilities to comply with
                                the City Zoning Ordinance at the time that any
                                nonconforming building or use is required to be
                                brought into conformity with the Zoning
                                Ordinance.
                                POLICY LU-2.2: Support cooperative solutions to
                                provide required off-street parking, such as
                                agreements among neighboring businesses and
                                public/private ventures.
                                POLICY LU-2.3: Continue to enforce all applicable
                                building and health and safety codes.
                                POLICY LU-2.4: Provide incentives to property
                                owners to revitalize industrial structures or
                                recycle/demolish obsolete or vacant structures.
                                POLICY LU-2.5: Assist in the reuse of properties
                                from one industrial use to another.
                                POLICY LU-2.6: Accommodate the expansion of
                                Soto Street north of 37th Street/Bandini Boulevard
                                pursuant to Circulation and Infrastructure Element
                                policy by requiring properties with frontage along
                                this corridor to dedicate land to the public right-of-
                                way sufficient to accommodate the roadway
                                widening in the event that such properties
                                redevelop or undergo substantial improvements.
                                POLICY LU-2.7: Consider and facilitate proposals
                                for more intensive employment-generating, non-
                                residential development near transit stops.
                      GOAL LU-3
                      Maintain Vernon as a highly desirable location for industry,
                      and continue to attract the types of industry the City is well
                      positioned to serve.
                                POLICY LU-3.1: Review City codes and
                                development requirements on a regular basis to
                                ensure that development costs and standards are
                                competitive with other industrial cities.
Land Use Element - 12
                                                        Vernon General Plan
                                                          Land Use Element
POLICY LU-3.2: Foster a City government and
governmental structure that is responsive to the
needs of industry located in a metropolitan area.
POLICY LU-3.3: Maintain power plants as key land
use in the community, and allow for the expansion
and/or development of new facilities to provide a
reliable, cost-effective source of energy to industrial
users.
POLICY LU-3.4: Invest in activities and programs
that advertise and promote Vernon as a quality and
desirable location for industry.
POLICY LU-3.5: Use development proposals as
opportunities to encourage modernization and
broaden property improvements goals.
                                                          Land Use Element - 13
Vernon General Plan
Land Use Element
                      This page intentionally left blank.
Land Use Element - 14
VERNON GENERAL PLAN
NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                 Vernon General Plan
                                                                      Noise Element
NOISE ELEMENT
1.0     PURPOSE AND FOCUS
1.1     Purpose
The purpose of the Noise Element is to identify significant
sources of noise in Vernon and to identify ways to protect
people living and working in Vernon from extensive exposure
to excessive or unhealthy noise levels. Per the California
Administrative Code, all general plans must include a Noise
Element. The Noise Element sets the framework for working
toward and maintaining environmental noise control
appropriate to individual communities. The Element
establishes goals, policies, and programs that identify possible
approaches to protecting the business community and the few
people living in Vernon from excessive noise.
1.2     Focus
In recognition of the adverse health effects associated with
excessive noise, the California Government Code, Section
65302(f), identifies the types of community noise to be
addressed in the General Plan.        The Noise Element is to
identify noise sources from:
       Freeways and street systems;
       Freight on-line railroad operations;
                                                                      Noise Element - 1

Vernon General Plan
Noise Element
                           Local industrial plants, including, but not limited to,
                            railroad classification yards; and
                           Other stationary ground noise sources identified by
                            local agencies as contributing to the community noise
                            environment.
                    Vernon is unique in that its status as an all-industrial
                    community establishes different sensitivities regarding noise
                    than those present in typical suburban or even mixed-use
                    urban areas. Local businesses are not significantly impacted by
                    higher noise levels that would not be appropriate in a
                    residential neighborhood or near schools, parks, or hospitals.
                    2.0     ABOUT NOISE
                    Noise is often defined as unwanted, excessive, or irksome
                    sound. Sound – and noise – consists of waves of energy that
                    we receive and interpret. To describe the character of a
                    particular noise, acousticians must have information about:
                           The amplitude and amplitude variation of the
                            acoustical wave,
                           The frequency (pitch) content of the noise, and
                           The duration of the noise.
                    2.1     Noise Metrics
                    Definitions of the most commonly used terms encountered in
                    community noise assessments and noise control are provided
                    in the General Plan Glossary. Of these terms, the A-weighted
                    sound pressure level, or dB(A), is the scale of measurement
                    that is most useful in community noise measurement. This
                    sound level is measured in decibels to provide a scale with the
                    range and characteristics most consistent with that of peoples'
                    sensitivity to sounds, as described below.
                    Since decibels are logarithmic units, sound pressure levels
                    cannot be added or subtracted by ordinary arithmetic means.
                    For example, if one automobile produces a sound pressure
                    level of 70 dB when it passes an observer, two cars passing
                    simultaneously would not produce 140 dB. In fact, they would
                    combine to produce 73 dB. This same principle can be applied
                    to other traffic quantities as well. In other words, doubling the
                    traffic volume on a street or the speed of the traffic will
                    increase the traffic noise level by 3 dB. Conversely, halving the
Noise Element - 2

                                                                 Vernon General Plan
                                                                      Noise Element
traffic volume or speed will reduce the traffic noise level by 3
dB.
Sound pressure level alone is not a reliable indicator of
loudness. The frequency or pitch of a sound also has a
substantial effect on how humans will respond. While the
intensity of the sound is a purely physical quantity, the
loudness or human response depends on the characteristics of
the human ear.
Human hearing is limited not only to the range of audible
frequencies, but also in the way it perceives the sound
pressure level in that range. In general, the healthy human ear
is most sensitive to sounds between 1,000 hertz (Hz) and 5,000
Hz, and perceives both higher and lower frequency sounds of
the same magnitude with less intensity. To approximate the
frequency response of the human ear, a series of sound
pressure level adjustments is usually applied to the sound
measured by a sound level meter. The adjustments, or
weighting network, are frequency dependent.
The A-scale approximates the frequency response of the
average young ear when listening to most ordinary everyday
sounds. When people make relative judgments of the loudness
or annoyance of a sound, their judgments correlate well with
the A-scale sound levels of those sounds. A range of noise
levels associated with common indoor and outdoor activities
is shown in Figure N-1.
                                                                      Noise Element - 3
Vernon General Plan
Noise Element
                                              Figure N-1: Examples of Noise Levels
                    The A-weighted sound level of traffic and other long-term
                    noise-producing activities within and around a community
                    varies considerably with time. Measurements of this varying
                    noise level are accomplished by recording values of the A-
                    weighted level during representative periods within a
                    specified portion of the day.
                    It is recognized that a given level of noise may be more or less
                    tolerable depending on the duration of exposure experienced
                    by an individual. There are numerous measures of noise
Noise Element - 4
                                                                 Vernon General Plan
                                                                        Noise Element
exposure that consider not only the A-
                                            Figure N-2: Examples of Noise at
level variation of noise but also the       Southern California Locations
duration of the disturbance. The State
Department of Aeronautics and the
California Commission on Housing
and Community Development have
adopted       the   community       noise
equivalent level (CNEL). This measure
weights the average noise levels for the
evening hours (7:00 P.M. to 10:00 P.M.),
increasing them by 5 dB, and weights
the late evening and morning hour
noise levels (10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.) by
10 dB. The daytime noise levels are
combined with these weighted levels
and are averaged to obtain a CNEL
value. Figure N-2 indicates the outdoor
CNEL at typical locations throughout
the Southern California area.
2.2     Noise and Health Effects
Sound levels which exceed 85 dB(A),
when experienced for long durations
during each working day, may result
in    severe     temporary     or   even
permanent hearing loss. State and
federal safety and health regulations
currently protect workers at levels of
exposure that exceed 90 dB(A) for each eight-hour workday.
Speech intelligibility is impaired when sound levels exceed 60
dB(A). The level of interference increases with sound level and
the distance between speaker and listener. Sound levels that
exceed 40 to 45 dB(A) are generally considered to be excessive
for sleeping areas within a residence.
2.3     Community Noise Standards
Vernon has established community noise standards to help
guide land use decisions and protect sensitive uses from
excessive noise levels, as shown in Figure N-3. Because the
City consists almost exclusively of industrial uses and policy
set forth in the Housing Element limits the construction of any
new housing to only a few specifically identified sites in
recognition of the hazards – including high noise levels –
associated with widespread industrial activity, these
                                                                        Noise Element - 5

Vernon General Plan
Noise Element
                    standards discourage any new noise-sensitive use that would
                    be incompatible with the City’s industrial focus. Similarly,
                    zoning regulations prohibit community facilities such as
                    schools, day care centers, and hospitals.
                                        Figure N-3: Community Noise Standards
Noise Element - 6

                                                               Vernon General Plan
                                                                    Noise Element
3.0     NOISE ENVIRONMENT IN 2007
In 2007, the City conducted a comprehensive noise survey of
the community to document the noise environment.
Measurements were taken at eleven locations, including two
border     locations   in   adjacent    communities.     Three
measurements consisted of 24-hour recordings of the sound
environment, and the balance were limited duration
measurements at representative locations throughout Vernon
and, as noted above, on the border of neighboring
communities. In conjunction with an update to the Land Use
and Housing Elements in 2013, focused noise measurements
were taken near locations considered for permanent and
emergency housing.
The most significant noise-producing activity within Vernon
involves the transportation systems: the arterial roadways and
train movements along regional rail lines. In addition, many
major manufacturing businesses create high noise levels.
The only noise-sensitive land uses within the City are
scattered residential units and the Vernon City
Elementary School. Residences largely are clustered in
four areas: on Vernon Avenue at Furlong Place, on
Vernon Avenue between Downey Road and Alcoa
Avenue, on Fruitland Avenue west of Downey Road,
and on 52nd Place east of Atlantic Boulevard. The
Emergency Shelter Overlay, which applies to a parcel
in the northwest corner of the City, could
accommodate emergency housing.            Vernon City
Elementary School is located at the southwest corner of
Vernon Avenue and Santa Fe Avenue.
The adjacent communities of Huntington Park and
Maywood have residential neighborhoods and schools
along and near their boundaries with Vernon. Vernon
has long practiced good neighbor policies with respect
to these uses, cooperating with adjacent cities to
minimize noise impacts on sensitive uses.
                                                                    Noise Element - 7
Vernon General Plan
Noise Element
                    3.1     2007 CNEL Contours
                    The noise measurements were modeled to create a
                    community-wide “picture” of noise conditions. The CNEL
                    contours for major arterial roadways and the I-710 freeway
                    within the City were developed utilizing the Federal Highway
                    Administration’s Traffic Noise Model and traffic data obtained
                    from Caltrans and citywide traffic count data (2004-2007). The
                    railroad contours were developed based on Wyle
                    Laboratories’ computational procedures and on a computer
                    model developed by the Federal Transit Administration.
                    Operational data for the railroads was obtained from Amtrak
                    and Metrolink schedules, the Southern California Regional
                    Rail Authority, the Alameda Corridor Transit Authority, the
                    Union Pacific Company, and the Federal Railroad
                    Administration Office of Safety Analysis.
                    These noise measurements and modeling results collectively
                    can be represented by noise contour lines. Similar to the way
                    topographic maps show contours indicated elevation change,
                    the noise contour maps indicate decreasing noise levels as you
                    move away from the noise source. Figure N-4 illustrates the
                    noise contours for year 2007.
                    3.2     Transportation Noise Sources
                    Noise along Arterial Roadways
                    Figure N-4 shows that noise levels associated with truck and
                    automobile traffic along Vernon’s arterial roadways are 70
                    CNEL along the roadway frontages. With regard to the
                    gradual diminishment of noise as the receiver moves away
                    from the street, the modeling does not take into account the
                    mitigating effect of buildings that front the street.
Noise Element - 8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vernon General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Noise Element
                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                              60                                  70                                                80                                 70
                                                 65                                       65                                      65
                          70                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80
                                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       75
                                                                                70                                                                                                        60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      75
                     70
                                                                                                60                                                 70                                                                        60
                                                                                               65                                                                                                                                                65
                                                                60                                                                                                     65                                                                                        70                                       70
                                                                                                                   70                       70
                                                                                70                                                                                                              70
                                          65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   60                                                                                                     65
                                                                                                                                   60             65
                                                                                                60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70
                          60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  65                                                                            75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       70
                                                                                                                                             65                       65                                                                                                                                                       75
                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              65
                                                                                                    65                                                                                                   70
                                                                          65
                                70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 65                                                                                          70
                                                                                                                                                                 60                                                                              60
                                                                                                              65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             75
                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60                                            65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             60
                               60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                                70                                                                                              60                                                           65                                                 60
                                                                                                    65                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                                                                         70                                                                                                                                                                   75
                                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                            60
                                                  60                                                                         65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                                                                                                     65                                                                                                     65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60                                            70
                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               65
                                                                                     70                                                           65                                                                                        60
                                                                 60                                                                60                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                        65                                                                                                                                                                                                                         65
                           65                                                                                                                                                                             70                                                                                                                                                                                                                80         70
                                                                                                     65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60                                                                     80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              65                            70                             65
                                                                                                                                             70                                                                                                                                                      65
                                                                                                              70                                                      65                                                                                                                                             65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60                                  75
                                    60                                               65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   65
                                                                                                                                                            70                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        65                            70
                                65                                                   70
                                                                                                                                                                                                              65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70
                                                                     65                                                                                65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           65                                                                                                                    65
                                     60                                              65
                                                                                                                                                                                               60                                                                           70
                                                                                70                                                                                                                                            70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                65
     Last Update: Hogle Ireland, July 30, 2007.
     Source: City of Vernon and Los Angeles County, 2006.
                                                         Feet
     0        500      1,000             1,500        2,000
LEGEND                                                   EXISTING (2007) NOISE CONTOURS
         City Boundary                                                80 CNEL                                                65 CNEL
         Freeway                                                      75 CNEL                                                60 CNEL
         Railroad                                                     70 CNEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure N-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2007 Noise Contours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Noise Element - 9
Vernon General Plan
Noise Element
                    This page intentionally left blank.
Noise Element - 10
                                                                 Vernon General Plan
                                                                       Noise Element
Freeway Noise
The CNEL generated in Vernon by traffic on the I-710 freeway
is as high as 80 dB. However, the land uses affected by the
traffic noise are largely industrial in nature and are not noise
sensitive.
Train Noise
The City is impacted by noise from train movements on six
primary rail lines, numerous spur lines, and activities at the
Burlington, Northern & Santa Fe (BNSF) rail yard, as well as at
the Union Pacific (UPRR) rail yard in the City of Commerce.
The CNEL associated with train movements in and through
Vernon is as high as 80 dB. However, the land uses affected by
the traffic noise are largely industrial in nature and are not
noise sensitive. The primary source of annoyance to residents
in the vicinity of the UPRR line adjacent to Downey Road is
train horn soundings at crossings.
3.3      Industrial Noise Sources
In general, industrial noise within the City is not considered
excessive because Vernon is a predominantly industrial city
with few noise-sensitive properties. However, at the few
scattered residences within the City, as well as at the Vernon
City Elementary School, noise levels can exceed generally
acceptable standards for these noise-sensitive uses. The impact
is primarily related to noise generated by loading dock
operations, trucks entering and leaving the area, and
mechanical equipment located both inside and outside
building.
Adjacent to the City of Vernon are residential neighborhoods
in the cities of Huntington Park and Maywood. Noise
measurements taken in 2006 indicated that while average
noise levels ranged up to 66.7 dB(A) and noise spikes
registered 87.6 dB(A) during daytime hours, the measured
CNELs of 61.5 dB in Huntington Park and 64 dB in Maywood
were less than the exterior CNEL standard of 70 dB for
residential properties in Vernon.
                                                                      Noise Element - 11
Vernon General Plan
Noise Element
                    4.0     FUTURE NOISE ENVIRONMENT
                    Figure N-5 indicates projected noise contours for year 2030,
                    assuming growth in regional traffic volumes through Vernon
                    and anticipated activity along rail lines, the Alameda Corridor,
                    and the regional rail lines.
                    Land use policy provides for continued industrial use
                    throughout the community, with provision for commercial
                    uses within the Commercial Overlay to meet the needs of the
                    daytime employee population and allow for a broader mix of
                    uses on aging industrial sites. As indicated above, land use
                    policy limits the introduction of any new noise-sensitive uses
                    to specifically identified sites along the edges of the City.
                    Thus, the City does not anticipate any new noise conflicts will
                    arise in Vernon over the life of this General Plan.
                    With regard to existing conditions where established
                    residences and Vernon City Elementary School sometimes
                    experience high noise levels, the City works with surrounding
                    businesses to achieve noise standards established in the
                    Zoning Ordinance.
                    5.0     GOALS AND POLICIES
                    As an industrial city, the aim of the Noise Element is to
                    address compatibility among neighboring businesses and
                    industries, and to work with adjacent communities to resolve
                    any conflicts that may be associated with individual
                    businesses along Vernon’s municipal boundary.
                    GOAL N-1
                    Reduce impacts from transportation noise sources to the
                    extent they may affect industrial businesses.
                            POLICY N-1.1: Encourage the effective enforcement of
                            local, state, and federal noise levels by all appropriate
                            City divisions.
                            POLICY N-1.2: Review noise impacts when rail
                            corridors are consolidated, and review ways to reduce
                            impacts on adjacent businesses.
                            POLICY N-1.3: Minimize adverse noise effects on new
                            residential developments through carefully planned
                            site design and construction approaches that limit
                            noise intrusion, wherever practical.
Noise Element - 12

                                                                                                       Vernon General Plan
                                                                                                             Noise Element
     Last Update: Hogle Ireland, July 30, 2007.
     Source: City of Vernon and Los Angeles County, 2006.
                                                 Feet
     0        500       1,000      1,500      2,000
LEGEND                                            FUTURE (2030) NOISE CONTOURS
        City Boundary                                     80 CNEL              65 CNEL
        Freeway                                           75 CNEL              60 CNEL
        Railroad                                          70 CNEL
                                                                                                               Figure N-5
                                                                                       Projected 2030 Noise Contours
                                                                                                            Noise Element - 13
Vernon General Plan
Noise Element
                    This page intentionally left blank.
Noise Element - 14
                                                               Vernon General Plan
                                                                     Noise Element
GOAL N-2
Incorporate noise and vibration considerations into land use
planning decisions.
       POLICY N-2.1: Consider the noise levels likely to be
       produced by any new businesses or substantially
       expanded business activities locating near existing
       noise-sensitive uses such as schools, community
       facilities, and residences, as well as adjacent to
       established businesses involving vibration-sensitive
       activities.
       POLICY N-2.2: Encourage acoustical design in all new
       construction.
       POLICY N-2.3: Prohibit the establishment of new
       noise-sensitive land uses in Vernon, including but not
       limited to schools, day-care facilities, and community
       facilities. Permit new residential uses only within the
       Housing Overlay District, and require new
       developments to incorporate appropriate noise
       attenuation to achieve City noise standards.
GOAL N-3
Develop measures to control non-transportation noise and
similar impacts.
       POLICY N-3.1: Continue to enforce the noise and
       vibration performance standards in the City Code to
       mitigate conflicts among neighboring uses.
       POLICY N-3.2: Establish and maintain coordination
       among City agencies involved in noise abatement.
       POLICY N-3.3: City departments will comply with all
       state and federal OSHA noise standards, and all new
       City equipment purchases shall comply with state and
       federal noise standards.
                                                                    Noise Element - 15
Vernon General Plan
Noise Element
                    This page intentionally left blank.
Noise Element - 16
VERNON GENERAL PLAN
RESOURCES ELEMENT
                                                              Vernon General Plan
                                                               Resources Element
RESOURCES ELEMENT
1.0     PURPOSE AND FOCUS
1.1     Purpose
As a fully developed city, Vernon has few remaining natural
resources in the conventional sense of undeveloped land,
native vegetation, and wildlife habitat. The two natural
resources that are present and important are groundwater and
the air. Both have been affected by urban development, but
both sustain development in the City and respresent critical
regional resources. Vernon’s groundwater serves as a portion
of the City’s water supply. Clean air, of course, provides a
healthier environment and may help minimize some aspects
of global warming.
The open spaces that exist in Vernon are limited to privately
owned landscaping around buildings, utility easements, rail
yards, and the Los Angeles River.
Given the industrial nature of Vernon, expanses of open space
are not needed for recreational purposes. However, open
space does provide visual relief from hard urban surfaces.
                                                                Resources Element - 1

Vernon General Plan
Resources Element
                      This Element establishes City policies intended to best manage
                      the limited available natural resources in Vernon and to
                      encourage continued participation in broader efforts to protect
                      the environment from harmful human activities.
                      1.2     Focus
                      This Resources Element combines two elements required by
                      the California Government Code–the Conservation Element
                      and the Open Space Element–and focuses on the protection
                      and preservation of resources within the City. In addition to
                      groundwater and air resources, additional resource issues
                      addressed are local open space, historic/cultural resources,
                      and the national issue of energy use.
                      2.0     IDENTIFYING AND PROTECTING LOCAL
                              RESOURCES
                      2.1     Water Quality and Supply
                      Potable water resources in Vernon are limited to the
                      groundwater basins that underlie the City (and surrounding
                      lands) and recycled water. Local groundwater is contained
                      within the Los Angeles River and Gaspar aquifers, which
                      supply a significant portion of the water used by businesses in
                      Vernon. Because these basins extend beneath surrounding
                      jurisdictions, activities both in Vernon and other cities affect
                      the quantity and quality of groundwater. Potential
                      contamination and depletion of the underground basins have
                      been historic concerns, and conditions are continuously
                      monitored to guard against possible interruption of supply.
                      Water quality standards established by federal and State
                      agencies and requirements for water quality monitoring
                      protect industrial users from contamination and ensure sage
                      drinking water supplies. In particular, National Pollution
                      Discharge Elimination Systems (NPDES) requirements
                      enforced by the State Regional Water Quality Control Board
                      require the control and clean up of surface runoff prior to its
                      discharge into storm drain systems and ultimately, into
                      groundwater basins or surface waters. State agencies continue
                      to press for percolation as a means of reclaiming stormwater
                      runoff, both as a mechanism to replenish aquifers and to allow
                      for continued natural cleaning processes. Given Vernon’s
                      built-out condition and the severe lack of open space, clean-up
                      and recharge via percolation proves difficult.
Resources Element - 2

                                                                    Vernon General Plan
                                                                     Resources Element
As described in the Circulation and Infrastructure Element,
three water agencies supply water within Vernon (see Figure
CI-3). Most of the geographical are of Vernon is supplied by
the City’s Water Department. The California Water Service
Company (Cal Water), East Los Angeles District, Commerce
System serves some of the northeast portion of Vernon, and a
small portion of southeast Vernon is serviced by Maywood
Mutual Water Company Number 3.
Many of the food processing and other industries common in
Vernon are water-intensive uses. Analysis of water resources
for the City of Vernon Water Department, including supply
sources, is contained in the 2010 Urban Water Management Plan
(which is periodically updated). In 2005, water use in
Vernon’s service area was approximately 12,000 acre-feet per
year (AFY).1 By 2010, water use had decreased to
approximately 9,000 AFY. Of that, approximately 84 percent
of the water supply was obtained from groundwater sources.
Less than eight percent was purchased from the Central Basin
Municipal Water District (CBMWD), and slightly more than
eight percent came from recycled water supplies.
As reported in the City’s 2010 Urban Water Management Plan,
water demand in 2025 is projected to increase to
approximately 13,800 AFY (which assumed construction of a
new power plant). As stated in the plan, Vernon’s
infrastructure is designed to meet a high level of demand from
the commercial and industrial sectors; associated water
demand may shift over time depending on current businesses
and industrial practices. By planning for this high level of
demand, sufficient flexibility is provided over the long term to
maintain the City’s business plan.
Water conservation programs are in place, and internal water
recycling by specific businesses helps reduce overall demand.
Because Vernon is built out, new businesses will simply
replace those that exist today, and water consumption over
time normally would not be expected to increase significantly.
By 2035, water supply is anticipated to increase substantially
(by approximately 145 percent) due largely to the increase in
supply from recycled water sources. The number of acre-feet
produced from the City Water Department’s wells is not
1
  An acre-foot of water equals 325,851 gallons, or about the amount
of water a family of four consumes in a year.
                                                                      Resources Element - 3

Vernon General Plan
Resources Element
                      expected to substantially increase, and the amount purchased
                      from CBMWD is expected to approximately double. By 2035,
                      Vernon’s water supply profile is projected to be 37 percent
                      from groundwater, 10 percent from CBMWD, and 53 percent
                      from recycled sources. The majority of any new demand will
                      be served throught the use of recycled water, indicating the
                      City’s commitment to conservation of its water resources,
                      good water management practices, and sustainability of
                      resources.
                      Parts of northeastern Vernon are within California Water
                      Service Company’s (Cal Water’s) District. Since the area is
                      completely urbanized, annual growth is very slow; since 1980
                      the amount of water used in the service area has never
                      increased by more than 0.5 percent from year to year.
                      Only 30 of Maywood Mutual Water Company #3’s 2,000
                      service connections are in the City of Vernon; the rest are in
                      the Cities of Maywood and Bell.             In 2006, Vernon’s
                      connections totaled 34.5 acre-feet of water usage. Early in 2007
                      a new Matheson Tri-Gas plant opened in this area, which had
                      been projected to add 150 annual acre-feet of usage, but has
                      instead shown to only use water commensurate with a 30 acre-
                      feet per year increase in water usage.
                      Maywood Mutual #3 currently derives all of its water supplies
                      from its own groundwater wells. Its three wells are capable of
                      producing approximately 4,500 acre-feet per year, and have
                      historically produced between 1,400 and 1,750 acre-feet per
                      year. Agreements are in place with the Metropolitan Water
                      District that would allow Maywood Mutual #3 to purchase
                      2,500 acre-feet of water per year if necessary, for a total
                      possible supply of 7,000 acre-feet per year. This would be
                      more than four times the current usage within Maywood
                      Mutual #3’s service area. Maywood Mutual #3 reports that
                      groundwater production is adequate for current and any
                      foreseen future demand.
                      2.2     Air Quality
                      The quality of the air in Southern California is determined by
                      many regional factors: prevailing winds, persistent inversion
                      conditions, the commute habits of 10 million-plus people
                      within the air basin, and the presence of major ports and
                      industry. Vernon lies within the South Coast Air Basin, a
                      geographic area that extends from the Pacific Ocean to the San
                      Gabriel Mountains, and from the Ventura County boundary
Resources Element - 4

                                                                   Vernon General Plan
                                                                    Resources Element
east to the San Bernardino and San Jacinto Mountains. The air
basin is a non-attainment area for federal and State air quality
standards for ozone, particulate matter less than 10 microns in
diameter (PM10), particulate matter less than 2.5 microns in
diameter (PM2.5), and lead. The basin is a non-attainment area
for State standards with regard to nitrogen dioxide (NO2). The
South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)
regulates air quality improvement programs within the basin
and works to improve regional air quality to achieve federal
and State standards.
At the local level, emissions from stationary sources (industry,
power plants, etc.) and from vehicles discharge chemicals and
particulate matter into the air, and these emissions are further
transformed in the atmosphere by photochemical action into
ozone and other health-threatening pollutants. As heavy
industry is prevalent in Vernon, most local businesses are
heavily regulated by SCAQMD. Emissions from trucks, cars,
and trains are regulated by State and federal agencies,
meaning the Vernon City Council and City staff have little
ability to affect those factors that most significantly contribute
to regional air quality conditions.
However, the City recognizes its responsibility to participate
in regional efforts to continue to improve air quality. City
programs in this regard include City purchase and use of
alternative fuel vehicles and fuel-efficient vehicles. In 2006,
about 3.5 percent of the vehicles owned by the City used
alternative fuels. As the City replaces its fleet of vehicles,
consideration and priority will be given to the purchase of
more vehicles using hybrid or electric engines or other
emerging technologies that replace fossil fuels.
Because motor vehicles represent a significant source of
pollutant emissions, one key approach to reducing emissions
is to reduce vehicle miles traveled. In 2006, businesses in
Vernon employed 44,225 workers locally. Many employers
have large workforces, offering opportunities for carpooling
and other ride-sharing arrangements. Also, many Metro bus
lines serve the City, and Blue Line light rail has stops that
readily serve Vernon businesses (provided one is willing to
walk or take bus connections from the train stations). The City
is in a position to encourage transit use and ride sharing by
serving as an information hub and clearinghouse for local
businesses. Reducing the volume of cars on local streets can
help reduce regional emissions and allow Vernon to
contribute to regional air quality improvements.
                                                                     Resources Element - 5
Vernon General Plan
Resources Element
                      2.3     Global Warming
                      In 2006, the California Legislature adopted AB 32, the Global
                      Warming Solutions Act of 2006, to address concerns regarding
                      the potential impact of climate change on the State’s economy
                      and the environment. The legislation requires the California
                      Air Resources Board to determine the level of greenhouse
                      gases produced in 1990 and outline strategies to ensure that
                      the level of emissions in 2020 do not exceed the 1990 level. The
                      overall goal is to establish a comprehensive program of
                      regulatory and market mechanisms to achieve real,
                      quantifiable, cost-effective reductions of greenhouse gas
                      emissions. Specifically, AB 32 (as codified in the California
                      Health and Safety Code) requires the California Air Resources
                      Board to:
                             Establish a statewide greenhouse gas emissions cap for
                              2020, based on 1990 emissions
                             Adopt mandatory reporting rules for significant
                              sources of greenhouse gases
                             Adopt a plan indicating how emission reductions will
                              be achieved from significant greenhouse gas sources
                              via regulations, market mechanisms, and other actions
                             Adopt regulations to achieve the maximum
                              technologically feasible and cost-effective reductions in
                              greenhouse gas, including provisions for using both
                              market mechanisms and alternative compliance
                              mechanisms
                      SB 375, passed into law in 2008, has the goal of fostering
                      development patterns—and more compact patterns in
                      particular—that reduce the need to drive, thereby reducing air
                      pollution from car exhaust, conserving water, and protecting
                      habitat, among other benefits. This law is designed to align
                      regional land use, housing, and transportation plans with
                      greenhouse gas reduction targets.
                      In Vernon, emissions are regulated by the Southern California
                      Air Quality District, as well as State and federal agencies. The
                      agencies have imposed regulations to reduce emissions from
                      both stationary and vehicular sources. These actions have led
                      to a substantial improvement in air quality in the Southern
                      California air basin and presumably have had a concurrent
                      effect on greenhouse gas emissions. Further reductions are
Resources Element - 6

                                                                   Vernon General Plan
                                                                    Resources Element
anticipated as new requirements are imposed by current
legislation and regulations.
The City of Vernon is a built out city, and the General Plan
does not provide for any substantive increase in either square
footage in industrial development or substantive increases in
employment (see Table LU-1 in the Land Use Element).
Future residential development is limited pursuant to the
Land Use Element. This limited residential development will
provide a new housing opportunity for local workers to live
near places of employment in Vernon, furthering SB 375 goals.
Given the limited changes anticipated as part of this General
Plan, the issue of increased emissions resulting from growth is
not a significant concern.
2.4     Energy Supplies
Industrial businesses in Vernon require reliable energy
supplies for industrial processes and refrigeration. In 1932,
the citizens of Vernon supported a bond measure that
authorized the City to construct a power plant. This enabled
the City to build its own electric power generating plant—to
meet the needs of this “exclusively industrial city”. Since then,
the City has been able to provide reliable and comparatively
low-cost electric power to its customers. In 2005, the City
completed construction of the Malburg Generating Station, a
new natural-gas-powered power plant that provides electricity
to many businesses in Vernon.
The City recognizes that energy conservation benefits
consumers in the form of lower energy costs. Conservation
also reduces the need for construction of costly new energy
production facilities. Finally, conservation helps efforts to
improve regional air quality by reducing pollutant emissions
from older power generation plants in Southern California.
Vernon. The City is committed to working with local
businesses to help them be energy efficient and help keep rates
low.
2.5     Open Space
The major open space resources in Vernon consist of the Los
Angeles River Channel and utility easements. No riparian
habitat exists, as the Los Angeles River channel is concrete
lined along this portion of the river. Given the City’s industrial
character, Vernon does not contain and does not have a need
for public parks. Private open spaces on industrial properties
                                                                     Resources Element - 7

Vernon General Plan
Resources Element
                      are limited as well, as most buildings are built to the sidewalk
                      line, leaving limited area for on-site landscaping. Over time,
                      requirements for site-specific runoff control may result in
                      property owners devoting portions of setback or parking areas
                      to green space.
                      Additional green space may also be added through the middle
                      of Vernon if plans progress for the “re-greening” of the Los
                      Angeles River. The Los Angeles River Master Plan, adopted
                      by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors in 1996, calls
                      for a greenway along the bank, a trail and murals along the
                      west levee, an interpretive exhibit near the Bandini Avenue
                      crossing, and a passive park area near Atlantic Avenue. As of
                      2007, no funding source or preliminary plan for creation of
                      additional open space within the City of Vernon currently
                      exists.
                      2.6     Cultural Resources
                      In 1847, the Mexican militia fought U.S. troops under the
                      command of U.S. Army General Stephen Watts Kearny and
                      U.S. Navy Captain Robert F. Stockton along the San Gabriel
                      River. The battle of La Mesa, in present-day Vernon, occurred
                      on January 9, 1847 and ended with the Mexicans overwhelmed
                      by a strong American advance. On January 10, Mexican
                      leaders surrendered peacefully to the Americans, who
                      promptly occupied the city of Los Angeles.
                      Between 1847 and the early years of the twentieth century, the
                      lands that now comprise Vernon were dedicated largely to
                      agriculture, with John B. Leonis representing one of the key
                      ranchers/landholders in the area. Vernon incorporated in
                      1905 as an “exclusively industrial” city and was named after a
                      dirt road, Vernon Avenue, crossing its center. In the following
                      years, many diverse industries established major facilities in
                      the City, taking advantage of the rail access and, with the
                      construction in 1932 of a City-owned power plant, low-cost
                      electricity.
                      The industrial buildings that house these diverse industries
                      well serve their industrial functions, but also display
                      architecture representative of distinct periods and styles. The
                      busy building period of the 1920s and ‘30s produced several
                      Streamline Moderne structures, and wonderful brick buildings
                      can be found throughout the City. A notable landmark is the
                      Farmer John mural surrounding the company’s meat
                      processing facility on Vernon Avenue.
Resources Element - 8

                                                                  Vernon General Plan
                                                                   Resources Element
Vernon will assist in the effort to preserve the memory of early
Los Angeles, and tell the story of its growth and development,
through taking and retaining photographs of buildings and
structures that may have architectural or historic interest.
3.0    GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL R-1
Conserve and protect the region's water and energy
resources.
            POLICY R-1.1: Encourage water conservation and
            the use of recycled water in new developments and
            by all industries.
            POLICY R-1.2: Support the use of energy-saving
            designs and equipment in all new development
            and reconstruction projects.
            POLICY R-1.3:         Seek and pursue the most
            practicable     and     cost-effective   means     of
            implementing National Pollutant Discharge
            Elimination Systems requirements.
GOAL R-2
Contribute to the continued gradual improvement of air
quality in the South Coast Air Basin.
            POLICY R-2.1: Coordinate and cooperate with the
            South Coast Air Quality Management District and
            Southern California Association of Governments in
            efforts to implement the regional Air Quality
            Management Plan.
            POLICY R-2.2: Encourage and facilitate the use of
            public transportation to reduce emissions
            associated with automobile use.
            POLICY R-2.3: Continue to expand the number of
            City-owned alternative fuels vehicles, hybrid
            vehicles, and other energy-efficient vehicles as they
            may be available.
            POLICY R-2.4: Maximize the amount of clean
            electrical power produced while minimizing
            emissions from power production plants.
                                                                    Resources Element - 9
Vernon General Plan
Resources Element
                                  POLICY R-2.5:        Consult with the Gateway Cities
                                  Council of Governments, regional planning
                                  agencies, and surrounding municipalities to
                                  coordinate land use, circulation, and infrastructure
                                  improvement efforts.
                       GOAL R-3
                       Preserve established open spaces, and look for opportunities
                       to create new open space areas that can benefit the health
                       and welfare of workers and residents in Vernon.
                                  POLICY R-3.1: Continue to maintain landscaped
                                  areas at City facilities as appropriate.
                                  POLICY R-3.2: Cooperate with regional efforts to
                                  upgrade the appearance and open space value of
                                  the Los Angeles River Channel.
                                  POLICY R-3.3: Encourage private property owners
                                  and industries to establish and maintain private
                                  landscaped areas for the benefit of employees.
                                  POLICY R-3.4: Continue the City's street tree
                                  planting and tree maintenance programs.
                       GOAL R-4
                       Recognize and preserve Vernon’s contributions to the
                       industrial and architectural history of Los Angeles.
                                  POLICY R-4.1: Expand available cultural resource
                                  information by establishing a City-maintained
                                  database of historic sites and facilities.
                                  POLICY R-4.2: Support the efforts of interested
                                  agencies or private organizations to undertake
                                  surveys or other research efforts to document
                                  buildings and places in Vernon of historic and/or
                                  architectural significance.
                                  POLICY R-4.3: Ensure compliance with CEQA
                                  provisions regarding cultural resources at the time
                                  buildings or places of identified or potential
                                  historic or architectural merit are proposed for
                                  demolition.
Resources Element - 10

                                                   Vernon General Plan
                                                    Resources Element
POLICY R-4.4:         Establish local programs and
practices that recognize places of local or other
historic significance.
                                                    Resources Element - 11
Vernon General Plan
Resources Element
                       This page intentionally left blank.
Resources Element - 12
VERNON GENERAL PLAN
SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                   Vernon General Plan
                                                                        Safety Element
SAFETY ELEMENT
1.0     PURPOSE AND FOCUS
1.1     Purpose
The Safety Element identifies the natural and man-made
hazards which affect public safety in the City, and establishes
policies the City will pursue to minimize associated risks to
life and property. Because these hazards can have significant
economic consequences, identifying, understanding, and
guarding against these hazards greatly benefits those who
own property, work, and live in Vernon.
1.2     Focus
Several different types of events could create critical situations
affecting public safety in Vernon. Generally, public safety
risks can be divided into two categories: environmental events
and events arising from human actions. In Vernon,
environmental events include earthquakes and flooding.
Human-caused hazards such as chemical spills, hazardous
materials release, and train, truck or plane accidents have
greater potential to cause upset in Vernon given its industrial
                                                                        Safety Element - 1
Vernon General Plan
Safety Element
                        nature. Increasingly in all cities in the nation, the threat of
                        terrorist activity represents a new public safety concern
                        requiring special treatment. This Element addresses each of
                        these potential safety risks and discusses how the City will
                        respond to each. Also addressed are evacuation routes
                        necessary to move people away from hazardous conditions.
 Vernon Fire Station #3
                        2.0     IDENTIFYING AND GUARDING AGAINST
                                HAZARDS
                        Four natural hazards of particular importance that could affect
                        Vernon are identified in the Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan.
                        Earthquakes represent a significant threat, with the associated
                        strong ground shaking and possibility of liquefaction in some
                        areas. Flooding is a concern as well, with Los Angeles River as
                        the major source. Unusual rainfall amounts may also cause
                        flooding if storm drain facilities are inadequate to
                        accommodate the resulting high volume of runoff. Inundation
                        from dam failure is a remote possibility but must nevertheless
                        be addressed. The fourth natural hazard is a significant
                        windstorm event. Southern California is occasionally raked
                        by moderate to severe wind events called “Santa Ana winds”
                        that blow hot, dry air into the Los Angeles Basin from the
                        desert. These winds tend to be most severe downwind of
                        mountain passes, but can affect the urban flatlands as well.
                        Wind speeds of up to 65 miles per hour are not uncommon,
                        and local gusts may substantially exceed these speeds.
Safety Element - 2

                                                                 Vernon General Plan
                                                                       Safety Element
Since Vernon and its surrounding areas are completely
urbanized, with little natural vegetation, there is almost no
risk of damage from wildfires. Urban fire protection is
discussed in Section 2.2 of this Element.
Human-caused hazards include the risk of explosion or leaks
from stored chemical and petroleum products, or from
derailment or collision of railcars or trucks carrying hazardous
chemical or materials. Chemical spills are also a concern
because of the industrial nature of the uses in Vernon. Fire
hazards are prevalent due to the nature of the industrial uses
and intensely developed character of properties. A fire during
a windstorm, which combines both a natural and a human-
caused hazard, can represent a serious threat to public safety.
Some events are particularly difficult to anticipate and prepare
a programmed response for. Since the 9/11 attack on New
York’s World Trade Center, the threat of terrorist activity has
been of major concern to the nation and the world. As with
both natural and human-caused hazards, a terrorist event
could occur outside Vernon yet directly impact the City.
Programs to deal with such an event require a cooperative
approach with regional agencies.
Activities such as a labor strike or other demonstration usually
present a low risk to public safety, but public safety personnel
must plan for responses to these situations to maintain public
order.
                                                                 Railcars carrying
                                                                 materials through
                                                                 Vernon
                                                                       Safety Element - 3

Vernon General Plan
Safety Element
                           The City’s Standardized Emergency Management System
                           (SEMS) Multi-Hazard Functional Plan (MHFP) discusses and
                           contains programs and plans for emergency responses to the
                           safety concerns described above. This document includes pre-
                           emergency preparedness plans and programs for mutual aid
                           between organizations for virtually any emergency situation.
                           2.1     Natural Hazards
                           Seismic Event
                           Southern California is one of the most seismically active
                           regions of the United States, given its location at the edge of
                           the Pacific Plate. Although no major faults have been
                           identified by Alquist-Priolo statewide mapping efforts as
                           crossing through Vernon, the many fault systems that traverse
                           Los Angeles County and the broader region, along with
                           unmapped blind thrusts, have the potential to cause damage
                           in the City in the event of an earthquake. Figure S-1 identifies
                           regional fault systems, including major faults within 20 miles
                           of the City. Severe ground shaking can cause damage to
                           buildings with corresponding threats of injury or loss of life.
         Figure S-1: Regional Faults
Safety Element - 4

                                                                    Vernon General Plan
                                                                         Safety Element
A secondary effect of ground shaking is soil liquefaction,
which can result in building instability or failure. This is not
considered a serious threat in Vernon, but some areas of the
City could be affected (see Figure S-2). Liquefaction can occur
when loose, unconsolidated, water-laden soils lose their
structure during strong ground shaking. These hazards can be
mitigated at the development stage through the removal and
re-compaction of suspect soils. Vernon’s standard practice of
requiring engineering studies for new development projects
reduces the risk of liquefaction hazards in those susceptible
areas identified on Figure S-2.
Figure S-2: Liquefaction Zone
In addition to damage to buildings, earthquakes often result in
damage to public and private infrastructure. Ruptured gas or
oil lines may result in explosions or leaks, and facilities storing
chemicals or flammable materials may also be damaged
causing leaks or explosion. Water lines, sewer lines, and
reservoirs can also be damaged.              Electrical facilities,
particularly transformer and power lines, are susceptible to
damage resulting in a possible injury or loss of life as well as a
power loss.
To reduce the scope of damage in the event of an earthquake,
Vernon will continue to require new construction to meet
mandated seismic safety codes. Retrofit of older structures
will continue pursuant to Municipal Code requirements, and
                                                                         Safety Element - 5

     Vernon General Plan
     Safety Element
                         the City will continue ongoing efforts to upgrade
                         infrastructure pursuant to the Capital Improvement Plan. In
                         addition, the programs the City has in place to guard against
                         hazardous materials spills and releases also help to protect
                         these materials from being released during ground-shaking
                         hazards. Through both preventative measures and strong,
                         organized emergency response, Vernon will continue to take
                         steps to minimize risks associated with earthquakes.
                         Flooding
                         Although the Los Angeles River flows through Vernon for a
                         distance longer than three miles and would frequently
                         overflow its banks under historic natural conditions, the river
                         was contained within a concrete-lined flood control channel
                         early in the twentieth century, substantially reducing the
                         potential for overflowing of the river banks or overtopping of
                         the dams that could cause flooding of adjacent areas. In the
                         rainy season of 2004-2005, the Los Angeles area received the
                         second highest rainfall ever recorded, approximately three
                         times the normal amount, yet the river channel proved
                         adequate to accommodate this flow.
                                                   In the past, localized flooding has
                                                   occurred during heavy rainstorms.
                                                   However, storm drain improvements
                                                   have substantially reduced this
                                                   problem.
                                                   Flood hazards related to storm
                                                   events generally are described in
                                                   terms of a 100-year or 500-year flood.
                                                   A 100-year flood is defined as a
                                                   major flood event that has a one
                                                   percent or greater chance of
                                                   occurring during any one year.
Los Angeles River        Flood hazard planning practices address such storms, as well
                         as 500-year events. These floods are considered severe;
                         however, these floods can be reasonably predicted and
                         therefore reasonably mitigated. With the flood control system
                         of the Los Angeles River in place, the Federal Emergency
                         Management Agency does not identify any 100-year
                         floodplain areas in the City of Vernon. FEMA maps identify a
                         small portion of southeast Vernon within the 500-year flood
                         zone (Figure S-3). The existing flood control system appears to
                         be adequate to serve the City’s needs.
     Safety Element - 6

                                                                Vernon General Plan
                                                                     Safety Element
Figure S-3: FEMA Flood Hazard Zones
Dam Inundation
Dam inundation occurs when structural damage to a dam
results in a flood. Dam failure can occur due to an earthquake,
erosion, design flaw, or water overflow during storms. Dam
inundation maps represent the best estimate of where water
would flow in if a dam with a full reservoir suddenly failed
completely. Figure S-4 shows areas that would be affected in
the event of dam failure.
Nearly all of the land in Vernon lies within the potential
inundation areas for both Hansen Dam and Sepulveda Dam,
which are located in separate areas of the San Fernando
Valley, more than 20 miles northwest of the City. In the
unlikely event that a catastrophic earthquake causes the
collapse of either of these dams, water and debris would flow
to and then generally along the Los Angeles River in a fairly
narrow stream before spreading out over a swath of the
coastal plain several miles wide, including Vernon.
The official map from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
predicts that the flow from Sepulveda Dam, 24 miles away
from Vernon, would take more than eight hours to reach the
City. Flow from Hansen Dam, also 24 miles away, is predicted
to take more than 19 hours to reach Vernon. The flow from
either dam would probably peak at a depth of 2 feet in the
                                                                     Safety Element - 7
Vernon General Plan
Safety Element
                        vicinity of Vernon. The expected long delay between dam
                        breach and the arrival of the flow should give ample time for
                        emergency services to respond, as outlined in the City’s SEMS
                        Multi-Hazard Functional Plan (MHFP).
   Figure S-4: Dam Inundation Areas
                        Windstorms
                        Windstorms present a potential hazard through their ability to
                        damage buildings and public facilities such as street traffic
                        control lights and public signs. In addition to the damage to
                        buildings, the most significant threat to public safety is from
                        flying debris. While this problem is not usually as severe as
                        that experienced in hurricanes or tornados, maintaining public
                        awareness of the hazard is important.
                        Regionally, the hot, dry Santa Ana winds can create severe
                        brushfire dangers, but this is not a particularly severe problem
                        in Vernon, as there is little vegetation.
Safety Element - 8

                                                                   Vernon General Plan
                                                                        Safety Element
2.2     Human-caused Hazards
Risk of Explosion and Hazardous Materials Spills
Many varied materials of an explosive or hazardous nature are
stored and used by many businesses in Vernon. Because of
the industrial nature of the City, the geographic scope is
citywide. In addition, the presence of major rail lines and
transfer yards, together with the Long Beach Freeway (I-710)
and Alameda Corridor, which carry high volumes of truck
and train traffic to and from the ports, pose real threats in the
event of a spill.
To address local storage issues, the City Environmental Health
Department maintains a complete inventory of the locations
where hazardous materials are stored and used. A detailed
response program defines the actions to be taken by the Fire
Department and Environmental Health Department in the
event of a problem involving a spill or explosion. This
program focuses on the evacuation of persons, as well as
containment and cleanup.
                                                                  Hazardous Materials
                                                                  Emergency Response operate
                                                                  the Spartan Super Vac
                                                                  Hazardous Materials Unit
With regard to terrorism concerns, possible targets in Vernon
include the major rail yards, power generation facilities, and
any business with significant volumes of hazardous materials.
Federal agencies are responsible for safe-guarding
transportation facilities, and Vernon will cooperate with these
agencies in these efforts. With regard to protection of local
businesses, routine patrol activities of the Police Department
and heightened training and vigilance are undertaken in order
to address these concerns. The City will provide Police
personnel with appropriate training to minimize such threats.
                                                                        Safety Element - 9
Vernon General Plan
Safety Element
                    Fire Department
                    The Vernon Fire Department is rated as Class I by Insurance
                    Services Office, Inc., one of only ten cities in California and 35
                    nationwide to earn this distinction. The Department provides
                    a variety of emergency services, including fire protection,
                    emergency medical services, urban search and rescue, and
                    hazardous materials control.
                    Staff at each of Vernon’s four fire stations is fully trained for
                    fighting fires. Each station is equipped with three to six
                    response vehicles, but also has its own specialization. Fire
                    Station 1 at 3375 Fruitland Avenue serves both as Fire
                    Department headquarters and training center. The personnel
                    at Fire Station 2, rebuilt in 2007 at 4301 Santa Fe Avenue,
                    adjacent to City Hall, are all trained as hazardous materials
                    specialists. Paramedics trained in advanced life support at
                    Fire Station 3, at 2800 Soto Street, respond to all emergency
                    situations, and this station is also home to a squad trained in
                    all manners of urban search and rescue techniques. Despite
                    being in a completely urbanized area, Fire Station 4 sends
                    specialized personnel to respond to wildfires through the
                    statewide mutual aid system.
                    3.0     GOALS AND POLICIES
                    Vernon has fewer than 200 permanent residents, but the
                    employment population approaches 45,000 during a typical
                    24-hour period. Police, fire, and paramedic facilities and
                    personnel must be adequate to provide services to this larger
                    community of workers.         Public safety personnel must be
                    prepared to handle potential emergency situations of all kinds:
                    hazardous materials spills, explosions, earthquakes, and train
                    accidents. Additionally, as an industrial city, Vernon must be
                    prepared for the possibility of labor issues such as strikes
                    disrupting the City and requiring responses from public safety
                    personnel.
                    GOAL S-1
                    Minimize the risk to public health, safety, and welfare
                    associated with the presence of natural and human-caused
                    hazards.
                                POLICY S-1.1: Periodically update and maintain
                                the Multi-hazard Functional Plan in an effort to
                                identify potential contingencies and emergency
Safety Element - 10

                                                                 Vernon General Plan
                                                                      Safety Element
           conditions and define the necessary response by
           public safety and other personnel.
           POLICY S-1.2: Cooperate with other jurisdictions
           in the southeast area of Los Angeles County to
           maintain an up-to-date emergency response system
           for the region.
           POLICY        S-1.3:   Prepare    and     disseminate
           information to residents and businesses on
           preparing for and responding to a major
           earthquake or potential terrorist threat.
           POLICY S-1.4: Maintain the public water
           distribution and supply system facilities to provide
           adequate capacity to meet both everyday and
           emergency fire-flow needs.
           POLICY S-1.5: Coordinate with the Los Angeles
           Unified School District for protection and or
           evacuation of school children in the event of an
           emergency condition, which could affect the
           schools in or near Vernon.
GOAL S-2
Provide a high degree of protection for all residents and
workers from hazardous materials and the hazards
associated with transport of such materials.
           POLICY S-2.1: Continue to support and encourage
           State efforts to identify existing or previously
           existing hazardous waste generators or disposal
           sites in the City of Vernon.
           POLICY S-2.2: Continue to require every business
           to maintain a list of the chemicals and other
           hazardous materials used or stored on site in
           accordance with appropriate material safety data
           sheets and otherwise in accordance with law, and
           to provide that list to the Fire Department and
           Environmental Health Department. Require that
           the Fire Department and Environmental Health
           Department to maintain a list of such materials and
           the location where they are stored or used to
           permit      emergency     personnel    to     respond
           appropriately, if required.
                                                                     Safety Element - 11
Vernon General Plan
Safety Element
                              POLICY S-2.3: Permit new residential uses only
                              within the Housing Overlay District. Strategically
                              identify sites for new housing in areas determined
                              to be most compatible for housing with limited
                              hazard impacts.
                    GOAL S-3
                    Maintain high standards for the provision of City emergency
                    services.
                              POLICY S-3.1: Establish and implement plans for
                              continuity of government for Vernon in the event
                              of a catastrophe.
                              POLICY S-3.2: Require businesses handling,
                              transporting, or producing materials considered
                              acutely hazardous to prepare contingency plans for
                              accidents involving these chemicals.
                              POLICY S-3.3: Support the development and
                              continued updating of public safety education
                              programs.
                              POLICY S-3.4: Undertake steps to inform all
                              residents and businesses of the importance of
                              visible and clearly legible signs and street numbers
                              in shortening the response time of emergency
                              personnel.
                              POLICY S-3.5: Periodically review the City's
                              emergency service equipment to determine if it is
                              adequate to meet the needs of changing land uses
                              and development types.
                              POLICY S-3.6: Require new development projects
                              that necessitate the purchase of public safety
                              equipment to underwrite or share in purchase
                              costs.
                              POLICY S-3.7: Develop a new Emergency
                              Operations Center (EOC) with adequate space and
                              facilities to respond to any emergency situation
                              which may arise.
                              POLICY S-3.8: Continue to support the Vernon
                              Fire Department in its effort to maintain its high
                              rating.
Safety Element - 12
                                                               Vernon General Plan
                                                                    Safety Element
GOAL S-4
Provide a high degree of protection for all workers and
residents in the event of any disaster.
           POLICY S-4.1: Review the risks related to a
           possible train derailment or collision, and develop
           appropriate response programs.
           POLICY S-4.2: Review the design of new
           development projects to consider public safety and
           issues such as emergency access, defensible space,
           and overall safety.
           POLICY S-4.3: Design and maintain an effective
           plan for the prompt evacuation of the City in the
           event of a dam inundation or other major disaster
           requiring the removal of workers or residents from
           Vernon.
           POLICY S-4.4: Identify facilities for use as
           emergency/disaster shelters for those unable to
           leave or required to stay within the City in the
           event of a major disaster or emergency event.
                                                                   Safety Element - 13
Vernon General Plan
Safety Element
                    This page intentionally left blank.
Safety Element - 14
