          THE CITY OF
          WINTER S
 GENERAL PLA N
POLICY DOCUMEN T
              ADOPTED
             MAY 19, 199 2
  HOUSING ELEMENT REVISED APRIL 1994
                                          TABLE OF CONTENT S
TABLE OF CONTENTS	
LIST OF FIGURES	                                                                   i
CREDITS	                                                                         ii
INTRODUCTION
     The City of Winters	                                                        1
     Purpose and Nature of the General Plan	                                     1
     Preparation of the General Plan 	                                           2
     Organization of the General Plan	                                           3
PART I: LAND USE/CIRCULATION DIAGRAMS AND STANDARD S
     Land Use Diagram and Standards 	                                         I- 1
     Circulation Plan Diagram and Standards 	                                 I-4
PART II : GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM S
I:       Land Use	                                                           II- 1
II:      Housing	                                                            II-9
III:     Transportation and Circulation 	                                  II-2 1
IV: Public Facilities and Services	                                        II-29
V:       Recreational and Cultural Resources 	                             II-4 1
VI: Natural Resources	                                                     II-47
VII:     Health and Safety	                                                II-57
VIII: Community Design	                                                    II-69
IX: Administration and Implementation 	                                    II-73
                                             LIST OF FIGURES
                                                                       Appears
                                                                         Afte r
                                                                          Page
Land Use Diagram	                                            Inserted separatel y
Figure I-1 :      Circulation Plan Diagram	                                   I-4
Figure 1-2:       Roadway Cross Sections	                                     I-6
Figure II-1 : Flood Overlay Area	                                           II-2
Figure II-2 : Urban Study Area	                                             I1-2
                                                 CREDITS
 CITY COUNCI L
 J. Robert Chapman, Mayo r
 Keith "Woody" Fridae, Mayor Pro Te m
 Frank Curry, Councilma n
 Roger Mosier, Councilma n
 William Pfanner, Councilman
 Robert Harris, Councilman 1986 - 199 0
Joe Ogando, Councilman 1986 - 199 0
 CITY STAFF
Perry Beck, City Manage r
John Wallace, City Attorney
Harold Anderson, Assistant City Attorne y
Nanci Mills, City Clerk
Brent Moore, Planning Director
Amelia Hutchinson, Public Works Coordinator
Steve Jackson, City Enginee r
Steve Godden, Police Chief
Dave Kidder, Fire Chief
Georgette Holt, Finance Director
Mary Jo Rodolfa, Parks & Recreation Coordinato r
CONSULTANT S
J. Laurence Mintier & Associates, General Plan Coordinator s
Balfrey & Abbott, General Plan Legal Advisor s
Remy and Thomas, EIR Legal Advisor s
CH2M Hill, Infrastructure Consultants
Wilbur Smith Associates, Traffic Consultant s
Economic and Planning Systems, Financial Advisor s
Duncan & Jones, General Plan EIR Consultant s
Sound Solutions, Noise Consultant s
Gutoff & Associates, PAC Planning Advisor s
PLANNING COMMISSIO N
Marion Cantor, Chair
Pat Riley, Vice Chai r
George Sanders, Commissioner
William Cody, Commissioner
Bruce Brewer, Commissione r
Dave Cummings, Commissione r
June Taylor, Commissioner
Gayle Todd, Commissioner 1986 - 199 0
Frank Curry, Commissioner 1986 - 1990
 STREETS & TREES COMMISSIO N
 Charles Horn, Chair
Naomi Manelis, Vice Chai r
Barry Pomeroy, Commissione r
Barbara Cody, Commissioner
Carol Scianna, Commissioner
Nancy Parkin, Commissione r
 Sally Paul, Commissioner
Christine Hills, Commissioner 1985 - 199 0
PARKS & COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSIO N
Phil Snow, Chai r
Joyce Snyder, Vice Chai r
Bobbie Greenwood, Commissioner
Linda Mariani, Commissione r
Gloria Marion, Commissione r
Liz Coman, Commissioner
Julie McNamara, Commissione r
Theresa Foster, Commissioner 1988 - 199 0
Roy Jones, Commissioner 1986 - 199 0
Al Smith, Commissioner 1986 - 1990
Chris Jones, Commissioner 1985 - 199 0
PLAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Roger Mosier, Chair
Marilyn Clark, Vice Chair
Liz Coman, Member
Mike Kimes, Member
Carol Scianna, Member
Charlie Martin, Member
Frank Pignataro, Member
Bob Pisani, Member
Rick Romney, Member
                                           111
INTRODUCTIO
                                                 INTRODUCTION
THE CITY OF WINTERS
The city of Winters is located in the southwestern corner of Yolo County, immediately north of the Solano Count y
line and just east of the Vaca Mountain Range . Winters lies approximately 14 miles west of the city of Davis
and 10 miles north of the city of Vacaville . The city is bordered on the south and southwest by Dry Creek an d
Putah Creek .
The principal highways in or near the city are Interstate 505 and State Highway 128 . Interstate 505, located les s
than one-half mile east of the city limits, serves as a key link between Interstate Highway 80, approximately 1 0
miles to the south, and Interstate 5, approximately 23 miles to the north . Highway 128, which originates at
Interstate 505 and transects the city, serves as a major access route to Lake Berryessa . Monticello Dam at Lak e
Berryessa is located approximately 10 miles to the west of the city.
PURPOSE AND NATURE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
A general plan is a legal document, required by state law, which serves as a community's "constitution" fo r
development and the use of land within its planning area . It must be a comprehensive, long-term document,
detailing proposals for the "physical development of the city, and of any land outside its boundaries which in th e
planning agency ' s judgment bears relation to its planning" (Government Code §65300 et seq .). Time horizons
vary, but the typical general plan looks 10-20 years into the future .
The law specifically requires that the general plan address seven topics or "elements ." These are land use ,
circulation, housing, conservation, open space, noise, and safety . The plan must analyze issues of importance
to the community, set forth policies in text and diagrams for conservation and development, and outline specifi c
programs for implementing these policies .
Preparing the general plan is an activity which sharpens and focuses the many concerns of citizens within th e
community and provides a framework within which these often conflicting concerns can be forged into a commo n
vision of the future . By focusing attention on the issues facing the community and placing them in an expande d
time frame, the general plan helps citizens to see their community as a complex system--a living entity that grow s
and responds to problems and opportunities--and it helps to guide the community along an agreed-upon course .
On a more concrete level, preparing, adopting, and maintaining a general plan serves the following purposes :
 •   To establish within local government the capacity to analyze local and regional conditions and needs i n
     order to respond effectively to the problems and opportunities facing the community ;
 •   To identify the community's environmental, social, and economic goals ;
 •   To record the local government's policies and standards for the maintenance and improvement of existin g
     development and the location and characteristics of future development ;
 •   To provide citizens with information about their community and with opportunities to participate in th e
     local planning and decision-making process ;

Introductio n
 •    To improve the coordination of community development and environmental protection activities amon g
      local, regional, state, and federal agencies ; and
 •    To establish a basis for subsequent planning efforts, such as preparation of specific plans, redevelopmen t
     plans, and special studies, to deal with unique problems or areas in the community .
While the general plan sets out policies and identifies ways to put these policies into action, the actua l
implementation of the plan is a complex and lengthy process in its own right . In implementing the plan, loca l
officials must take many separate, but interconnected actions according to the direction set out in the general plan .
These various actions rest on two essential powers of local government : corporate and police powers . Using their
 "corporate power," local governments collect money through bonds, fees, assessments, and taxes, and spend i t
to provide services and facilities such as police and fire protection, streets, water systems, sewage disposa l
facilities, drainage facilities, and parks . Using their "police power," local governments regulate citizens' use o f
their property through zoning, subdivision, and building regulations in order "to promote the health, safety, an d
welfare of the public ." The general plan provides the framework for the exercise of these powers by local
officials . By virtue of state law and case law, all zoning, subdivision, and public works decisions must b e
consistent with the general plan .
PREPARATION OF THE GENERAL PLAN
The current General Plan revision effort was prompted by dramatic growth during the 1986-1988 period and b y
submission in 1988 of a specific plan application for 886 acres of land in the north part of Winters . After lengthy
discussion of the North Area Specific Plan and its potential implications for the city, the City Council decide d
a comprehensive review of its General Plan was warranted .
Accordingly, in February 1989, the Council instituted amoratorium by approving an Interim Control Ordinanc e
to "study land use, City service capability, factors which are affected by specific projects, and factors which ar e
affected by the cumulative effects of the many projects contemplated . "
To provide for citizen input into the General Plan revision process ; the City Council in March 1989, appointe d
a nine-member Plan Advisory Committee (PAC) to develop a new general plan . After 18 meetings between May
1989 and February 1990, the PAC published a draft general plan in February 1990 . The draft general plan
included all state-mandated elements, except for a noise element, and covered approximately 3 .10 square miles ,
including the territory in the North Area Specific Plan .
In 1989, a citizen initiative qualified for and was voted on in the November election . The initiative would hav e
set a population limit (8,000 people by the year 2000, and 11,000 by the year 2010), required new developmen t
to fund complete incremental costs of public facilities and establish certain public service standards, preserve th e
character of Winters' retail/commercial area, protect the ecology of Putah and Dry Creek and develop recreatio n
potentials thereon, and promote local commercial and industrial activity and design variety . In the November
1989 election, the initiative failed.
During March and April 1990, the Planning Commission conducted a preliminary review of the PAC plan .
Subsequently, between April and October 1990, the Planning Commission held 11 workshops during which th e
Commission extensively reviewed each element of the plan and each of the five planning areas designated in th e
plan.
                                                            2

                                                                                                             Introduction
 Following conclusion of the Planning Commission's review, City staff and consultants sought City Counci l
 direction on several key policy issues . Having secured this policy direction in February and March 1991, Cit y
 staff and consultants began redrafting the General Plan. A public review draft of the General Plan, along with
 a draft environmental impact report, draft public facility master plans, and financing analysis were released fo r
public review in October 1991 .
Between early November 1991 and early January 1992 the City Council and Planning Commission held si x
public hearings on the Draft General Plan, Draft General Plan EIR, and related General Plan documents.
During late January and late February 1992 the Planning Commission and City Council met jointly eight time s
and separately once to formulate their recommendations for the final General Plan.
Based on the direction of the Planning Commission and City Council, City Staff and Consultants prepared th e
final General Plan, Final General Plan EIR, and related General Plan documents for final review and adoption .
After final hearings and review by the Planning Commission and City Council, the City Council adopted th e
General Plan on May 19, 1992 .
ORGANIZATION OF THE GENERAL PLA N
The Winters General Plan consists of two documents : the General Plan Background Report and the General
Plan Policy Document . The General Plan Background Report inventories and analyzes existing conditions an d
trends in Winters . The Background Report, which provides the formal supporting documentation for genera l
plan policy, addresses ten subject areas : land use ; housing ; population; economic conditions and fiscal
considerations ; transportation and circulation ; public facilities and services ; cultural and recreational resources ;
natural resources ; health and safety ; and scenic resources and urban design .
The General Plan Policy Document includes the goals, policies, standards, implementation programs, quantifie d
objectives, land use diagram, and circulation plan diagram that constitute the formal policy of the City of Winter s
for land use, development, and environmental quality . The following definitions describe the nature of th e
statements of goals, policies, standards, implementation programs, and quantified objectives as they are used i n
this document :
     Goal: The ultimate purpose of an effort stated in a way that is general in nature and immeasurable .
     Policy : A specific statement in text or diagram guiding action and implying clear commitmen t
     Standard: A specific, often quantified guideline, incorporated in a policy or implementation program ,
     defining the relationship between two or more variables . Standards can often translate directly int o
     regulatory controls.
     Implementation Program : An action, procedure, program, or technique that carries out general pla n
     policy. Implementation programs also specify primary responsibility for carrying out the action and a
     time frame for its accomplishment The time frames indicated for the various programs are directory, no t
     mandatory, since they are subject to staff and budgetary constraints .
     Quantified Objective (Housing only) : The number of housing units that the City expects to b e
     constructed and the number of households the City expects will be assisted through Housing Elemen t
     programs and based on general market conditions during the time frame of the Housing Elemen t
                                                           3
Introduction
The General Plan Policy Document is divided into two main parts . Part I describes the designations appearin g
on the Land Use Diagram and outlines the standards of population density and building intensity for these lan d
use designations . Part I also contains the Circulation Plan Diagram depicting the proposed circulation system
and a description of the street classification system.
Part II contains explicit statements of goals, policies, standards, implementation programs, and quantifie d
objectives . Part II is divided into sections roughly corresponding to the organization of issues addressed in th e
General Plan Background Report. These are : I . Land Use; II. Housing ; III. Transportation and Circulation; IV .
Public Facilities and Services ; V. Recreational and Cultural Resources ; VI . Natural Resources ; VII. Health and
Safety; VIII. Community Design; and IX. Administration and Implementation .
Each section includes several goal statements relating to different sub-issues or different aspects of the issu e
addressed in the section . For each goal statement there are several policies which amplify the goal statement .
Implementation programs are listed at the end of each section and describe briefly the proposed action, th e
agencies or departments with primary responsibility for carrying out the program, and the time frame fo r
accomplishing the program . The housing section also includes a statement of quantified housing objectives ,
required by state law as part of the housing element .
                                                           4
                        PART I
LAND USE/CIRCULATION DIAGRAMS
                AND STANDARDS
                                                        PART I
                         LAND USE/CIRCULATION DIAGRAMS AND STANDARD S
Part I first describes the General Plan Land Use Diagram and the allowable uses and standards for each of th e
designations shown on the diagram and, second, describes the Circulation Plan Diagram designed to suppor t
the land uses depicted on the Land Use Diagram .
LAND USE DIAGRAM AND STANDARD S
The Land Use Diagram (inserted separately) depicts proposed land use for Winters within the Urban Limit Lin e
through the year 2010 . The boundary lines between most land use designations are delineated as specifically a s
possible, generally following parcel lines . In the case of future parks and schools, however, the locations show n
on the Land Use Diagram are conceptual, not parcel specific .
The following sections describe the land use designations appearing on the Land Use Diagram and the standards
of population density and building intensity for the various land use designations .
Standards of building intensity for residential uses . are stated as the allowable'range of dwelling units per gros s
acre. Gross acreage includes all land (including streets and rights-of-ways) designated for particular uses, whil e
net acreage excludes streets and rights-of-ways . Normally, net acreage is about 25 percent less than gros s
acreage . Standards of populationdensity for residential uses can be derived by multiplying the maximu m
allowable number of dwelling units per gross acre by the average number of persons per dwelling unit assumed
for the applicable residential designation . The assumed average number of persons per dwelling unit for eac h
residential designation has been extrapolated from projections by the Sacramento Area Council of Government s
for Winters . The assumed average number of persons per dwelling unit is 2 .8 for the Rural, Low-Density, and
Medium-Density Residential designation and for residential uses in the Agriculture designation; 2.3 for the
Medium-High Residential designation and for residential uses in the Neighborhood, Community Commercial ,
and Office designations ; and 2 .0 for the High-Density Residential designation and for residential uses in th e
Central Business District designation .
Standards of building intensity for non-residential uses are stated as maximum floor-area ratios (FARs), base d
on net acreage. An FAR is a ratio of the gross building square footage permitted on a lot to the net square footag e
of the lot. For example, on a site with 10,000 net square feet of land area, an FAR of 1 .0 will allow 10,000 gros s
square feet of building floor area to be built . On the same site, an FAR of 2 .0 would allow 20,000 square feet ;
and an FAR of 0 .5 would allow 5,000 square feet .
Rural Residential (RR)
This designation provides for single-family detached homes, secondary residential units, limited agricultural uses ,
public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses . Residential densities shall be in the range of 0 .5
to 1 .0 units per gross acre .
 Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
 Low Density Residential (LR)
 This designation provides for single-family detached homes, secondary residential units, public and quasi-publi c
 uses, and similar and compatible uses . Residential densities shall be in the range of 1 .1 to 4.0 units per gros s
 acre .
 Medium Density Residential (MR )
 This designation provides for single-family detached and attached homes, public and quasi-public uses, an d
 similar and compatible uses . Residential densities shall be in the range of 4 .1 to 6 .0 units per gross acre .
 Medium High Density Residential (MHR )
 This designation provides for single-family detached and attached homes and multi-family residential units, grou p
 quarters, quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses . Residential densities shall be in the range of 6 . 1
to 10 .0 units per gross acre .
High Density Residential (HR)
This designation provides for single-family attached homes and multi-family residential units, group quarters ,
public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses . Residential densities shall be in the range of 10 . 1
to 20 .0 units per gross acre . New residential development at densities less than 10 .1 dwelling units per gross acr e
is deemed compatible, but shall be subject to discretionary review and approval .
Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
This designation provides for neighborhood and locally-oriented retail and service uses, offices, multi-famil y
residential units above the ground floor, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses . All
residential uses shall be subject to discretionary review and approval . The FAR shall not exceed 0 .40 for
commercial uses and residential density shall be in the range of 6 .1 to 10.0 units per gross acre.
Central Business District (CBD )
This designation provides for restaurants, retail, service, professional and administrative offices, hotels, multi -
family residential units, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses . Residential densities shall
be in the range of 10.1 to 20 .0 units per acre ; the FAR for offices and commercial uses shall not exceed 2 .0 and
the FAR for all other uses shall not exceed 0 .60 . Residential uses shall be subject to discretionary review and
approval .
Highway Service Commercial (HSC )
This designation provides for restaurants, service stations, hotels and motels, and retail and amusement uses ,
which are oriented principally to highway and through traffic, public and quasi-public uses, and similar an d
compatible uses . The FAR shall not exceed 0 .40.
Office (OF)
This designation provides for professional and administrative offices, medical and dental clinics, laboratories ,
financial institutions, multi-family residential units, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and'compatibl e
uses. The FAR shall not exceed 0 .40 for office uses, and residential densities shall be in the range of 6 .1 to 10 .0
                                                          I-2
                                                                          Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
units per gross acre . Residential uses in this designation shall be subject to discretionary review and approval .
Planned Commercial (PC )
This designation provides for neighborhood- and locally-oriented retail and services uses, offices, restaurants ,
service stations, multi-family residential units, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses.
The FAR shall not exceed 0 .40 for commercial uses, and residential densities shall be in the range of 6 .1 to 10 .0
units per gross acres .
All development under this designation shall be approved pursuant to an adopted master development plan (e .g.,
specific plan) . As these master development plans are approved, the Planned Commercial designation shall b e
replaced through a general plan amendment with the Neighborhood Commercial, Office, Recreation and Parks,
Open Space, or Public/Quasi-Public designations as the City deems appropriate based on the approved master
development plan .
Light Industrial (LI)
This designation provides for industrial parks, warehouses, light manufacturing, public and quasi-public uses ,
and similar and compatible uses . The FAR shall not exceed 0 .40.
Heavy Industrial (HI )
This designation provides for manufacturing, processing, assembling, research, wholesale and storage uses ,
trucking terminals, railroad facilities, and public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible . uses . The
FAR shall not exceed 0 .40.
Business/Industrial Park (BIP)
This designation provides for offices, light industrial, wholesale commercial and limited retail commercial uses ,
public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses . The FAR . shall not exceed 0 .40.
Planned Commercial/Business Park (PCB)
This designation provides for restaurants, service stations, hotels and motels, retail and amusement uses, which
are oriented principally to highway and through traffic, offices, light industrial, and wholesale commercial uses ,
public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses . The FAR shall not exceed 0 .40.
All development under this designation shall be approved pursuant to an adopted master development plan (e .g.,
 specific plan) . As these master development plans are approved, the Planned Commercial/Business Park
designation shall be replaced through a general plan amendment with the Highway Service Commercial ,
 Business/Industrial Park, Open Space, or Public Quasi-Public designations as the City deems appropriate base d
 on the approved master development plan .
 Public/Quasi-Public (PQP )
 This designation provides for government-owned facilities, public and private schools, and quasi-public uses suc h
 as hospitals, churches, and similar and compatible uses . The FAR shall not exceed 0 .50.
 Recreation and Parks (RP)
                                                          I-3
 Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standard s
 This designation provides for existing and planned public parks and public and private recreational uses . The
 FAR for development in RP-designated areas shall not exceed 0 .20.
 Open Space (OS)
 This designation provides for agricultural uses, recreational uses, riparian vegetation and wildlife habita t
protection, water retention, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses consistent with th e
 open space purposes of this designation . The FAR shall not exceed 0 .05 . The precise location of the boundary
 of the Open Space designation along Putah and Dry Creeks shall be determined by the City in conjunction wit h
 individual project proposals based on creek setback requirements and site-specific conditions .
Agriculture (AG)
 This designation provides for agricultural uses, single-family homes, limited commercial and industrial use s
directly related to agriculture, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses . Minimum parcel
size is five (5) acres, and residential uses are limited to one (1) unit per parcel .
CIRCULATION PLAN DIAGRAM AND STANDARD S
The Circulation Plan Diagram (Figure I-1) depicts the official classification of existing and proposed street s
and roads in Winters . The following paragraphs define the various types of roadways included in th e
classification system .
Roadway Classification System
Arterial Streets - Arterialstreets are defined as streets which serve major centers of activity, the highest traffi c
volume corridors, and longest trip desires ; are integrated internally, and provide service between major rura l
connections.
Primary Collector Streets - Primary Collector streets are those which interconnect with, and augment the arteria l
street system, accommodate trips of moderate length at a lower level of service than arterials, and provid e
intracommunity continuity.
Secondary Collector Streets - Secondary Collector streets are those which provide both land access and traffi c
circulation within residential and commercial areas, and distribute traffic between residential neighborhoods an d
Primary Collectors and Arterials at a lower traffic level of service than Primary Collector streets .
Local Streets - Local streets include all those not included in higher classifications, and typically provide th e
highest direct access to abutting land uses and the lowest mobility levels of the system, discouraging throug h
travel.
As shown in Figure I-1, Grant Avenue and Railroad Avenue are classified as Arterial streets . Putah Creek Road ,
although outside the Winters Urban Limit Line, also provides an Arterial street function and is included in th e
figure for system completeness . The Main Street, Valley Oak Drive, County Road 32A, County Road 33, an d
the proposed Road 32A/Road 33 connector midway between Valley Oak Road and Railroad Avenue are classifie d
as Primary Collector streets, as is the new industrial road west of I-505 and its connections to Grant Avenue an d
East Baker Street . Sufficient right-of-way along County Road 32A should be maintained for possible ultimat e
expansion to four lanes . Other roads depicted in Figure I-1 fulfill the function of Secondary Collector streets .
                                                          I-4
                         2
                                   .      ;FroeY►ey
                           a
                             ~""`       ''AAerel
                                     ~.' Ninety Colleob
                             	             Secondary Collector
                                   2       Number of Trent Lena
                                  Q        Potential Traffic Slgnal
                               NOTE; AI Heo ndi y aoisaton to
                               have None droiaeodon.
        FIGURE I- I
CIRCULATION PLAN DIAGRAM

                                                                            Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
Freeways, although shown as a category in Figure I-1, are not considered part of the street system fo r
classification purposes . Local streets include all those streets not depicted in Figure I-1 .
Street Standard s
Cross section standards for the various street classifications are depicted in Figure I-2 . These standards are based
on standards published by Caltrans, AASHTO, and the Institute of Transportation Engineers, as well as loca l
practice .
Arterial Streets - Arterial streets provide for two or four 12-foot travel lanes, a 10-foot to 12-foot median, 4-foo t
to 12-foot shoulders for bike lanes and/or parking, and 20-foot sidewalk/landscaped areas .
Prinary Collector Streets - Primary Collector streets provide for two 12-foot travel lanes, an optional 10-foo t
median/left turn lane, 4-foot to 12-foot shoulders for bike lanes and/or parking, and 20-foot sidewalk/landscaped
areas .
Secondary Collector Streets - Secondary Collector streets provide for two 12-foot travel lanes, 4-foot to 8-foo t
shoulders for bike lanes and/or parking, and 16-foot sidewalk/landscaped areas .
Local Streets - Local streets provide for two travel lanes plus optional parking within a 24-foot to 38-foo t
pavement width and 4-foot to 6-foot sidewalk/landscaped areas .
Circulation Improvement s
Based on the Circulation Plan Diagram (Figure I-1) and the street standards described above and depicted i n
Figure I-2, improvements to the following roadways will be necessary and will be pursued as funding permits and
when traffic thresholds are reached :
     •     Main Street Extensions (north and south )
     •     Road 32A Extension (Road 88 to Road 90 )
     •     Road 33 Extension (Road 88 to Road 90 )
     •     Valley Oak Drive Extensio n
     •     Putah Creek Bridge Repai r
     •     Grant Avenue/Dry Creek Bridge Reconstruction and Widenin g
     •     Railroad Avenue Widening (north of Grant Avenue)
     •     Taylor Street Reconstructio n
     •     East Street Widening
     •     Grant Avenue Widening
     •     Grant Avenue/I-505 Overcrossing Widening
     •     Traffic Signals at Six Intersections

                              PART II
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATIO N
                           PROGRAMS
                                                    SECTION I
                                                     LAND USE
GOALS AND POLICIES :
Goal I.A : To provide for orderly, well-planned, and balanced growth consistent with the limits
                imposed by the city's infrastructure and service capabilities and by the city's ability t o
                assimilate new growth .
Policies:
I.A.1 .         The City shall seek to preserve Winters' traditional small-town qualities and agricultural heritage ,
               while increasing its residential and employment base .
I.A .2.         The City shall designate an Urban Limit Line delineating the area to be urbanized within the tim e
               frame of the General Plan and designed to accommodate a population of 12,500 by the year 2010 .
I.A.3.         The City shall encourage development to occur in a sequence that promotes the efficient use an d
               extension of public facilities and services.
I .A.4 . The City shall link the rate of growth in Winters to the provision of adequate services an d
               infrastructure, including schools . To this end, the City shall prepare and adopt a program t o
               ensure that growth occurs in an orderly fashion and in pace with the expansion of public facilitie s
               and services.
LA.S . The City shalhnotapprove new•development unlessrthe capacity of needed public services an d
               facilities, including school facilities, is sufficient to accommodate that new development or a
               mechanism that ensures the needed facilities will be available in a timely fashion is in place .
I.A.6.         The City shall promote the development of employment uses that improve the city's current jobs -
               housing imbalance .
I.A.7.         The City shall ensure its designation of land uses and approval of development projects do no t
               hinder efforts to maintain a positive fiscal balance for the City .
LA .B .        The land use pattern and design of new development in Winters shall facilitate pedestria n
               convenience and the use of non-automobile forms of transportation .
I.A.9 . No new development may occur within the flood-overlay area shown in Figure II-1 until a
               feasibility and design study for a comprehensive solution to the 100-year flooding problem ha s
               been completed and a fee schedule has been established or financing program adopted which
               includes all affected and contributing properties for financing the comprehensive flood contro l
               solution .

          FIGURE II-1
FLOOD OVERLAY ARE A
              Flood Overlay Am "
          - City Limits
              Urban Limit Line
•A more detailed delineation of th e
Flood Overlay Area is on file with
the City of Winter s
CITY OF WINTERS .
    0   4   000 I2 1007 2000
     eennaea saYe
      BASE MAP. JUNE 197 1

Land Use
 I.A.10.         The City shall designate land adjacent to the Urban Limit Line in the northwest part of Winter s
                 as Urban Study Area for future consideration of incorporated development . (See Figure II-2.)
I.A.11 . The City will strenuously oppose any new unincorporated highway-related commercial or urba n
                 development in Yolo or Solano County, with the exception of agricultural industrial uses, withi n
                 one mile of the City's Urban Limit Line.
Goal B :         To promote the development of a pedestrian-oriented central business district that include s
                 retail commercial, office, residential, civic, cultural, and recreational uses .
Policies :
I.B
.1.              The City's first priority for commercial development within the Central Business District shall b e
                the area west of East Street and south of Grant Avenue .
I.B.2.           The City shall promote infill development and the conversion of industrial buildings an d
                properties to commercial uses in the Central Business District.
I .B.3.          The City shall promote the relocation of non-conforming industrial uses in the Central Busines s
                District to other appropriate locations in the city .
I.B.4 . First priority for ground floor uses in the Central Business District shall be given to retail uses .
                New residential and office uses shall be permitted on a case-by-case basis over ground floor retai l
                uses.
LB.5 .          The City shall promote :andprovide support forthe physical upgrading of older buildings and thei r
                facades in the Central Business District .
I .B.6 . The City shall support the revitalization of the Central Business District by upgrading physica l
                infrastructure, such as sidewalks, curbs, street lighting, water, sewer, and drainage facilities . The
                City shall also work with utility companies in undergrounding overhead utility lines in the Centra l
                Business District .
I.B.7.          As much as possible, the entrances of new buildings in the Central Business District shall b e
                oriented directly to the street and not be separated from the street by parking lots .
I.B.8 .         Development and redevelopment of properties on the east side of Railroad Avenue shall be guided
                by the following principles :
                a. Buildings and uses should be developed as an extension of the Downtown Main Street area ,
                     reflecting and complementing the character of existing Main Street development .
                b. Development should be occupied predominately by retail uses with a minimum of non-retai l
                     or office uses . Non-retail or office uses should be located in mezzanines and on upper floors .
                c. Shared off-street parking should be developed through the coordinated efforts of the propert y
                     owners and the City . New parking lots should not be located along the Railroad Avenue
                     frontage .
                                                           II-2
                                                FIGURE 11-2
                                          URBAN STUDY ARE A
                                                  Urban Study Are a
                                                  Urban Limit Line
                             WILLOW CANAL
” II	                III C
 :gKu iu a3 z=    16i777n77'
 CSTnE	 tg
        CIV , 01tli1
     t i"J~ i C16t1
                                          CITY OF WINTER S
                                            0 400 000 IT00 MOO ACC
                                           BASE MAP:OCTOBER 199 1

                                                                                                           Land Use
 Goal I.C:      To designate adequate land in a range of residential densities to accommodate the housin g
                needs of all income groups expected to reside in Winters .
Policies :
LC .1 . The City shall maintain an adequate supply of residential land in appropriate land use designation s
                and zoning categories to accommodate Winter's fair share of projected regional growth an d
               maintain normal vacancy rates .
I.C .2.        The City shall seek to maintain an overall mix of 75 percent single family and 25 percent multi -
               family in its housing stock .
I.C .3.        The City shall promote the development of affordable housing to meet the needs of low-an d
               moderate-income households .
I .C.4.        Higher density housing should be located in areas served by the full range of urban services ,
               preferably along collector and arterial streets, and within easy walking distance of shopping areas .
I .C.5 .       The City shall promote the preservation, stability, and integrity of existing residentia l
               neighborhoods.
Goal I.D:      To designate adequate land for and promote the development of commercial uses providin g
               goods and services to .Winters' residents, employees, and visitors .
Policies :
I.D.1 . The City shall promote expansion of the range of retail goods and services offered in Winters t o
               capture a larger share of expenditures by Winters' residents and minimize the need for Winters '
               residents to shop outside the city.
I.D.2.         The City shall promote the establishment, maintenance, and expansion of businesses in Winter s
               that generate high retail sales taxes as important contributors to the local economy .
I.D.3.         The City's first priority for new commercial development shall be the Central Business District .
I.D.4.         The City shall work with local business groups and associations, such as the Winters Chamber
               of Commerce, to promote Winters' businesses .
I.D.5 .        New commercial and office development along Highway 128/Grant Avenue shall be designed to
               avoid the appearance of strip development .
I.D .6.        Bed and breakfast inns shall be allowed in residential neighborhoods and the Central Busines s
               District, subject to discretionary review and approval by the City .
I.D.7.         The City shall seek to avoid any concentration of fast-food restaurants .
                                                         II-3
Land Use
 Goal I.E :     To designate adequate land for and promote development of industrial uses that create job s
                and enhance the economy of Winters .
 Policies :
 I.E .1.        The City shall promote and assist the maintenance and expansion of Winters' industrial sector .
I.E.2.          The City shall work with the private sector to promote job creation and a better jobs/housin g
                balance.
I.E.3 . The City shall promote the development of clean industries that do not create problems or pos e
                health risks associated with wastewater, refuse, water and air pollution, or potential leaks or spill s
                of hazardous substances .
Goal I .F:      To designate adequate land for development of public and quasi-public uses to suppor t
                existing and new residential, commercial, and industrial land uses .
Policies :
LF .1 .         The City shall designate adequate, appropriately-located land for City and County facilities and ,
               in consultation with the School District, School District facilities .
I.F.2 . The City shall strive to ensure the provision of adequate funds or other mitigation measures t o
               maintain School . District facilitiesatservice levels equal to or exceeding State standards fo r
               classroom size, school enrollment, and school site size for all School District schools .
I.F.3 .        The City shall strive to ensure the provision of adequate funds or other mitigation measures t o
               construct and/or renovate School District schools to keep pace with urban growth .
I.F.4 . In order to ensure the availability of school sites consistent with the provisions of the Genera l
               Plan, the City may require the dedication or reservation of school sites consistent with service leve l
               standards .
I.F.5 . The City shall promote the clustering of public and quasi-public uses such as schools, parks, chil d
               care facilities, and community activity centers . Joint-use of public facilities shall be promoted ,
               and agreements for sharing costs and operational responsibilities among public service provider s
               shall be encouraged.
I.F.6.         The City shall pursue the development of a public safety facility, including a fire station and police
               station, perhaps in conjunction with a City corporation yard in the northern part of Winters .
I.F.7.         The City shall designate adequate, appropriately-located land for quasi-public uses such as
               medical facilities, churches, private school facilities, and utility uses .
I.F.8.         The City shall promote the development and operation of child care facilities .
                                                       II-4
                                                                                                   Land Use
 IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS :
I .1.     The City shall request the Yolo County LAFCO to adopt a revised sphere of influence for Winter s
         based on the City's long-term growth plans as reflected in the General Plan.
         Responsibility :       City Counci l
                                Planning Departmen t
         Time Frame :           FY 92-9 3
1.2.     The City shall review and revise, as necessary, the Zoning Ordinance to accomplish the following
         purposes :
          •  Ensure consistency with the General Plan in terms of zoning districts and developmen t
             standards .
          •  Ensure consistency with the General Plan in terms of the distribution and boundaries o f
             zoning districts .
         •   Create new zoning districts to implement new General Plan designations .
         Responsibility :       City Counci l
                                Planning Commission
                                Planning Department
         Time Frame:          FY 91-92 ; 92-93
I.3.     The City shall establish and maintain a program to monitor residential and non-residentia l
         development .
         Responsibility:      Planning Department
         Time Frame:          FY 92-93 ; ongoing
I.4.     The City shall prepare and adopt a program to ensure that growth occurs in an orderly fashion an d
         in pace with the expansion of public facilities and services . This program may include a growth -
         phasing plan, establishment of assessment districts, community facility districts, or othe r
         mechanisms .
         Responsibility:        City Council
                              Planning Department
         Time Frame :         FY 92-93

Land Use
I.S . The City shall revise the Zoning Ordinance to include a flood overlay district and shall apply such
             district to areas that contribute to or are affected by 100-year flooding as shown in Figure II-1 .
             The flood overlay district shall require compliance with FEMA's standards and participation i n
             a comprehensive flood control program prior to approval of any development entitlements .
             Responsibility :      City Counci l
                                   Planning Departmen t
             Time Frame:           FY 92-93 ; 93-9 4
I.6 .        The City shall prepare and adopt a Central Business District Plan that includes the following :
             •   Detailed land use plan
             •   Design guidelines
             •   Parking plan
             •   List of proposed public improvements
             Responsibility:       City Counci l
                                   Redevelopment Agency
                                   City Manager
                                   Planning Department
             Time Frame:           FY 92-93 ; 93-9 4
I.7. The City shall undertake a . study to assess the potential effectiveness of establishing a"linkag e
             program" designed. to ensure that new commercial development outside the Central Busines s
             District does not:adverselyaffect existing and new . : development within the Central Busines s
             District .
             Responsibility :      Economic Development Commissio n
                                   Planning Department
             Time Frame :          FY 92-93 ; 93-94
I.B.         The City shall develop an economic development plan to identify and implement strategies t o
             attract new commercial development and industry to Winters .
             Responsibility:       City Council
                                   Planning Commissio n
                                   Economic Development Commissio n
                                   Planning Departmen t
             Time Frame:           FY 92-93 ; 93-94
                                                       II-6

                                                                                                    Land Use
1 .9.  The City shall establish and maintain a program to monitor the fiscal status of the City as it relate s
       to the implementation of the General Plan.
       Responsibility :      City Manager
                             Finance Department
                             Planning Department
       Time Frame :          FY 92-93 ; ongoing
1 .10. The City shall prepare, adopt, and submit to the Regional Water Quality Control Board, a Closur e
       Plan for the City's old landfill .
       Responsibility :      City Council
                             Public Works Department
                             Planning Department
       Time Frame:           FY 92-93
WINTERS HOUSING ELEMEN T
      Adopted May 19, 1992
       Revised April 1994
                            CITY OF WINTER S
                            ORDINANCE 94-1 0
     AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING AN AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRA M
                       FOR THE CITY OF WINTER S
WHEREAS, the public welfare requires the establishment of a progra m
to encourage the provision of new affordable housing in order t o
meet the housing needs of the citizens of the City of Winters ;
WHEREAS, federal and state funds are either extremely limited or n o
longer available to facilitate the construction of new affordabl e
housing which places greater emphasis on local government and th e
private sector in producing affordable housing ; and
WHEREAS, the City of Winters General Plan provides for severa l
housing policies which will facilitate the development of new an d
rehabilitated affordable housing ; and
WHEREAS, the Winters General Plan also provides for programs ,
activities and incentives to implement housing policy to encourag e
the production of housing affordable to low and very low incom e
households .
NOW, THEREFORE    the City Council of the City of Winters does ordai n
as follows :
Section 1 . Article 31, Affordable Housing, is hereby added t o
Title VIII of the Winters Municipal Code to read as follows :
                    ARTICLE 31 . AFFORDABLE HOUSIN G
 Section 8-1 .3101 . PURPOSE . The public welfare requires the cit y
to take action to ensure that affordable housing is constructed an d
maintained within the City of Winters . The General Plan contain s
goals, policies and implementation programs designed to facilitate
 the development of new and rehabilitation for affordable housing .
 Such policies include but are not limited to, achieving th e
 community's fair share regional allocation for housing for very lo w
 and low income households, establishing density bonuses t o
 facilitate construction of housing for targeted income groups ,
 rezoning land to promote mixed uses and affordable housing, an d
 seeking all available sources of funding (including redevelopment )
 to facilitate development of affordable housing by the privat e
 sector . Special needs must be addressed such as adequate bedroom s
 for large families and housing for seniors .
 Section 8-1 .3102 . DEFINITIONS . For the purposes of this articl e
 the following words and phrases shall have the meaning s
 respectively ascribed to them by this section .
(a) "Affordable housing" means affordable sales housing o r
     affordable rental housing . Affordable housing focuses o n
     moderate, low and very low income households as define d
     hereinafter and by State Statute . The ratio of househol d
     income to ability to pay may evolve over time . However ,
     currently affordable housing purchase payments ar e
     approximately 30% of gross monthly household income les s
     insurance and property taxes . Affordable rental housin g
     payments are approximately 30% of gross monthly househol d
     income less utilities .
(b) "Moderate income" means a household earning a gross income o f
     more than 80 percent and less than 121 percent of the media n
     income for Yolo County as determined by the U .S . Department o f
     Housing and Urban Development .
(c) "Low income" means a household earning a gross income of mor e
     than 50 percent and less than 80 percent of the median incom e
     for Yolo County as determined by the U .S . Department o f
     Housing and Urban Development .
(d) "Very low income" means households earning a gross income o f
     less than 50 percent of the . median income for Yolo County a s
     determined by the U .S . Department of Housing and Urba n
     Development .
(e) "Density bonus" means entitlement to build additiona l
     residential units above the maximum number of units permitted
     pursuant to existing General Plan, . applicable specific pla n
     and zoning designations . Density bonus units may b e
     constructed only in the development where the units o f
     affordable housing are located . Density bonus means a bonu s
     of units awarded to a development pursuant to Government Cod e
     Section 65915 et seq .
Section 8-1 .3103 . APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE . This Article i s
enacted pursuant to the police power of the City of Winters and i s
for the purpose of providing affordable housing in Winter s
consistent with the General Plan .
Section 8-1 .3104 .  INDIVIDUALIZED PROJECTS . The Winters Genera l
Plan contains a policy that at least 15 percent of all new housin g
units will be affordable to persons of very low, low, or moderat e
income households, with six percent of new housing being affordabl e
to very low income households, and nine percent being affordable t o
low or moderate income households in proportion to the unmet need s
for each identified in the current Housing Element . This policy
may be met in a variety of ways, including but not limited to ,
construction of dwelling units (single-family or multi-family) an d
sales or rentals ; dedication of land ; monetary payments in lieu o f
dedication of land, cooperative ventures with non-profit housin g
corporations, mutual housing associations, limited equity housin g
cooperatives, self-help or "sweat equity" projects, etc .
The City will explore all avenues of funding and cooperativ e
efforts to assist in the development of affordable housing by th e
private and non-profit sectors .
The City's policy is to cause to be constructed 15% of all ne w
housing for very low, low and moderate income households . This is
a community-wide policy . Each project/subdivision will b e
individualized or tailored to contribute to the end policy . Every
project will not be identical . A project individualized progra m
shall be developed jointly by the developer/builder and City . The
City reserves the final authority to determine whether th e
developer's project individualized program meets the City' s
affordable housing requirements .
Such programs may include but are not limited to the following :
Programs may use a combination of the following elements .
      a.   Construct units for sale or rental .
      b.   Provide an irrevocable offer of dedication of land .
      c.   Payment of an in lieu fee instead of constructing unit s
           or dedicating land .
      d.   Density bonuses shall be granted for low and lower incom e
           units pursuant to State Statute .
Section 8-1 .3105 TERM . Affordable housing for low and very lo w
income households, shall remain affordable for a period of not les s
than 55 years .
Section 8-1 .3106 HOUSING MIX . A community-wide housing mix i s
essential . Seniors and large families must be addressed as well a s
average size households . Affordable housing units shall include a
mix of unit sizes, and to the extent feasible, should be disperse d
throughout the development .
Section 8-1 .3107 MINIMUM SIZE . The city shall approve development
programs for affordable housing proposals with a minimum acceptable
size of land dedication based upon development feasibilit y
including standard criteria such as parking, open space, buildin g
height, etc .
Section 8-1 .3108 IN-LIEU FEES . In-lieu fees shall be establishe d
by Resolution of the City Council . Any such payments shall b e
deposited into a separate account for independent audit an d
entitled "Affordable Housing Fund" . This in-lieu fee shall be
 levied on builders only when on-site construction and dedication o f
 land requirements are not deemed feasible or in combination wit h
construction and dedication . The preferred action is constructio n
of housing as compared to payment of in-lieu fees . The city shal l
determine whether the payment of in lieu fees is appropriate t o
meet the affordable housing requirmenets . The city reserves th e
 final authority to determine whether the developer's project
individualized program meets the city's affordable housin g
requirements .
This Ordinance was introduced at a regular meeting of the Winter s
City Council on the 19th day of April, 1994 and was passed an d
adopted on the 3rd day of May, 1994 by the following roll cal l
vote :
AYES :           Curry, Mosier, Planner, Mayor Chapma n
NOES :           None
ABSENT :         Martin
ABSTAINED :      Non e
ATTEST :
72adle .L, q .‘7n4
         . ills,,  CITY CLERK
    ci G

                                              SECTION II
                                               HOUSING
GOALS AND POLICIES :
Goal II.A :      To designate adequate land for a balanced range of housing types and densitie s
                 for all economic segments of the community .
Policies :
II.A.1 . The City shall continue to promote the development of a broad mix of housing types .
II.A.2 . The City shall strive to provide for its fair share of the region's housing needs .
II.A.3 . The City shall maintain an adequate supply of residential land in appropriate land us e
         designations and zoning categories to accommodate Winters' fair share of projected regiona l
         growth and maintain normal residential vacancy rates .
II.A.4 . The City shall seek to maintain an overall mix of 75 percent single family and 25 percen t
         multi-family in its housing stock . This policy shall not be implemented in such a way that i t
         would operate as a constraint on the City's ability to meet its regional fair share allocation fo r
         housing for very-low- and low-income households .
II.A. At least 15 percent of all new housing units developed within the City of Winters shall b e
         affordable to very low, low, or moderate income households, with 6 percent of new housin g
         being affordable to very low income households and 9 percent being affordable to low o r
         moderate income households in proportion to the unmet needs for each identified in th e
         current Housing Element .
II.A. To facilitate development of affordable housing, the City shall encourage development in th e
         upper half of the density range in the Medium High Density Residential and High Densit y
         Residential designations . To this end, when a project is proposed in the upper half of th e
         density range in the Medium High Density Residential or High Density Residentia l
         designations, the City shall not reduce the project density below the midpoint of the densit y
         range, unless there are specific site constraints that make such density infeasible o r
         undesirable .
II.A.S . While promoting the provision of housing for all economic segments of the community, th e
         City shall seek to ensure the highest quality in all new residential development .
II.A. To address the needs of large families, the City shall promote the development of multi-famil y
         rental units, including units with three or more bedrooms.
II.A.6. The City shall pursue all available state and federal funding assistance that is appropriate t o
         Winters' needs to develop housing that is affordable to low- and moderate-incom e
         households.
                                                    II-9
II .A.7 . The City shall consider use of Tax Exempt Mortgage Revenue Bonds, Mortgage Credi t
          Certificates (MCCs) and support the use of other financing techniques such as FHA insuranc e
          for multifamily development, Low Income Tax Credits, State Rental Housing Constructio n
          Program (RHCP) financed by Propositions 77 and 84, and the Federal Home Loan Ban k
          Affordable Housing Program .
II .A.B . All housing development proposals involving 50 units or more shall be required to submi t
          development plans to the Affordable Housing Commission for review . All such projects shall
          be encouraged to qualify for a density bonus under the density bonus provisions of state law .
II .A.9 . The City shall promote the expeditious processing and approval of residential projects tha t
          conform to General Plan policies and City regulatory requirements .
II .A .10 . Consistent with other City objectives, the City shall attempt to ensure that its policies ,
              regulations, and procedures do not add unnecessarily to the costs of producing housing .
              To this end, the City's design review process shall not be used to constrain the
              development of multi-family housing nor to unnecessarily increase its development costs .
II .A.11 . The City shall continue to provide for the development of secondary residential units, a s
              required by state law, while protecting the single-family character of neighborhoods .
              Development of secondary residential units fronting on alleys shall be encouraged .
II.A.12 . In accordance with provisions of state law, the City shall grant density bonuses of at least
              twenty-five (25) percent and at least one other specified incentive for qualifying project s
              to promote the inclusion of lower income and senior citizen housing .
II .A.13 . If below-market-rate units are included in a projectpursuant to the density bonus program
              or other local, state, or federal requirements, the City shall require buyer/renter eligibility
              screening and resale/rent controls for at least 30 years to maintain affordability of the unit s
              to originally-targeted income groups .
II .A.14. Where residential units which are required to sell or rent at below-market-rates ar e
              included within a housing development, such units shall be interspersed within th e
              development, and to the extent reasonable, shall be visually indistinguishable from market-
              rate units.
II.A.15. The City shall allow the installation of mobilehomes and factory-built housing o n
              permanent foundations consistent with the requirements of state law and in accordanc e
              with the City's residential design standards .
II.A.16. The City shall continue to work with the Yolo County Housing Authority in th e
              administration of affordable housing programs .
II.A.17. The City shall promote homeownership in new housing constructed for low- and
              moderate-income households,
 II.A.18 . The City shall promote the development of second-story residential uses over commercial
               and office uses in the Central Business District and Neighborhood Commercial
               designations.
                                                      II-10
II .A.19.      The City shall require that 10 percent of the lots in residential subdivisions of 20 or more
               lots be reserved for and sold to local builders or owner-builders .
II .A.20 . The City may use Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds in conjunctio n
               with private financial institutions to write down interest rates for home purchase .
II.A .21 . The City shall support the continued use of Section 8 rent certificates and vouchers b y
               Winters' residents.
II.A.22 . The City shall support the establishment of a new nonprofit housing developer or wor k
               with existing nonprofit developers to help develop affordable housing .
II.A.23 . The City shall require the provision of relocation assistance to tenants required to relocat e
               as a result of the removal or condemnation of housing where such removal or
               condemnation is not the fault of the tenants .
Goal II .B:         To encourage the maintenance, improvement, and rehabilitation of the city' s
                    existing housing stock and residential neighborhoods .
Policies :
II.B .1 . The City shall encourage private reinvestment in older residential neighborhoods and privat e
           rehabilitation of housing .
II.B .2. The City shall pursue all available state and federal funding assistance that is appropriate t o
           Winters' needs to rehabilitate housing . Housing rehabilitation efforts shall be given high
           priority in the use of CDBG funds .
II.B.3 . The City shall support the revitalization of older neighborhoods by keeping streets and othe r
           municipal systems in good repair.
II.B.4. The City shall promote the continued upkeep of existing mobilehome parks .
II.B .5 . The City shall require abatement of unsafe structures, giving property owners ampl e
           opportunities to correct deficiencies .
II.B.6. The City shall promote the preservation of architecturally and historically significant
           residential structures .
 Goal H.C :         To encourage energy efficiency in both new and existing housing .
 Policies :
 II.C .1 . M required by state law, the City shall require the use of energy conservation features in th e
           design of all new residential structures. The City shall also promote incorporation of energ y
           conservation and weatherization features in existing homes .
Goal II.D:           To ensure the provision of adequate services to support existing and futur e
                     residential development .
Policies :
II.D.1 . The City shall support the use of CDBG funds for upgrading streets, sidewalks, and othe r
           public improvements .
II .D .2 . The City shall ensure that new residential development pays its share in financing publi c
           facilities and services .
II.D.3 . In allocating remaining sewer capacity, the City shall ensure that its allocation scheme doe s
           not constrain the development of housing for very-low- and low-income households .
II.D.4 . The City shall strive to ensure that necessary public facilities and services, including Schoo l
           District facilities, are available prior to occupancy of residential projects .
II.D.5 . The City shall promote infill residential development where adequate public facilities an d
           services are already in place .
II.D.6 . The City shall work with the School District to ensure the availability of adequate schoo l
           facilities to meet the needs of projected households in Winters : : -
II.D .7 . The City shall strive to ensure that funds are available to provide for the construction o f
           elementary schools within walking distance of new residences .
Goal ILE : To promote equal opportunity to secure safe, sanitary, and affordable housin g
                     for all members of the community regardless of race, religion, sex, marita l
                     status, national origin, or color.
Policies :
II.E.1 . The City shall give special attention in housing programs to the needs of special groups ,
           including the physically and mentally disabled, large families, farmworkers, the elderly, an d
           families with lower incomes.
II.E.2. The City shall make available to the public information on the enforcement activities of th e
           State Fair Employment and Housing Commission .
II.E.3 . The City shall seek to work with the County and surrounding jurisdictions to address th e
           needs of the homeless on a regional basis .
II.E.4 . The City shall cooperate with community-based organizations which provide services o r
           information regarding the availability of services to the homeless .
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS :
The following describes programs that the City intends to implement during the seven-year time fram e
of Housing Element (July 1, 1991, to June 30, 1998) . For some of these programs, the descriptio n
                                                        II-12
includes a target for the number of units to be produced or households to be assisted during th e
Housing Element time frame. The households to be assisted are listed by income categories whic h
are defined as a percentage of the median household income for Yolo County . The 1991 media n
income for Yolo County, as defined by the U .S . Department of Housing and Urban Developmen t
(HUD), is $39,700 . The target income categories and their corresponding 1990 income ranges ar e
shown in Table II-1 .
                                             TABLE II- 1
                                TARGET INCOME CATEGORIE S
                                                  199 1
                                                Percentage of
        Income Category                           of Median                          Income Range'
        Very-Low                                0 to 50 percent                        under $19,850
        Low                                    51 to 80 percent                   $19,850 - $31,75 0
        Moderate                              81 to 120 percent                   $31,750 - $47,65 0
        Above Moderate                      120 percent and above                       over $47,650
' These are adjusted annually based on HUD's yearly reporting of median income to Yolo Count y
  (assumes a family of four) .
II.1 . The City shall create and appoint an Affordable Housing Committee to advise the City
              Council, Planning Commission, and Redevelopment Agency on housing policy and it s
              implementation and the allocation of the Redevelopment Agency's Tax Incremen t
              Housing Set Aside . The Affordable Housing Committee shall also review housin g
              project proposals and make recommendation for the inclusion of affordable housing .
              Responsibility : City Counci l
              Time Frame :       FY 93-94 ; Ongoing
II .2 The City shall comprehensively review and revise the text of the Zoning Ordinance to
              ensure consistency with the General Plan and shall carry out rezoning consistent wit h
              the Land Use Diagram of the General Plan.
              Responsibility : City Counci l
                                  Planning Commissio n
                                  Planning Departmen t
              Time Frame : FY 92-93 to 94-95
I1.1 The City shall adopt an ordinance requiring every new residential project of five (5) o r
              more units to contribute to meeting General Plan Policy II.A._ requiring that at least
               15 percent of all new units developed within the city be affordable to very low, low, o r
              moderate income households . Development of the affordable units on-site will normall y
              be preferred . When this is found to be infeasible or inappropriate, the City may allo w
                                                  II-13
             off-site development of the affordable units, may accept in-lieu contributions of cash o r
             land, or may approve a combination of these and other methods . The City shall wor k
             with property owners and developers to facilitate compliance with this program an d
             shall on a case-by-case basis consider providing regulatory or financial incentives t o
             facilitate compliance . The City shall develop or work with the Yolo County Housin g
             Authority to develop procedures and guidelines for establishing income eligibility fo r
             the "reserved" units and for maintaining the reserved units over time .
            During the four and one-half year period between 1994 and 1998, the program i s
             expected to result in the construction of approximately 27 units for very low incom e
             households, 18 units for low income households, and 23 units for moderate incom e
             households (assuming an average of 100 units per year) .
             Responsibility: City Counci l
                                 Redevelopment Agency
                                 Planning Department
             Time Frame :        FY 93-94 ; ongoin g
I1 .1 The City shall work with property owners and developers in the preparation an d
             processing of master development plans and specific plans for unincorporated areas an d
             in the expeditious annexation of such lands. (In May 1993, the City annexed the 148 -
             acre Winters Highlands Project area, which is designated entirely for residentia l
             development.)
             Responsibility : City Council
                                 Planning Departmen t
             Time Frame :        Ongoing
II. In accordance with the requirements of state law, the City shall revise the Zoning
             Ordinance to provide for a density bonus of at least 25 percent and at least one othe r
             incentive for residential projects of five or more units which reserve at least 20 percen t
             of their units for lower-income households, including elderly persons and families wh o
             meet the criteria for lower-income households . The City shall work with the Yol o
             County Housing Authority in developing procedures and guidelines for establishin g
             income eligibility for the "reserved" units and for maintaining the "reserved" units a s
             affordable units for at least 30 years . The City shall seek Housing Authority
             administration of the reserved units . Target: 30 very-low-income units ; 30 low-incom e
             units.
             Responsibility : City Counci l
                                 Planning Department
                                  Yolo County Housing Authorit y
             Time Frame:         FY 92-93 ; 93-94 ; Ongoing
II1 . The City shall continue through the Zoning Ordinance to allow secondary dwellin g
             units in residential zones subject to criteria concerning floor area, relationship t o
              principal residence, required parking, and other features . Target: 15 very-low-income
              and 15 low-income units. (City Council adoption of Ordinance No. 92-14 on
             November 3, 1992, greatly expanded the development potential for second units.)
                                                  II-14
           Responsibility : City Counci l
                               Planning Commission
                               Planning Department
           Time Frame :        Ongoin g
II2.       The City shall continue through the Zoning Ordinance to provide for the establishmen t
           of mobilehomes and mobilehome parks consistent with the requirements of state law .
           Responsibility : City Council
                               Planning Commissio n
                               Planning Departmen t
           Time Frame :        Ongoing
II3.       The City shall revise the Zoning Ordinance to allow for the development of affordabl e
           duplexes and halfplexes on corner lots as a permitted use in single family zonin g
           designations.
           Responsibility : City Council
                               Planning Commission
                               Planning Departmen t
           Time Frame :        FY 92-93 ; 93-9 4
II4.       The City shall revise the Zoning Ordinance to provide for the establishment, subject t o
           Conditional Use Permit control ;, of homeless shelters and transitional housing in th e
           Medium High Density Residential, High Density Residential, Central Business District ,
           and Public/Quasi Public designations. The Zoning Ordinance shall include language
           specifying that conditions imposed on Conditional Use Permit approvals shall no t
           preclude the development of homeless shelters and transitional housing in Winters .
           Responsibility : City Counci l
                               Planning Department
           Time Frame :        FY 92-93 ; 93-94
II . The City shall revise the Zoning Ordinance to include a provision that residentia l
           developments proposed in the upper half of the density range in the medium high
           density residential and high density residential zones shall be approved in the upper hal f
           of the density range, unless there are specific site constraints that make such densit y
           infeasible or undesirable .
           Responsibility : City Counci l
                               Planning Department
           Time Frame :        FY 93-9 4
 II. The City shall revise the Zoning Ordinance to facilitate mixed use development (i .e .,
           commercial and residential) in the CBD and neighborhood commercial and office zones ,
           and the development of residential uses in second stories in downtown buildings .
                                               II-15
              Responsibility : City Counci l
                                  Planning Department
              Time Frame :        FY 93-94
II5.          The City shall pursue appropriate state and federal funding sources to support effort s
              to meet new construction and rehabilitation needs of low- and moderate-incom e
              households and to assist persons with rent payments required for existing units .
              Responsibility : City Council
                                 Planning Department
              Time Frame :       FY : Ongoing
II6.          The City shall use local, state, and federal funding sources to support new constructio n
              to meet the needs of lower- and moderate-income households . The following funding
              sources shall be the City's highest priority : Mortgage Revenue Bonds, Low Income Ta x
              Credits, State Rental Housing Construction, and Redevelopment Agency Tax Incremen t
              Housing Setaside . Target: 30 units for very-low-income households, 30 units for low -
              income households, and 50 units for moderate-income households . (In Septembe r
              1993, the City applied for $126, 300 in HOME funds to support development of a 38 -
              unit FmHA project for very-low-income seniors .)
              Responsibility : City Council
                                 Planning Departmen t
              Time Frame :       FY 91-92 to 97-9 8
II7.          The City shall use local, state, and federal funding sources to support rehabilitation o f
              housing to meet . the needs of very-low- and low-income households . The following
              funding sources shall be the City's highest priority : California Housing Program - bot h
              Owner and Rental components (CHRP-O and CHRP-R), State Rental Rehabilitatio n
              Program (CECRP), Community Development Block Grant (CDBG), an d
              Redevelopment Agency Tax Increment Housing Setaside. Target : 20 units for very-
              low-income households and 20 units for low-income households . (The City in 1992
              applied for and received a CDBG technical assistance grant to assess rehabilitation
              needs. Based on the study, the City in 1993 was awarded $500,000 in CDBG funds fo r
              low interest and deferred loans for rehabilitation of owner-and renter-occupie d
              housing. The City also received a CDBG grant to assess the feasibility of
              rehabilitating three two-story, unreinforced masonry buildings in downtown for a
              combination of commercial and residential uses )
              Responsibility : City Counci l
                                  Planning Department
                                  Redevelopment Agenc y
              Time Frame :        FY 91-92 to 97-9 8
II . The City shall apply to the State for CDBG and HOME funds to rehabilitate for mixe d
              use one or more of the three buildings (Chadwick Building, Buckhorn Building, Ban k
              of Winters Building) evaluated in the City's 1993 Rehabilitation Study.
                                                    II-16
            Responsibility : City Counci l
                                Planning Departmen t
             Time Frame :       FY 94-95 or FY 95-9 6
II8.        The City may use Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds to subsidiz e
            on-and off-site infrastructure improvement for lower-income housing projects .
            Responsibility : City Council
                                Planning Departmen t
            Time Frame :        FY 91-92 to 97-9 8
II9.        The City shall support the development of a senior housing project by Farmers Hom e
            Administration . Target : 48 units for very-low-income households . (The Winters
            Planning Commission approved a 38-unit FmHA seniors project in February 1993 .
            In June 1993, the City Council waived over $53, 000 in mitigation fees for the project.
            In September 1993, the City applied for $126,300 in HOME funds to support th e
            project's development. The City also supported an application to the California Tax
            Credit Commission for the project )
            Responsibility : City Counci l
                                Planning Department
            Time Frame :        FY 91-92 to 93-9 4
II10.       The City shall establish a housing trust fund utilizing state and federal funds ,
            Redevelopment Agency funds, and funds from other sources to assist in th e
            development of housing for very-low- and low-income households . (Redevelopment
            housing set-aside income alone should generate up to $500,000 by FY 97-98 .
            Conceivably, the housing trust fund may accumulate as much as one million dollars b y
            FY 97-98, considering other possible sources . Depending on the level of City
            participation, the trust fund could subsidize between 20 and 50 units for very-low- an d
            low-income households. )
            Responsibility : City Council
                                Planning Department
            Time Frame :        FY 93-94 ; ongoing
II11.       The City shall develop a fee deferral program to assist in the development of housing
            for very-low and low-income households. an .June 1993, the City Council waived ove r
            $53, 000 in mitigation fees for a 38-unit FmHA seniors project)
            Responsibility : City Counci l
                                Planning Department
            Time Frame :        FY 93-9 4
II. The City, acting as the Redevelopment Agency, shall prepare an affordable housing
            production plan as required by Health & Safety Code Section 33413(b)(4) to ensur e
            that sufficient affordable housing is developed with the Redevelopment Project Area t o
            ensure compliance with state law targets .
                                                II-17
               Responsibility : Redevelopment Agency
                                    Planning Department
               Time Frame:          FY 93-94 :, 94-9 5
 II . The City, in cooperation with property owners, developers, and the Yolo County Floo d
               Control and Water Conservation District, will undertake a feasibility and design stud y
               for a comprehensive solution to flooding problems associated with Chickahominy and
               Moody Sloughs . The comprehensive solution may include such features as diversio n
               to Putah Creek, diversion under I-505, detention ponds, changes in land us e
               designations, elevating building pads, and structural flood proofing as deemed effective
               and cost effective . (A feasibility and design study was completed in May 1993 . In FY
               93-94, the City is preparing an EIR on the proposed drainage improvements .)
               Responsibility : City Counci l
                                   City Enginee r
                                   City Manager
               Time Frame:         FY 92-93 to 94-9 5
II12.          The City shall post and distribute information on currently available weatherization an d
               energy conservation programs.
              Responsibility : Planning Department
               Time Frame :        Ongoing
II13.          The City shall enforce state requirements, including Title 24 requirements, for energ y
               conservation in new residential projects and shall encourage residential developers t o
               employ additional energy conservation measures with respect to the siting of buildings ,
              landscaping, and solar access .
              Responsibility : City Council
                                   Planning Departmen t
              Time Frame :         Ongoing
II.14 . The City shall continue to cooperate with the Yolo County Housing Authority in it s
              administration of the Section 8 rental assistance program . Target : 30 very-low-incom e
              households.
              Responsibility : Planning Department
                                   Yolo County Housing Authority
              Time Frame :         Ongoing
II15 . The City shall work with the cities of Davis, Woodland, West Sacramento, and Yol o
              County to extend their joint agreement providing services for the homeless for a n
              additional three-year period, starting July 1993 . (In October 1993, the City signed a
              three year-extension of the agreement)
              Responsibility : City Counci l
                                   City Manager
                                   Planning Department
                                                    II-18
              Time Frame :        FY 92-93 ; 93-9 4
II16.         The City shall consider establishing a position of housing program coordinator, eithe r
              as a City staff position or through contract, to coordinate City housing activities, t o
              assist in the implementation of affordable housing programs, and to work with non -
              profit housing developers to build affordable housing.
              Responsibility : City Counci l
                                  City Manage r
                                  Planning Departmen t
              Time Frame :        FY 92-93 ; ongoing
II17.         The City shall continue to promote equal housing opportunity for all persons regardles s
              of race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, or color . The City shal l
              continue to refer ;Fair housing complaints to the County District Attorney or to the Stat e
              Fair Employment and Housing Commission . The City shall publicize its fair housin g
              program by placing printed information in schools, libraries, other public buildings an d
              meeting places, and by advertising in the local media .
              Responsibility: City Counci l
                                  Planning Department
              Time Frame :        Ongoing
II18.         The City shall annually review and publish the city's progress toward achieving th e
              City's fair-share housing allocation as determined by SACOG .
              Responsibility : City Counci l
                                  Planning Department
              Time Frame :        FY 92-93 ; annually thereafte r
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVE S
Table II-2 summarizes Winters' quantified objectives for the period June 30, 1991, to July 1, 1998 .
These quantified objectives represent a reasonable expectation for the new housing units that will b e
developed and households that will be assisted between 1991 and 1998 based on the policies an d
programs outlined in this section and general market conditions .
Table 11-2 also shows the estimated total new construction need for Winters to July 1998 as provide d
by the Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG), adjusted to reflect units approved i n
1989, 1990, and 1991 .
                                                        SECTION III
                                    TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION
 GOALS AND POLICIES :
 Goal III.A : To create and maintain a roadway network that will ensure the safe and efficient movemen t
                  of people and goods throughout the city.
 Policies :
 III.A.1 .        The City shall endeavor to maintain a Level of Service "C" or better, as defined by the 1985
                 Highway Capacity Manual or subsequent revisions, on all streets and intersections within the city .
 III .A.2. Streets shall be dedicated, constructed, widened, extended, and modified according to Cit y
                  standards specified in Part I of this Policy Document. Dedication and improvement of full rights -
                  of-way may not be required in existing developed areas where the City determines that suc h
                  improvements are either infeasible or undesirable . The City may allow other deviations from thes e
                  standards if the City determines that safe and adequate public access and circulation, includin g
                 pedestrian convenience, are preserved by such deviations .
III.A.3 . To identify the potential impacts of new development on traffic service levels, the City shal l
                 require the preparation of traffic impact analyses at the sole expense of the developer fo r
                 developments with 20 or more lots or units .
III.A.4.         The City shall explore the restoration of the Putah Creek Bridge as an historic bridge .
III.A.5 .        The City explore the feasibility of developing a second bridge crossing of Putah Creek betwee n
                 the existing Putah Creek Bridge and Johnson Road .
III.A.6.         The City shall work with Caltrans in developing and implementing interchange improvements a t
                 Highway 128 and I-505 .
III.A.7.         The City shall explore with Caltrans and the County the long-term possibilities for improving th e
                 capacity of the County Road 31 overcrossing of I-505 .
IILA .8 .        The City shall comply with and implement the programs and policies of the Yolo County
                 Congestion Management Plan (CMP) .
III.A.9. The City shall require street designs consistent with principles of interconnected network pat h
                 design. The City shall insure that there are multiple, local-street access points to all development s
                 throughout the city . The City shall insure that direct access to all local streets from primary an d
                 secondary collectors is maintained . At the discretion of the City, alleys may be used i n
                 conjunction with the overall street layout .
IILA .10.        Street designs should promote pedestrian and bicycle travel and should emphasize safety ove r
                 travel speed and capacity . Collector streets should not be used as separators of neighborhoods .
IILA .11 .       Neighborhood streets shall be designed to discourage unsafe traffic speeds .
                                                            II-20
                                                                                        Transportation and Circulation
 III.A .12 .    The City shall encourage the use of curb corner radii that slow traffic turning movements an d
                minimize pedestrian crosswalk lengths, but are consistent with fire truck turning needs .
 III.A .13.     On-street truck parking shall be prohibited where such parking restricts adequate sight distance s
                or otherwise poses a potentially hazardous situation .
IILA .14,       Industrial and commercial development shall be planned so that truck access through residentia l
                areas is avoided .
IILA .15 .      The City shall ensure through a combination of traffic impact fees and other funding mechanism s
               that new development pays its share of the costs of circulation improvements .
III.A.16. The City shall prohibit development of private streets in new residential projects, except i n
               extraordinary circumstances . In such cases, the private streets shall be developed to City stree t
               standards .
III.A.17.      Access to new schools shall be located away from major arterials and adjacent to pedestrian an d
               bicycle routes .
Goal III.B : To promote and maintain public and private transit systems that are responsive to th e
               needs of Winters' residents.
Policies :
IILB .1 .      The City shall work with the Yolo County Transit Authority to maintain and expand bus servic e
               to Winters.
III.B.2.       The City shall consider assessing development impact fees for capital expenses for increase d
               transit service.
III.B.3 .      The City shall require bus turnouts and shelters in higher density residential and commercial area s
               and other areas deemed appropriate .
Goal III.C : To promote increased efficiency in automobile use .
Policies :
III.C.1.       The City shall encourage and support programs that will increase ridesharing .
III.C.2.       The City shall cooperate with Caltrans and Yolo County Transit in developing and maintaining
               park-and-ride facilities for Winters' commuters .
III.C.3. The City shall coordinate its ridesharing support services with the rideshare offices of major traffi c
               generators such as UC Davis, Yuba Community College in Woodland, and major regiona l
               employers .
III.C.4.       The City shall encourage telecommuting and other trip-reduction strategies .
                                                       II-21
 Transportation and Circulation
 Goal III.D : To consider air quality and noise impacts along with traffic flow efficiency when makin g
                  decisions about improvements to existing roadways or construction of new roadways .
 Policies :
 IILD .1.         To the extent feasible, the City shall provide for separation of residential and other noise-sensitiv e
                  land uses from major roadways to reduce noise and air pollution impacts .
 Goal III.E : To promote intergovernmental communication and cooperation concerning transportation -
                  related issues .
 Policies :
 IILE.1 .         The City shall continue to participate in state, regional, and local transportation planning effort s
                  to ensure coordination of its transportation improvements with the region's transportation system .
 Goal III.F : To ensure the adequate provision of both on- and off-street parking .
Policies :
III.F.1 . The City shall require provision of adequate off-street parking in conjunction with all ne w
                  developments . To the extent possible, parking shall be located behind buildings, out of view fro m
                 the street : When it is not possible for parking lots to be placed behind buildings, the City shal l
                 require screening to mitigate the visual impact of the lots while providing for continued polic e
                 surveillance . As much as possible, parking lots should not be located at intersections .
III.F.2 . In addition to providing for on-street parking, the City shall pursue development of public parkin g
                 lots in the downtown area and establishment of a parking assessment district or other financin g
                 mechanisms to facilitate development and maintenance of public parking lots .
III.F.3 .        The City shall encourage downtown business owners and their employees to park their vehicle s
                 at more distant locations to free up parking spaces nearest downtown businesses .
III.F.4.         The City shall aggressively enforce on-street parking time limitations .
Goal III.G: To promote pedestrian and bicycle travel as alternatives to automobile use .
Policies :
IILG. I . The City shall create and maintain a safe and convenient system of pedestrian and bicycle route s
                 that encourages walking or bicycling as an alternative to driving . The pedestrian bicycle syste m
                 shall connect all residential areas, schools, and shopping and employment areas in the city . The
                 bicycle system shall favor on-street bike lanes over separated bike paths . New development shall
                 be required to pay its share of the costs for development and maintenance of this system .
III.G.2.         The City shall require installation of sidewalks along all streets in all newly developing areas .
                                                          II-22
                                                                                      Transportation and Circulation
III .0.3 .     The City shall cooperate with surrounding jurisdictions in designing and implementing an area -
               wide bikeway system .
III.G.4.       Where cul-de-sacs are deemed necessary or desirable, pedestrian/bicycle paths shall, whereve r
               possible, be required to connect from the cul-de-sac bulb to the next street .
III.0.5 .      All schools should be easily accessible from pedestrian and bicycle routes .
III.G.6 . The City shall require inclusion of bicycle parking facilities at all new major public and quasi -
               public facilities and commercial and employment sites . Major employers shall be encouraged to
               provide showers and lockers in their facilities to encourage biking .
 Transportation and Circulation
 IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS :
III.1 . The City shall maintain a master list of the most recent available traffic counts . The master lis t
                  shall be updated with traffic counts taken in conjunction with project traffic studies and specia l
                 counts conducted by the City .
                 Responsibility :     City Engineer
                                      Public Works Department
                 Time Frame:          Ongoing
III.2.           The City shall prepare, adopt, and periodically update a Circulation Master Plan consistent with
                 the land use patterns and densities/intensities specified in the General Plan.
                 Responsibility:      City Council
                                      City Engineer
                                      Public Works Department
                                      Planning Departmen t
                 Time Frame :         Ongoing
                                      FY 91-92, as neede d
III.3 .          The City shall undertake a feasibility and design study for the development of a second bridg e
                 crossing of Putah Creek between the existing Putah Creek Bridge and Johnson Road .
                 Responsibility:      City Counci l
                                      City Manager
                                      City Engineer
                                     Public Works Department
                 Time Frame:         FY 92-93 ; 93-9 4
IIL4 . The City shall adopt and implement a program to satisfy the requirements of the Yolo Count y
                 Congestion Management Plan (CMP). This program shall include a monitoring plan, a land us e
                 impact analysis plan, and a local trip reduction ordinance . Deficiency plans may also have to b e
                 prepared if violations of CMP Level of Service standards occur on Highway 128 or Railroa d
                 Avenue .
                 Responsibility:     City Counci l
                                     City Engineer
                                     Public Works Departmen t
                                     Planning Departmen t
                 Time Frame :        FY 91-92 ; 92-93 ; ongoing
                                                          II-24
                                                                                    Transportation and Circulation
 III .5 .  The City shall prepare and adopt a traffic impact fee as part of the City's development impact fe e
          schedule to pay for improvements necessitated by new development .
          Responsibility:       City Counci l
                                City Engineer
                                Public Works Department
                                Planning Departmen t
          Time Frame :          FY 91-92
I1I.6.    The City shall conduct a transit . improvement study to identify areas in the city needing new an d
          expanded transit services .
          Responsibility :      City Counci l
                                Public Works Department
          Time Frame :          FY 93-9 4
III.7.    The City shall review and revise, as necessary, off-street parking standards of the Zoning
          Ordinance .
          Responsibility:       City Council
                                Planning Commission
                                Planning Department
          Time Frame :          FY 91-92 ; 92-93
III.8 .   The City shall investigate the purchase of vacant lots downtown for the development of publi c
          parking lots .
          Responsibility :      Redevelopment Agency
          Time Frame:          FY 92-93 ; ongoing
II1.9 .   The City shall cooperate with Caltrans and Yolo County Transit in developing and maintaining
          park-and-ride facilities for Winters' commuters .
          Responsibility:       City Counci l
          Time Frame:           Ongoing
                                                  II-25
Transportation and Circulation
III.10.         The City shall prepare, adopt, and periodically update a Bicycle/Pedestrian System Master Plan .
                Responsibility :     City Counci l
                                     Streets and Trees Commissio n
                                     City Engineer
                                    Public Works Department
                                    Planning Department
                Time Frame:         FY 92-93 ; 93-9 4
111.1 1 .       The City shall prepare and adopt requirements for secure bicycle racks at new commercial and
                employment sites .
                Responsibility:      City Counci l
                                    Public Works Departmen t
                                     Planning Departmen t
                Time Frame :        FY 92-93
                                                        II-26
Transportation and Circulatio
                                                     SECTION IV
                                     PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICE S
 GOALS AND POLICIES :
 Goal IV.A : To maintain an adequate level of service in the Winters' public facilities and services t o
                 meet the needs of existing and future development .
 Policies :
 IV .A
 .1 .           The City shall ensure, insofar as possible, that public facilities and services are developed an d
                operational as they are needed to serve new development .
 IV.A.2.        The City shall regularly monitor current levels of service in Winters' public facilities and services .
 IV.A .3 .      The City shall ensure through capital facility planning and budgeting and through review o f
                private development projects that City-adopted level of service standards are maintained .
 IV.A .4 . The City shall ensure through a combination of development fees and other funding mechanism s
                that new development pays its fair share of the costs of developing new facilities and services .
                The City at its sole discretion may allow developers to construct needed improvements accordin g
                to City specificati in in lieu of paying development fees for such improvements .
IV .A.5 . The City shall ensure thorough a combination of assessment districts, utility user taxes, and othe r
                funding mechanisms that adequate funding is available for the improvement, operation, an d
                maintenance of public facilities and services .
Goal IV.B : To maintain an adequate level of service in the City's water system to meet the needs                   of
                existing and future development .
Policies :
IV .B.1 . The City shall continue to use groundwater as the principal source of domestic water for th e
                foreseeable future . The City shall also pursue acquisition of surface water rights in order t o
                decrease the city's dependence on groundwater .
IV .B.2.        The City shall maintain a regular program for replacing older water pipes .
IV .B.3 .       The City shall develop, maintain, upgrade, and replace city water wells as necessary to ensur e
                adequate and assured water supply for existing and new development and for fire protection .
IV .B.4 .       The City shall maintain a regular program for inspecting and testing fire hydrants .
IV .B.5 . The City shall eliminate from service the existing elevated water storage tanks after installation
                of a pressurized system utilizing variable frequency drives and backup generators at existing well s
                and replacement of old pipes south of Grant Street .
                                                         II-28
                                                                                          Public Facilities and Services
 IV .B.6.        The City shall institute a new telemetry system to monitor, control, and provide record keepin g
                 for existing and future wells and tanks .
 IV .B.7.        The City shall make preservation of groundwater recharge areas a high priority .
 IV.B.8 . The City shall study the feasibility of rebuilding the Winters Dam on Putah Creek to promot e
                 groundwater recharge, provide a surface water source, promote riparian habitat enhancement, and
                 provide for both passive and active recreational activities .
 IV.B.9.         The City shall monitor groundwater levels at least twice a year to determine if a progressive, long -
                 term decline in water levels is occurring .
 IV .B .10 .     The City shall participate in an areawide groundwater management study .
 IV.B .11 . To minimize the need for the development of new water sources and facilities and to minimiz e
                sewer treatment needs, the City will promote water conservation in City operations and in privat e
                development . To this end, the City shall implement a "moderate" water conservation program a s
                defined in Urban Water Management Plan in the Water System Master Plan . The City shall
                annually monitor water usage to assess the effectiveness of the "moderate" water conservation
                program . If groundwater levels decline and/or if the "moderate" program does not achieve it s
                intended results, the City shall implement the "aggressive" or "maximum" water conservatio n
                program as defined in the Water Management Plan .
IV .B.12 . The City shall, to the extent practical, require the use of drought-tolerant plant species and dri p
                irrigation systems in the landscaping of new public and private open space areas, common areas ,
                and parks .
IV .B.13.       The City shall promote the use of treated sewage effluent for public and private landscap e
                maintenance and agricultural irrigation .
IV.B.14.        The City shall require water meters on all new hook-ups and shall develop a meter retrofi t
                program for existing connections .
Goal IV.C:      To maintain an adequate level of service in the City's sewage collection and disposal system
                to meet the needs of existing and future development .
Policies:
IV .C.1 .       The City shall maintain a regular program for replacing and upgrading older and undersized sewe r
                lines and pumps.
IV .C.2.        The City shall ensure the provision of adequate sewer service to all new development in the city .
IV .C.3 . The City shall undertake a design study for construction of a new and larger treatment plant in th e
                northeast part of the city . Treated effluent from the treatment plant should be reused for such
                purposes as crop or golf course irrigation and/or wetlands creation/maintenance during summe r
                months and discharged to Putah Creek during winter months .
                                                        II-29
 Public Facilities and Services
 IV .C.4.            The City shall expand existing sewage treatment facilities to their existing planned capacity t o
                    provide for development prior to a new plant coming on line .
 IV .C.5            The City shall implement and enforce an industrial pretreatment program to ensure the safe an d
                    efficient operation of City treatment facilities .
 Goal IV.D:         To maintain an adequate level of service in the City's storm drainage system t o
                    accommodate runoff from existing and future development and to prevent property damage
                    due to flooding.
 Policies :
 IV .D.1 .          The City shall maintain a regular program for replacing and upgrading older and undersized stor m
                    drains .
 IV.D.2.            The City shall expand and develop storm drainage facilities to accommodate the needs of existin g
                    and planned development .
 IV.D.3 . The City shall determine the feasibility of developing a recreational lake in conjunction wit h
                    development of the North Area to serve as a detention facility, designed to accommodate al l
                    stormwater runoff from the North Area .
 IV.D.4 . The City, in cooperation with property owners, developers, and the Yolo County Flood Contro l
                    and Water Conservation District shall undertake a feasibility and design study for a
                    comprehensive solution . to the floodingproblems ; associated with Chicahominy and Mood y
                    Sloughs . The comprehensive solution may include such features as diversion to Putah Creek ,
                    diversion under I-505, detention ponds, changes in land use designations, elevating building pads ,
                    and structural flood proofing as deemed effective and cost effective . As a condition to any
                   development entitlement approval, all development affected by or contributing to the 100-yea r
                   flooding problem shall be required to contribute to the financing of the comprehensive flood
                   control solution in an amount that reflects that property's relative contribution to the flooding
                   problem or benefit from the program adopted .
IV.D.5 .           Future drainage system discharges, including discharges into Putah Creek, shall comply wit h
                   applicable state arid federal pollutant discharge requirements .
Goal IV.E:         To provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste while minimizing the generation
                   of waste .
Policies :
IV .E.1 .          The City shall institute recycling and waste generation reduction programs with the goal o f
                   reducing its solid waste generation by 25 percent by 1995 and 50 percent by the year 2000 .
                                                           II-30
                                                                                             Public Facilities and Services
  Goal IV.F:      To ensure that an adequate level of police service is maintained as new development occurs .
 Policies :
 IV .F.1 . The City shall, through adequate staffing and patrol arrangements, endeavor to maintain th e
                 minimum feasible response times for police calls . The goal for average response time for Priority
                  1 (emergency) calls shall be three minutes .
 IV.F.2.         The Police Department shall continually monitor response times and report annually on the results
                 of the monitoring.
 GoalIV.G: To ensure that an adequate level of fire protection service is maintained as ne w
                 development occurs .
 Policies :
 IV.G.1 . The City shall encourage the Fire Protection District to maintain an overall fire insurance (ISO )
                 rating of five or better for the city of Winters, but in no event should the ISO rating be allowed to
                 fall below 6 . The goal for average response time for Priority 1 (emergency) calls should be five
                 minutes .
 Goal IV.H : To provide public schools which serve as a neighborhood focus and to maintain a qualit y
                 learning environment for Winter's residents as the city's population increases.
Policies :
IV.H. 1 .        The City shall assist the School District in locating and reserving appropriate sites for ne w
                 schools.
IV.H.2.         The City shall work cooperatively with the School District in monitoring housing, population, an d
                school enrollment trends to plan for future school facility needs .
IV .H.3 .       The City shall support enactment of state legislation to finance the construction of new schools .
IV .H.4 . The City shall cooperate with the School District in an effort to ensure adequate financing for ne w
                school facilities . To this end, the City shall cooperate with the School District in the collectio n
                of school facility development fees from new residential and non-residential development .
IV .H.5.        The City, to the 'extent possible, shall require that new school facilities are constructed an d
                operating prior to the occupation of the residences which the schools are intended to serve .
IV .H.6. The City shall nol : approve any development entitlements, including building permits for ne w
                residences, unless a mechanism to mitigate school impacts generated by the project has bee n
                approved by the City . This mechanism may include the dedication of land, development fees, a
                commitment to funding through an assessment district or Mello-Roos Community Facilitie s
                District, the phasing of the project, reduction in density, or some other mechanism which mitigate s
                or avoids the school impacts attributable to the development .
                                                          II-31
 Public Facilities and Services
  IV.H.7.            The City shall include the School District in the City's staff review process for new residentia l
                     developments .
 IV .H .8.           The City shall encourage participation in the educational systems by all segments of the
                    community.
 IV.H.9.            The City shall encourage the provision of social, recreational, and educational services tha t
                    complement and enrich those provided by public and private educational services and facilities .
 Goal IV.I.:        To maintain a high level of library services for all Winters' residents .
IV .I
 .1 .               The City shall assist the County in locating and reserving an appropriate site and in securin g
                    funding for construction of a new branch library .
IV.I.2. The City shall assist the County in seeking sufficient operating funds to support an adequat e
                    library collection, staff and hours of service, including more evenings, Saturdays, and possibl y
                    Sunday afternoons .
Goal IV.J:          To promote efficiency, convenience, and harmonious relationships in the siting of publi c
                    facilities .
Policies :
IV.J.1 . Public facilities, such. as utility substations, water storage or treatment plants, pumping stations ,
                    and sewer treatment plants, shall be located, designed ; and maintained so that noise, light, glare ,
                    or odors associated with these facilities, will not adversely affect nearby land uses . Building and
                    landscaping materials that make these facilities compatible with neighboring properties shall b e
                   used.
IV.J.2.            Utility company rights-of-way shall be considered for use as public or private open space, trails ,
                   parkland, or other compatible recreational uses .
IV.J.3.            The City shall require all new electrical and communication lines to be installed underground . The
                   City shall actively promote the undergrounding of existing overhead facilities .
IV.J.4 . The City shall promote the clustering of public and quasi-public facilities such as schools, parks ,
                   libraries, child care facilities, and community activity centers . The City shall promote joint-us e
                   of public facilities, and agreements for sharing costs and operational responsibilities among publi c
                   service providers .
                                                            II-3 2
                                                                                  Public Facilities and Services
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS :
IV.1.   The City shall prepare, adopt, and periodically update a Level of Service Plan for public
        improvements and services, including but not limited to, the following : traffic, sewer, water,
        drainage, police, and fire .
        Responsibility :     City Counci l
                             City Manager
                            Department Head s
        Time Frame :        FY 92-93 ; as needed
IV.2.   The City shall regularly monitor current levels of services in Winters' public facilities and services
        based on the Level of Service Plan .
        Responsibility :     City Counci l
                             Planning Commission
                             City Manage r
                            Department Head s
        Time Frame :         Ongoing
IV.3.   The City shall prepare, adopt, and periodically update a Water System Master Plan consistent
        with the land use patterns and densities/intensities specified in the General Plan . The Wate r
        System Master Plan shall include a scheduled program for replacing older water pipes .
        Responsibility :     City Council
                             City Enginee r
                             Public Works Department
        Time Frame :         FY 91-92 ; as needed
IV.4.   The City shall pursue the acquisition of surface water rights .
        Responsibility:      City Council
                             City Manager
                             City Engineer
                             Public Works Departmen t
        Time Frame:          Ongoing
IV.5.   The City shall monitor groundwater levels at least twice a year to determine if a progressive, long -
        term decline in water levels is occurring .
        Responsibility :     Public Works Department
         Time Frame :        Annually
                                                II-33
Public Facilities and Services
IV.6.              The City shall implement a "moderate" water conservation program as defined in Urban Wate r
                   Management Plan in the Water System Master Plan. The City shall annually monitor wate r
                   usage to assess the effectiveness of the "moderate" water conservation program . If groundwater
                   levels decline and/or if the "moderate" program does not achieve its intended results, the City shal l
                   implement the "aggressive" or "maximum" water conservation program as defined in the Urban
                   Water Management Plan .
                   Responsibility:      City Counci l
                                        Public Works Departmen t
                   Time Frame:          Ongoing ; annually ; as needed
IV.7.              The City shall develop a water meter retrofit program for all existing connections.
                   Responsibility :     City Counci l
                                        City Manager
                                        City Engineer
                                        Public Works Departmen t
                   Time Frame :         FY 92-9 3
IV.8.              The City shall prepare, adopt, and periodically update a Sewer System Master Plan consistent
                   with the land use patterns and densities/intensities specified in the General Plan .
                   Responsibility :     City Counci l
                                        City Engineer
                                        Public Works Department
                   Time Frame :         FY 91-92 ; as needed
IV.9.              The City shall undertake a design study for and construction of a new and larger sewage treatmen t
                   plant in the northeast part of the city . The new treatment plan should be completed an d
                   operational by June 1995 .
                   Responsibility:      City Council
                                        City Engineer
                                        Public Works Department
                   Time Frame :         FY 92-93 ; 93-94; 94-9 5
IV.10.             The City shall prepare, adopt, and periodically update a Storm Drainage Master Plan consistent
                   with the land use patterns and densities/intensities specified in the General Plan .
                   Responsibility:       City Council
                                         City Engineer
                                         Public Works Department
                    Time Frame :         FY 91-92 ; as needed
                                                           II-34
                                                                                 Public Facilities and Services
IV.11. The City, in cooperation with property owners, developers, and the Yolo County Flood Contro l
       and Water Conservation District, will undertake a feasibility and design study for a comprehensiv e
       solution to flooding problems associated with Chickahominy and Moody Sloughs . The
       comprehensive solution may include such features as diversion to Putah Creek, diversion unde r
       I-505, detention ponds, changes in land use designations, elevating building pads, and structura l
       flood proofing as deemed effective and cost effective .
       Responsibility:      City Counci l
                            City Enginee r
                            Public Work Departmen t
       Time Frame:          FY 92-9 3
IV.12. The City shall prepare and adopt an ordinance to ensure that impacts on school facilities ar e
       mitigated, which may include a requirement for dedication of land, development fees, a
       commitment to funding through an assessment district or a Mello-Roos Community Facilitie s
       District, phasing of the project, reduction in density, or other mitigation measures .
       Responsibility:      City Counci l
                            Planning Commission
                            City Manage r
       Time Frame:          FY 91-92 ; 92-9 3
IV.13. The City and the School District shall negotiate a memorandum of understanding to address level s
       of service needed by local schools; implementationof General Plan school facilities policies, and
       the School District's...responsibilities 'with regard.to,providing the necessary legal and factual
       support for such school facilities .
       Responsibility :     City Counci l
                            City Manager
                            School Distric t
       Time Frame :         FY 91-92 ; 92-93 (prior to adoption of school impact mitigation ordinance .)
IV.14. The City shall prepare and adopt a legislative mechanism, such as an overlay zoning district, t o
       ensure that development projects which are currently within the city limits will contribute th e
       necessary school impact mitigation fees or provide alternative mitigation measures necessary to
       provide adequate school facilities .
       Responsibility :      City Counci l
                             Planning Commissio n
                             City Manager
        Time Frame :         FY 91-92 ; 92-93
                                                II-35
Public Facilities and Services
IV.15.             The City shall undertake a space-needs study for the development of a new public safety facilit y
                   for the Winters Police Department and Fire Protection District .
                   Responsibility:       City Manager
                                         Police Department
                                         Fire Protection Distric t
                   Time Frame :          FY 92-93 ; 93-9 4
IV.16.             The City shall adopt an ordinance that establishes standards and requirements for undergroundin g
                   of both new and existing overhead electrical and communication utility lines .
                   Responsibility:       City Counci l
                                         City Engineer
                                         Public Works Department
                   Time Frame:           FY 92-9 3
IV.17.             The City shall prepare, adopt, and submit to Yolo County a source reduction and recycling elemen t
                   which includes the following components :
                   •    Waste Characterization
                   •    Source Reductio n
                   •    Recycling (including a curbside pickup program )
                   •    Composting
                   •    Solid Waste Facility Capacity
                   •    Education and Public Information
                   •    Funding
                   •    Special Waste
                   •    Household Hazardous Wast e
                   Responsibility:       City Counci l
                                         Public Works Department
                   Time Frame :          FY 91-9 2
IV .18.            The City shall prepare, adopt, and periodically update a long-term Capital Improvement Progra m
                   (CIP), for traffic, sewer, water, drainage, parks, and other facility improvements .
                   Responsibility:       City Council
                                         Planning Commissio n
                                         City Manager
                                         Department Heads
                   Time Frame:           FY 92-93 ; as needed
                                                           II-36

                                                                              Public Facilities and Services
IV .19. The City shall annually review and adjust, as necessary, its development fee schedule.
        Responsibility :   City Counci l
                           City Manager
                           Department Head s
        Time Frame:        Annually
                                              II-37
Public Facilities and Service
                                                    SECTION V
                             RECREATIONAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCE S
GOALS AND POLICIES :
Goal V.A:       To establish and maintain a public park system and recreation facilities suited to the need s
                of Winters' residents and visitors .
Policies :
V.A. 1.         The City's overall goal shall be seven acres of developed parkland (combined neighborhood an d
                community) per 1,000 residents .
V.A .2 . To the extent authorized by law, the City shall require all new residential development to dedicat e
                improved parkland or pay equivalent in-lieu fees based on a standard of five acres of improve d
                parkland per 1,000 population . Golf course development and creek setbacks shall not be counte d
                toward meeting the park dedication requirement .
V.A.3.         New residential developments shall be required to fund park maintenance through a landscapin g
                and lighting district or other appropriate mechanism .
V.A.4.          The City shall pursue all available and appropriate local, regional, state, and federal funding fo r
                the acquisition of parkland, the development of park facilities, and park maintenance .
V.A.S .        Neighborhood parks shall be integrated into, and become focal points of, new residentia l
                neighborhoods .
V.A.6 . The City shall work with the School District in developing a 20± acre joint-use community par k
                next to the proposed high school site . This park should include basketball and tennis courts ,
                swimming pool, gymnasium, ballfields, playground, and picnic area .
V.A .7.         The City shall develop a 30± acre community ball complex in Winters . This park should includ e
                lighted baseball and soccer fields, concession facilities, and restrooms .
V.A .B.         The City shall pursue joint-use of school facilities as a high priority for the development of ne w
                park and recreational facilities .
V.A .9.         Parks shall be located, oriented, and designed in such a way as to facilitate security, policing ,
                maintenance, and pedestrian bicycle access .
V.A .10. New high-activity-level parks and parks intended for night use shall be designed to buffer existin g
                and planned surrounding residential uses from excessive noise, light, and other potentia l
                nuisances.
V.A .11 .       The City shall encourage development of recreational facilities along Putah Creek near th e
                Community Center .
                                                        II-39

Recreational and Cultural Resources
V.A.12.          The City shall pursue development of a cultural center, teen center, and senior center near th e
                 Community Center or at another suitable location .
V.A .13 .        The City shall emphasize the use of drought-tolerant and drought-resistant landscaping in th e
                 development of City parks .
V.A.14 .         The City shall encourage the use of open space and recreational uses as buffers betwee n
                 incompatible land. uses .
V.A.15 . The City shall pursue the development of a citywide network of pedestrian and bicycle pathway s
                 and equestrian trails . The pedestrian and bicycle pathway and trail system should be designed t o
                 link parks, schools, civic and major shopping and employment centers . The City's bicycl e
                pathway system should be integrated with the county-wide bikeway system .
V.A .16 .        The City shall explore the reconstruction of the railroad bridge over Putah Creek as a
                 bicycle/pedestrian bridge .
V.A .17 .        The City shall pursue development of a championship golf course in the north part of Winters .
Goal V.B :      To promote the provision of private recreational facilities and opportunities .
Policies :
V.B .1.          The City shall promote the provision of private open space and recreation facilities in large-scal e
                residential developments .
V.B.2.           The City shall promote the development of commercial recreational facilities that meet communit y
                needs and complement public parks, facilities, and programs .
V.B .3 . The City shall actively promote the visual and performing arts in Winters and suppor t
                 development of facilities for the arts . To this end, the City shall explore the creation of a civics
                 arts commission and the development of a cultural center .
Goal V .C:       To establish recreation programs suited to the broad needs and interests of all Winters '
                 residents .
Policies :
V.C .1 .         In planning recreation programs, the City shall promote the active involvement of all affecte d
                 residents, including those with special needs, such as the physically disabled and the elderly .
V.C.2.           The City shall maintain cooperative agreements with the School District for the use of schoo l
                 facilities for City-sponsored recreation programs .
                                                          II-40
                                                                                  Recreational and Cultural Resources
Goal V.D:     To preserve and enhance Winters' historical heritage.
Policies :
V. D
.1 .          Winters' historically and architecturally significant buildings and sites should be preserved an d
              enhanced to the fullest degree possible .
V.D.2 . The City shall continue to implement the City's Historic Preservation Ordinance and the State
              Historic Building Code. The Historic Preservation Ordinance and State Historic Buildin g
              Code should be mode applicable to all historically-significant structures in Winters .
V.D.3 .       The Winters Planning Commission shall continue to carry out the functions of the City's Historica l
              Preservation Commission as specified in the City's Historic Preservation Ordinance :
V.D .4.       The City shall work with property owners in seeking registration of historical structures and site s
              as State Historic Landmarks or listing on the National Register of Historic Sites .
V.D.5 . The City shall support the efforts of property owners to preserve and renovate historic an d
              architecturally significant structures . Where such buildings cannot be preserved intact, the Cit y
              shall seek to preserve the building facades .
V .D .6.      The City shall pursue available local, state, and federal funding for public and private historica l
              restoration and preservation activities .
V.D.7. Structures of historical, cultural, or architectural merit which are proposed for demolition shall b e
              considered for relocation as a means of preservation . Relocation within the same neighborhoo d
              or to another compatible neighborhood shall be encouraged .
V.D.8.        The City shall explore restoration of the historic Putah Creek Bridge and the railroad bridge .
Goal V .F:    To protect Winters' Native American heritage .
Policies :
V.F.          The City shall refer development proposals that may adversely affect archaeological sites to th e
              Northwest Information Center of the California Archaeological Inventory for review and comment .
V.F.2. The City shall undertake an archeological sensitivity survey of the entire area within the Urba n
              Limit Line. Such study shall classify areas as "low-sensitivity," "moderate sensitivity," and "high -
              sensitivity ." Within areas classified as "high-sensitivity," an archeological site survey will b e
              required in conjunction with project applications . In all other areas, no field surveys will b e
              required. However, if archeological artifacts are discovered during grading or construction,
              grading or construction must stop pending an archeological investigation and identification o f
              appropriate mitigation measures . City implementation of this policy shall be guided by Appendi x
              K of the State CEQA Guidelines .
                                                       II-41
Recreational and Cultural Resources
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS :
V.I . The City shall prepare, adopt, update, and implement a Parks Master Plan that includes goals,
                 policies, and standards for the location, size, and level of development of all existing and propose d
                parks. The Parks Master Plan shall incorporate the following standards for park sizes :
                                      Classification                              Size
                                      Mini-Park                              1/2 to 3 Acre s
                                      Neighborhood                            3 to 5 Acre s
                                      Community                             20 to 30 Acres
                Responsibility :       City Counci l
                                       City Manager
                                       Parks and Community Services Commission
                                       Parks Department
                 Time Frame :          FY 91-92 ; as needed
V.2.             The City shall regularly monitor local, regional, state, and federal programs for funding of
                parkland acquisition, development, rehabilitation, and maintenance . The City shall actively pursue
                funding for which it is qualified.
                 Responsibility:       City Counci l
                                       Parks Department
                Time Frame:            Ongoing
V.3.             The City shall maintain a joint-use agreement with the School District that provides for use of
                 school facilities for City-sponsored recreation programs .
                 Responsibility:       City Council
                                       City Manager
                                       Parks and Community Services Commissio n
                                       Parks Department
                 Time Frame :          Ongoing
V.4.             The City shall amend the City's Historic Preservation Ordinance and the State Historic Buildin g
                 Code to make them applicable to all historically significant structures in Winters .
                 Responsibility:       City Council
                                       Planning Commissio n
                 Time Frame:           FY 91-92 ; 92-9 3
V.S . The City shall undertake an archeological sensitivity survey of the entire area within the Urba n
                 Limit Line. Such study shall classify areas as "low-sensitivity," "moderate sensitivity," and "high -
                 sensitivity ."
                                                          II-42
                                       Recreational and Cultural Resources
Responsibility : Planning Department
Time Frame :     FY 92-93
                                 II-43
Recreational and Cultural Resources
                                    II-44
                                                    SECTION VI
                                             NATURAL RESOURCE S
GOALS AND POLICIES :
Goal VI.A : To protect water quality in Putah Creek, Dry Creek, and the area's groundwater .
Policies :
VI .A
.1 .            The City shall seek the elimination of existing septic systems in the city .
VI .A.2 . In reviewing development proposals, the City shall consider the project's potential for adversel y
                affecting water quality in Putah Creek, Dry Creek, and the are a's groundwater and shall conditio n
                development approvals to avoid or adopt all feasible measures to mitigate any identified
                significant effects .
VI .A.3.        The City shall support public and private efforts to collect baseline data concerning existing wate r
                quality in Putah Creek .
VI.A .4.        The City shall regularly monitor water quality in City wells for evidence of toxics and other
                contaminants as required by State Health Department regulations .
VI.A.5.         The City shall support efforts at the local, regional, state and federal levels to reduce runoff of
                toxic agricultural chemicals into the area's water courses .
VLA.6 . The City shall condition development approvals to minimize the discharge of sediment fro m
                grading into Putah Creek and Dry Creek . To this end, grading should be carried out during th e
                dry months, when possible . Areas not being graded should be disturbed as little as possible .
                Construction and grading areas, as well as soil stockpiles, should be covered or temporaril y
                revegetated when left for long periods . Revegetation of slopes should be carried out immediately
                upon completion of grading . Also, temporary drainage structures and sedimentation basins mus t
                be installed to prevent sediment from entering and thereby degrading the quality of downstrea m
                surface waters, particularly Putah Creek. The full cost of any necessary mitigation measures shall
                be borne by the projects creating the potential impacts .
Goal VI.B: To promote the continued productivity of agricultural land surrounding Winters and t o
                prevent the premature conversion of agricultural land to urban uses .
Policies :
VI.B.1.         The City shall support the continuation of agricultural and related uses on lands within the Urba n
                Limit Line designated for urban uses until urban development is imminent .
VI.B.2.         The City shall encourage the County to retain agricultural uses on lands surrounding Winter s
                pending their annexation to the City .
                                                         II-45
Natural Resources
VI.B.3 . Along the northern and western portion of the Urban Limit Line new residential development that
                  abuts designated and active agricultural land shall incorporate buffers to minimize agricultural -
                  residential conflicts and nuisance problems . The size of the buffer zone shall be determined b y
                  the type of agricultural activities involved . The buffer zone may consist of open space ,
                  recreational uses, landscaped areas, streets or other non-intensive uses .
VI .B.4 . Outside the Urban Limit Line, high quality agricultural soils should be protected by strong Count y
                  agricultural policies and regulations . Any future expansion of the Urban Limit Line should occu r
                  in areas with lower quality agricultural soils .
VI .B .5 . The City shall support the eftbrts of the County in establishing a land conservation trust an d
                  implementing programs involving transfer of development rights and purchase of developmen t
                  rights or conservation easements .
VI .B.6.          The City shall adopt a right-to-farm ordinance .
VI .B.7.          The City shall support tax and economic incentives at both the local and state levels to enhanc e
                  the economic competitiveness of agriculture .
VI .B.8.          The City shall allow and encourage activities that support local agriculture such as fanners '
                  markets, on-site sale of produce, and special events promoting local agricultural products .
Goal VI .C:       To protect sensitive native vegetation and wildlife communities and habitat .
Policies :
VI .C. 1 . Prior to approving public or private development projects in areas containing or adjacent to area s
                  containing large trees, riparian vegetation, wetlands, or other significant wildlife habitat, the City
                  shall require the project area and its environs be field surveyed for the presence of special-status
                  plant and animal taxa . Such field surveys shall be conducted by a qualified biologist . If special -
                  status taxa are encountered during the field surveys, appropriate measures shall be developed t o
                  minimize disturbance and protect identified populations where feasible .
VI .C.2. In regulating private development and constructing public improvements, the City shall ensure tha t
                  there is no net loss of riparian or wetland habitat acreage and value and shall promote project s
                  that avoid sensitive areas . Where habitat loss is unavoidable, the City shall require replacemen t
                  on at least a I :I basis. Replacement entails creating habitat that is similar in extent and ecologica l
                  value to that displaced by the project . The replacement habitat should consist of locally-occurring ,
                  native species and be located as close as possible to the project site . Implementation of this policy
                  should be based an baseline data concerning existing native species . Study expenses shall b e
                  borne by development .
VI.C .3 . Unless there are overriding considerations as defined in the California Environmental Quality Act ,
                  the City shall not approve any project that would cause significant unmitigatible impacts on rare ,
                  threatened, or endangered wildlife or plant species .
VI .C .4.          The City shall support and participate in local and regional attempts to restore and maintain viabl e
                  habitat for endangered or threatened plant and animal species . To this end, the City shall work
                                                            II-46
                                                                                                   Natural Resource s
               with surrounding jurisdictions and state and federal agencies in developing a regional Habitat
               Management Plan . Such plan shall provide baseline data for the Winters area on special-statu s
               plant and animal taxa, including Swainson hawk and the valley elderberry longhorn beetle, an d
               provide guidelines and standards for mitigation of impacts on special-status taxa .
VI .C.5 . The City shall require mitigation of potential impacts on special-status plant and animal tax a
               based on a policy of no-net-loss of habitat value . Mitigation measures shall incorporate as the
               City deems appropriate, the guidelines and recommendations of the U .S. Fish and Wildlife Servic e
               and the California Department of Fish and Game . Implementation of this policy may include a
               requirement that project proponents enter into an agreement with the City satisfactory to the Cit y
               Attorney to ensure that the proposed projects will be subject to a City fee ordinance to be adopte d
               consistent with the regional Habitat Management Plan .
VI .C.6. The City shall undertake a feasibility study for the establishment of an Open Space Preserv e
               between the Urban Limit Line and Grant Avenue west of I-505 . Such preserve should be designed
               to provide for a combination of uses including agriculture, habitat protection, groundwate r
               recharge, and educational and recreational activities . The Open Space Preserve should, to th e
               maximum extent possible, be designed to function as part of the City's flood control an d
               wastewater discharge system . The City should consider requiring developments that cannot
               mitigate wetlands or riparian habitat impacts on-site to make in-lieu contributions to the
               establishment, development, and maintenance of the Open Space Preserve or other mitigation s
               consistent with the regional HabitatManagement Plan .
VI .C.7 .      The City shall promote the use of drought-tolerant and native plants, especially valley oaks, fo r
               landscaping roadsides, parks, schools, and private properties .
VI .C.8.       Parks, the drainage detention areas, and golf course development shall incorporate areas of nativ e
               vegetation and wildlife habitat .
VI .C.9. Large, older and historically-significant trees should not be removed unless they are diseased o r
               represent an unavoidable obstacle to development. Development should be designed and
               constructed to avoid adverse impacts on such trees .
VI .C.10.      The City shall encourage and support development projects and programs that enhance publi c
               appreciation and awareness of the natural environment .
Goal VI.D: To promote the protection and enhancement of wetlands and the riparian and aquati c
               ecosystems of Putah Creek and Dry Creek.
               The City shall require that all new development along Putah Creek east of Railroad Avenue be se t
               back at least 100 feet from the top of the creek bank, that all new development along Putah Creek
               west of Railroad Avenue be set back at least 50 feet from the top of the creek bank, and that al l
               new development along Dry Creek be set back at least 50 feet from the top of the creek bank .
               Where there is no discernable bank, the set back shall be measured from the line closest to th e
               creek where riparian vegetation is permanently established.
                                                       II-47
Natural Resources
VI .D .2 . Except for recreational trails and recreational uses developed along Putah Creek in the downtow n
                 area, the Putah Creek and Dry Creek corridors should be preserved as much as possible in thei r
                natural state . Public access and recreational facilities shall not eliminate or degrade riparia n
                habitat values . Trails, picnic areas, and other recreational developments shall be sited to minimiz e
                 impacts on sensitive wildlife habitat or riparian vegetation .
VI.D.3 .        The City shall develop a program for habitat management within the Putah Creek and Dry Cree k
                 corridors consistent with the following principles :
                 •   Trees and shrubs planted within the creek corridors shall be selected from a list of nativ e
                     plants approved by the City .
                 •   Non-native trees and shrubs shall be removed from the creek corridors according to a long -
                     term program approved by the City.
                 •   New irrigation and planting within the dripline of existing native oaks shall be prohibited .
                     Irrigated turf areas shall be placed only in areas where there are no mature native trees tha t
                     could be damaged by changes in the environment, such as summer watering .
VI .D .4 .      Any upstream development that creates potential erosion impacts on Dry Creek and Putah Cree k
                shall be required to adopt all feasible measures to mitigate such impacts .
VI .D.5 . Modifications to creek/channels and other wetland features (e .g., bridge crossing, flood contro l
                improvements, or culverting) shall be designed to minimize disturbance to areas of dense riparia n
                and marshlands cover . Any proposed channel modifications shall be coordinated wit h
                representatives of the California Department of Fish and Game and the U .S . Army Corps o f
                Engineers to ensure that the concerns and requirements of both agencies can be easily incorporate d
                into specific development plans (luring the initial phase of project design . Where wetland features
                are present, jurisdictional determinations and appropriate mitigation will be required subject t o
                the provisions of Section 404 of the Clean Water Act and Sections 1601-1606 of the CDFG Code .
                Preliminary determinations and coordination with jurisdictional agencies shall be completed prio r
                to approving specific development plans on parcels with wetland features .
VI.D.6.         The City shall seek state grant funding for revegetation, habitat preservation, and erosion contro l
                in the Putah Creek and Dry Creek corridors.
VI .D.7 . The City shall work with Yolo County, Solano County, the Putah Creek Council, the Californi a
                Department of Fish and Game, and the U .S . Army Corps of Engineers in establishing guideline s
                 for erosion control measures along Putah Creek and Dry Creek . Such guidelines should implement
                 the following principles :
                 •    Slope stabilization projects should emphasize revegetation .
                 •    Stabilization projects that involve the use of cribs, gabions, rock and wire mattresses, or wir e
                      mesh over stone should be screened from public view with vegetation to assure a naturalisti c
                      appearance.
VI.D.8 .         Brush clearing, mowing of natural vegetation, fire breaks, or similar activities along Putah Cree k
                 and Dry Creek shall be prohibited unless a demonstrated need exists to protect the public health ,
                                                           II-48

                                                                                                    Natural Resources
                safety, or welfare, as determined by the Fire Protection District or other public agency with lega l
               jurisdiction .
VI.D.9.        No mining or gravel extraction operations shall be permitted in the Putah Creek and Dry Cree k
                corridors.
Goal VI.E : To promote and, to the extent possible, improve air quality in Winters and the region .
Policies :
VI .E.1 . The City shall cooperate with the Yolo-Solano Air Pollution Control District in an effort to ensur e
                the earliest practicable attainment and subsequent maintenance of federal and state ambient ai r
                quality standards.
VI .E.2 . The City shall utilize the CEQA process to identify and avoid or mitigate potentially significan t
                air quality impacts of new development . The CEQA process shall also be utilized to ensure earl y
                consultation with the Yolo-Solano Air Pollution Control District concerning air quality issue s
                associated with specific development proposals .
VI .E.3 . The City shall notify and coordinate with the Yolo-Solano Air Pollution Control District whe n
               industrial developments are proposed . Such coordination will assist applicants in complying wit h
                applicable air quality regulations and will assist the City in promptly identifying and resolvin g
               potential air qualify problems .
VI.E .4.       Major intersections shall . be designed to minimize long vehicle delays which result in carbo n
                dioxide (CO) "hot spots . "
VI.E.5 .        The City shall, to the extent practicable, separate sensitive land uses from significant sources of
               air pollutants or odor emissions .
VI .E.6 . The City shall require for both public and private projects that construction-related dust b e
               minimized . Larger projects that create a potential for generating a significant amount o f
                construction-related dust shall be required to include dust control measures as part of thei r
                construction mitigation plans .
VI .E.7.        The City shall promote expansion of employment opportunities within Winters to reduce
                commuting to areas outside Winters .
VI .E.8.        The City shall attempt through careful land use and site planning to reduce automobile use .
VI.E.9.         The City shall actively promote ridesharing .
VI.E.10.        The City shall contribute through tree planting and preservation to the enhancement of air quality .
VI.E.11 . In granting development entitlement, the City shall require all new industrial and commercia l
                developments within the city projected to generate more than 500 trips per day (based on typica l
                generation rates) to develop an air quality mitigation plan . This plan shall include an analysis of
                how the project would utilize site planning, mixed land uses, transportation systems managemen t
                                                       II-49
Nalural Resources
                 measures (e .g ., carpooling, van pooling, shuttle bus service, transit incentives, etc .) to reduce by
                 25 percent the number of trips that would typically be projected for such development . Where thi s
                 goal cannot be met by these methods, the plan shall provide for off-site mitigation through fundin g
                 of air quality improvements such as new park-and-ride lots, sidewalks, bike paths, and suppor t
                 of transit, as deemed acceptable to the City.
Goal VI .F. Promote energy efficient development in City's development review process throug h
                 effective implementation of adopted state and local standards, and guidelines .
Policies :
VI .F
.1 .             In approving new residential subdivisions, the City shall promote the maximum feasible east-wes t
                 alignment of lots for southern solar exposure, as required by the State Subdivision Act.
VLF .2 .         The City shall encourage and promote examples of energy efficient design and operation of ne w
                 residential, commercial, and industrial development projects .
VI .F .3 . For projects involving rehabilitation or modification of existing developments, the City shal l
                 promote the incorporation of energy-efficient features beyond state Title 24 requirements through
                 fast-track processing or other incentives .
VI .F.4.         The City shall provide for the dedication of sunlight easements in connection with land divisions ,
                 pursuant to Government Code §66475.3 .
VI .F.5 .        Through its operation and management of existing municipal facilities, as well as planned new
                 facilities, the City shall utilize energy efficient technologies to the maximum feasible extent.

                                                                                          Natural Resource s
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS :
VI.1.   The City shall continue its program of routinely monitoring groundwater quality in City wells .
        Responsibility:      City Council
                            City Engineer
                            Public Works Department
        Time Frame :        Ongoing
VI.2.   The City shall adopt a right-to-farm ordinance .
        Responsibility:     City Counci l
                            Planning Commission
                            Planning Departmen t
        Time Frame :        FY 91-92 . 92-93
VI.3.   The City shall monitor the research and literature of agricultural-based public and privat e
        organizations in assessing methods to protect agricultural lands at the urban fringe .
        Responsibility:     Planning Department
        Time Frame:         Ongoing
VI.4.   The City, in conjunction with other interested agencies, shall prepare a regional Habitat
        Management Plan to provide a comprehensive approach to habitat protection, mitigation, an d
        enhancement in the Winters area.
        Responsibility:     City Counci l
                            Planning Department
        Time Frame:         FY 92-93 ; 93-94 ; 94-95
VI.5.   The City shall prepare and adopt a comprehensive landscape ordinance that includes plantin g
        requirements for screening, ground cover and trees, parking lot shading, acceptable irrigatio n
        systems, and water conservation measures, including drought-tolerant plants and drip irrigatio n
        systems . The landscape ordinance should also promote the use of native plants in ne w
        development where practicable .
        Responsibility:     City Council
                             Streets and Trees Commission
                            Public Works Department
        Time Frame:          FY 91-92 ; 92-93
                                               II-51
Natural Resources
VI.6.            The City shall conduct an inventory to assess the extent of wetlands in the Winters vicinity .
                Responsibility:        City Counci l
                                       Planning Department
                Time Frame:           FY 92-93 ; 93-9 4
VI.7.           The City shall undertake a feasibility and design study for development of an Open Spac e
                Preserve . Such a preserve should be designed to provide for a combination of uses includin g
                agriculture, habitat protection, groundwater recharge, and educational and passive recreationa l
                opportunities . The Open Space Preserve should, to the maximum extent possible, be designed t o
                function as part of the City's flood control and wastewater discharge system .
                Responsibility:       City Counci l
                                       City Manager
                                      City Engineer
                                      Public Works Department
                                      Planning Departmen t
                Time Frame;           FY 92-9 3
VI.8.           The City shall develop a program for habitat management within Putah Creek and Thy Cree k
                corridors .
                Responsibility:        City Counci l
                                      Streets and Trees Commissio n
                                      Public Works Department
                 Time Frame :         FY 92-93 ; 93-94
VI.9.           The City shall work with Yolo County, Solano County, and the Putah Creek Council, the
                 California Department of Fish and Game, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, in establishin g
                guidelines for erosion control measures along Putah Creek and Thy Creek .
                 Responsibility:       City Council
                                       Streets and Trees Commissio n
                                       Public Works Department
                 Time Frame :          FY 92-93 ; 93-94
VI.10.           The City shall prepare and adopt a Heritage Tree Ordinance to protect large, older and
                 historically-significant trees .
                 Responsibility :      City Counci l
                                       Streets & Trees Commissio n
                                       Public Works Department
                 Time Frame :          FY 92-93
                                                         II-52
                                                                                               Natural Resources
VIA 1 . The City shall prepare guidelines for the type and width of buffers between new residential
              developments and . active agricultural uses outside the Urban Limit Line to be used in the revie w
              of subdivision proposals .
              Responsibility:     Planning Department
              Time Frame:         FY 93-94
VI .12 . The City shall amend the Subdivision Ordinance to provide for dedication of sunlight easements
              in connection with land divisions, pursuant to Government Code §66475.3 of the Subdivisio n
              Map Act.
              Responsibility :    City Counci l
                                  Planning Department
              Time Frame:         FY 92-93 ; 93-94

Natural Resource
                                                    SECTION VII
                                             HEALTH AND SAFET Y
GOALS AND POLICIES :
Goal VILA : To prevent loss of life, injury, and property damage due to geologic and seismic hazards .
Policies:
VILA.1 . The City shall require new development to be constructed according to the requirements of th e
                Uniform Building Code to ensure that new structures are able to withstand the effects of seismi c
                activity, including liquefaction .
VII .A.2.       Underground utilities, particularly water and natural gas mains, shall be designed to withstand
                seismic forces in accordance with state requirements .
VII .A.3 . The City shall require the abatement of identified structural hazards in unreinforced masonr y
                buildings . To assist building owners in abating such structural hazards at the earliest possibl e
                date, the City shall establish a loan/grant program to help finance upgrading of hazardou s
                buildings .
Goal VII .B: To prevent loss of life, injury, and property damage due to flooding .
Policies :
VII .B.1 . The City shall continue to participate in the National Flood Insurance Program . To this end, th e
                City shall ensure that its regulations are in full compliance with standards adopted by the Federa l
                Emergency Management Agency.
VII.B.2.        Construction of storm drainage improvements shall be required, as appropriate, to preven t
                flooding during periods of heavy rainfall .
VII.B.3.        The City shall impose appropriate conditions on grading projects performed during the rainy
                season to ensure that silt is not conveyed to the storm drainage system.
VII .B.4. To mitigate flooding impacts associated with Moody and Chickahominy Sloughs, the City shal l
                require properly owners who are affected by or contribute to such flooding to participate in th e
                development and implementation of a comprehensive solution to the flooding problem i n
                proportion to their relative contribution to the flooding problem or benefit from the progra m
                adopted.
Health and Safety
Goal VII.C: To prevent loss of life, injury, and property damage due to wildland and structural fires ,
                 explosions and release of hazardous materials .
Policies :
VII .C.1 .       The City shall require that new development provides all necessary water service, fire hydrants ,
                 and access roads consistent with Fire Protection District standards .
VII.C.2 . The City shall endeavor to achieve and maintain adequate water fire-flows throughout the city an d
                 shall regularly monitor fire-flows to ensure adequacy . New development shall comply with th e
                 following minimum fire-flow rates :
                                                                                Gallon s
                              Development Category                             Per Minute
                              Single-Family Residential                           1,500
                              Multi-Family Residential                            1,500
                              Central Business District                           2,00 0
                             Industrial/Other Business Districts                  3,000
                 In areas where there are existing water system deficiencies, the City shall require new developmen t
                 to install all on-site water system improvements necessary to achieve the above fire-flow rates bu t
                 may waive full compliance with these standards until existing water system deficiencies ar e
                 corrected.
VII .C.3.        The Fire Protection District shall maintain an ongoing fire and life safety inspection program for
                 all public, commercial, and industrial buildings .,.
VII.C.4.         All new development shall be constructed according to fire safety and structural stability standard s
                 contained in the latest adopted Uniform Fire and Building Codes and related regulations .
VII.C.5.         To minimize the dependence of new developments on City firefighting personnel and equipment,
                 the City may require installation of built-in fire suppression equipment in all new development .
VII.C.6. The City shall require property owners to remove fire hazards, including vegetation, hazardou s
                 structures and materials, and debris, as directed by the Fire Protection District and Public Work s
                 Department .
VII .C.7.        The City shall ensure that new development provides for adequate fire equipment access and ,
                 where appropriate, includes the use of fire-resistant landscaping and building materials .
VII .C.8,        The City shall promote the abandonment of gas wells consistent with requirements of state la w
                 and regulations .
                                                                                                      Health and Safet y
Goal VII .D: To ensure that City emergency response procedures are adequate in the event of natura l
                or man-made disasters .
Policies :
VII .D.1 . The City shall adopt, maintain, periodically update, and test the effectiveness of its Emergency
               Response Plan . As part of the periodic update, the City shall review county and state emergenc y
                response plans and procedures to ensure coordination with the City's plan .
VII .D.2.       The City shall identify emergency access routes and shall ensure that they are kept free of traffi c
                impediments.
VII .D.3.       Critical emergency response facilities such as fire, police, emergency service facilities, and utilitie s
                shall be sited to minimize their exposure to flooding, seismic effects, fire, or explosion.
VII.D .4.       The City shall maintain mutual aid agreements and communications links with surroundin g
               jurisdictions for assistance during times of emergency .
Goal VILE : To protect city residents from the harmful and undesirable effects of excessive noise .
Policies :
VIL E
.1 .            The City shall evaluate the compatibility of various land uses with nearby noise sources based o n
               the standards in Table II-3 .
VILE.2.         The City shall require new residential development to comply with applicable provisions of the
                California State Noise Insulation Standards (California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part Z
               Appendix, Chapter 35) and the Uniform Building Code (Appendix Chapter 35), and update s
                thereof. These provisions include, but are not limited to, the following standards :
                a) Ldn values due to exterior noise sources shall not exceed 45 dBA inside habitable rooms o f
                    new multi-family dwellings (apartments, condominiums, hotels, motels, etc .).
                b) Assemblies dividing units within multi-family dwellings shall have laboratory certified ST C
                    ratings of 50 or more (NIC 45 or more if field tested) . In addition, floor/ceiling assemblie s
                    shall have laboratory certified IIC ratings of 50 or more (45 if field tested) .
VII .E.3 .      Ldn values above 45 dBA due to exterior noise sources shall be prohibited inside habitable room s
                of all new dwellings .
VII .E.4 . Non-transportation noise sources which are potentially intrusive shall be evaluated in terms of th e
                noise level limits in Tables II-4 and II-5. In applying these limits, the corrections in Table II- 6
                shall be added to account for the nature of the noise .
                                                        II-57
Health and Safet
              y
VII.E.5 . The City shall require preparation of a noise study for all residential projects proposed in area s
                where Ldn values exceed 60 (IBA according to the contour locations set out in Table IX-4 an d
                shown in Figure IX-8 in Chapter IX of the General Plan Background Report .
VII.E.6.        Any project that would cause existing traffic-related noise levels in existing residential areas t o
                increase more than 3dB shall be required to evaluate the feasibility of noise mitigation measures .
VII.E.7 . The City may also require preparation of a noise study when Ldn standards are met o r
                inapplicable, but 1) a potentially intrusive noise source is proposed near a noise sensitive area, o r
               2) a noise sensitive land use is proposed near a potentially intrusive noise source .
VILE .8 . Required noise studies shall be the responsibility of the project applicant, and shall be consisten t
               with the state guidelines for noise study reports . Such studies shall be performed by a qualified
                consultant and shall include the following:
                a) A summary of noise data collected, and/or descriptions of the methodologies used t o
                    determine existing and expected noise levels and noise descriptors such as Leq or Ldn .
               b) Figures or maps showing the locations of noise sources and noise sensitive areas .
               c) A description of the impacts of existing and future (20 years hence) noise levels on the projec t
                    and/or impacts due to the project on the surrounding area . The standards in this section of th e
                    General Plan Policy Document shall form the basis for impact assessment .
               d) Specifications of any noise mitigation measures recommended to ensure compliance with th e
                    standards in this General Plan Policy Document .
               e) Description of the expected effects of the mitigation measures .
VII .E.9.       The City shall encourage county, state, and federal agencies to actively enforce regulations dealing
               with noise.
VILE.10. Vehicles and other equipment operated by or on behalf of the City shall comply with all applicabl e
               noise performance standards . Noise emission shall be a consideration in the purchase of any ne w
               equipment or vehicles .
VII.E.11 .      The City shall encourage development designers to minimize noise levels through such measures
                as the following:
                a) Locating outdoor activity spaces such as yards, patios, and decks in areas where noise level s
                    are low.
                b) Locating and orienting buildings to place noise sensitive indoor spaces such as living room s
                    and bedrooms in areas with low noise levels .
                c) Locating relatively non-noise sensitive structures such as commercial buildings to shield nois e
                     sensitive areas such as residences and care facilities from noise sources .
                                                         II-58
                                                                                             Health and Safet
                                                                                                            y
              d) Using berms, walls, and setbacks to shield noise sensitive areas from noise sources . Wall s
                  shall only be used as a last resort.
              e) Provide appropriate muffling devices or enclosures for new noise sources located near nois e
                  sensitive areas .
VII.E.12 . Deviations from City noise standards may be approved only in extreme and/or unusua l
              circumstances . Deviations from the California State Noise Insulation Standards shall not b e
              permitted .
                                                       II-59
      Health and Safety
                                                                     TABLE II-3
                                              LAND USE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
                                                                                                             Exterior Ldn (dBA)
 Land Use Category                                                                        60 or Less         60-65            65-7 0        70-7 5
Residential                                                                                    +               o
Single and multiple family dwellings, including mobile homes ,
duplexes, apartments, condominiums, hotels, and motels
Outdoor Public Facilities                                                                      +               0
Neighborhood parks, playgrounds (including school playgrounds) ,
picnic areas, amphitheaters, golf courses, riding stables and
trails, water recreation, cemeterie s
Public Buildines                                                                              ++               +                0
School buildings, libraries, churches, hospitals, nursing homes ,
auditoriums, concert halls, sports arena s
Commercial                                                                                    ++               +                0
Office buildings, retail, business and professional facilities
Tndt s ial                                                                                    ++              ++                +             o
Manufacturing, utilities, and agriculture facilitie s
Symbols
++ Clearly Acceptable - The activities associated with the specified uses can be carried out with virtually no interference from noise .
+ Normally Acceptable - Little interference with outdoor activities is expected . Conventional structures will insure that interior Ldn values are
     compatible with indoor activities .
o Conditionally Acceptable - The indicated noise levels will cause moderate interference with outdoor activities, and with indoor activities whe n
     windows are open. New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirement s
     is made. Noise reduction features should be included in the project design which upgrade the environment to the "Normally Acceptable "
     category over a substantial portion of the project site .
     NormallyUnacceptable -Noise will create substantial interference with both outdoor and indoor activities . Noise intrusion on indoor activitie s
     can be mitigated with special noise insulating construction . New construction or development should be generally discouraged . If constructio n
     or development does proceed, noise mitigation measures should be required to upgrade the acoustic environment to approach the "Normall y
     Acceptable" category with respect to exterior noise, and to insure that interior noise levels comply with the state noise insulation standards .
      Clearly Unacceptable - Unacceptable noise intrusion upon land use activities will occur . Adequate structural noise insulation may not be
      practical in many cases, or may involve high noise barriers visually incompatible with a suburban area . New construction or development
      should generally not be undertaken .
                                                                          II-60
                                                                                                                               Health and Safety
                                                                   TABLE II-4
                                                   EXTERIOR NOISE LEVEL LIMIT S
                                                                                                  Exterior Limit in dBA
                                                                                      Daytime                                     Nighttime
Use Zone                                                                        7 a.m. - 10 p .m.                            10 p .m. - 7 a .m .
Rural (OS)                                                                               50                                           40
Residential (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4)                                                         50                                           45
Parks & Recreation (P-R)                                                                 50                                           45
Commercial (C-1, C-2, NC, CH, CS)                                                        63                                          45
Manufacturing/Industrial (M-1, M-2, PI)                                                  73                                          70
These limits on intrusive noise are to be applied at any point within the boundaries of a property zoned as indicated .
Each limit is the noise level which is not to be exceeded continuously during any five minute period . If the noise level varies above and below th e
limit, the limit shall not be exceeded during more than one time interval in any five minute period . Noise levels higher than the applicable limit
plus 15 dBA are prohibited at all times .
                                                                  TABLE II-5
                                                   INTERIOR NOISE LEVEL LIMIT S
                                                                                                  Interior Limit in dBA
                                                                                      Daytime                                    Nighttim e
Use Zon e                                                                       7 a.m. - 10 p .m.                            10 p.m. - 7 a.m.
Residential (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 )                                                        45                                           35
These levels of intrusive noise are not to be exceeded at any point within a dwelling .
Each limit is the noise level which is not be to exceeded continuously during any five minute period . If the noise level varies above and below th e
limit, the limit shall not be exceeded during more than one time interval in any five minute period . Noise levels higher than the applicable limi t
plus 15 dBA are prohibited at all times .
                                                                        II-6 1
Health and Safety
                                                            TABLE II-6
                                    CORRECTIONS TO NOISE LEVELS DUE T O
               POTENTIALLY INTRUSIVE NON-TRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCE S
                                                                                                   Correction to be added t o
                                                                                                  The Measured or Predicte d
                                                                                                       Noise Level Due to a
Type of                                   Circumstances Under Which                                   Potentially Intrusive
Correction                                The Correction is Ap l ip cable                             Noise Source (dBA) 	
Seasonal                                  Summer (or year-round operation)                                      0
Corrections
                                          Winter only (or windows always closed                                -5
Corrections fo r                          No tonal, impulsive, or information content                           0
Character of Noise
                                          Tonal components present                                            +5
                                          Impulsive noise                                                     +5
                                          Information content (e.g., speech,.. song lyrics)                   +5
Correction for Previous                   No prior experience with the subject noise                          +5
Exposure and Communit y
Attitudes                                 Some previous exposure to subject noise, but
                                          little effort made to control noise.                                  0
                                          No previous exposure, but community is awar e
                                          that serious noise control efforts are bein g
                                          made .                                                                0
                                          Considerable previous exposure to subjec t
                                          noise, and noise maker has good relations
                                          with community.                                                      -5
                                          Community is aware that the subject nois e
                                          source is very necessary, and will not operat e
                                          indefinitely.                                                      -10
These corrections are to be used in conjunction with the standards specified in Policy VII .E.4 .
                                                                 II-62
                                                                                               Health and Safety
Goal VII.F:      To prevent crime and promote the protection of people and property .
Policies :
VII .F
.1 .           The Police Department shall provide neighborhood security and crime prevention information an d
               training to neighborhood groups, schools, senior citizens, and homeowners' associations .
VII.F.2 . The City shall encourage the use of physical site planning as an effective means of preventin g
               crime . Developers shall design open spaces, parking lots, parks, play areas, and other publi c
               spaces so they can be under continuous surveillance by residents . To this end, the Police
               Department shall participate in the project review process to ensure that crime preventio n
               considerations are incorporated in the design of residential, commercial, industrial, and publi c
               facility projects .
Health and Safet
              y
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS :
VII .1 . The City shall adopt the most current editions of the Uniform Building, Uniform Fire, Unifor m
               Plumbing, Mechanical, and National Electric Codes . Any amendments to these codes adopte d
                by the City shall be consistent with the General Plan .
                Responsibility:       City Counci l
                                     Planning Department
                Time Frame:          Ongoing
VII .2.         The City shall adopt an ordinance requiring the abatement of structural hazards in unreinforce d
                masonry buildings by January 1, 1996 .
                Responsibility:      City Counci l
                                     Planning Departmen t
                Time Frame:          FY 93-94
VII.3 .         The City shall establish a grant/loan program to assist owners of unreinforced masonry building s
                with identified structural . hazards in correcting these deficiencies .
               Responsibility :      City Council
                                     Redevelopment Agency
                                     Planning Department .
                Time Frame:          FY 93-9 4
VII .4.         The Fire Protection District shall inspect every commercial and industrial building at least onc e
                every two years in conjunction with issuance and renewal of business licenses .
                Responsibility:      Fire Protection District
                Time Frame:          Annually
VII .5.          The City may adopt requirements for built-in fire suppression equipment in all new development .
                 Responsibility :     City Council
                                      Planning Department
                                      Fire Protection Distric t
                 Time Frame:          FY 92-93
                                                         II-64
                                                                                            Health and Safet
                                                                                                          y
VII.6.       The City shall regularly update the City's Emergency Response Plan .
             Responsibility:      City Counci l
                                  City Manager
                                  City Department Head s
                                  Fire Protection District
             Time Frame :         FY 93-94 ; every two years thereafter
VII .7.      The City shall regularly conduct tests of its emergency response procedures .
             Responsibility:      City Counci l
                                  City Manage r
                                  Police Department
                                  Fire Protection Distric t
             Time Frame:          FY 93-94 ; every two years thereafter
VII.8 . The City shall, pursuant to Public Resources Code §3206.5, request information from the State
             Division of Oil and Gas concerning non-producing gas wells in Winters and shall provide such
             information to affected property owners to ensure proper abandonment of such wells .
             Responsibility:      Planning Departmen t
             Time Frame:          FY 92-9 3
VII .9 .     The City shall revise the Zoning Ordinance consistent with the noise policies and standard s
             contained in this section of the Policy Document .
             Responsibility:      City Counci l
                                  Planning Departmen t
             Time Frame :         FY 91-92 ;  92-93
VII.10.      The City shall adopt a noise ordinance based on the standards contained in this section of th e
             Policy Document to regulate existing noise sources .
             Responsibility:      City Council
                                  Planning Department
                                  Police Departmen t
             Time Frame:          FY 91-92 ;   92-93
                                                     II-65

Health and Safet
              y
VII .11 . The City shall develop procedures to check compliance of proposed buildings with the Californi a
                State Noise Insulation standards and noise-related provisions of the Uniform Building Code .
                Procedures shall also be implemented to check for consistency between building plans and any
                specifications for noise mitigation measures identified in required noise studies .
                Responsibility :     Planning Departmen t
                Time Frame:         FY 92-93 ; 93-94
VII .12 . The Police Department shall continue to provide neighborhood security and crime prevention
                information and training to neighborhood groups, schools, senior citizens, and homeowner' s
                associations .
                Responsibility :     Police Department
                Time Frame:          Ongoing
                                                       II-66
                                                  SECTION VII I
                                             COMMUNITY DESIGN
GOALS AND POLICIES :
Goal VIII.A: To promote the development of a coherent and distinctive physical form and structure tha t
                 reflects Winters' small-town qualities and agricultural heritage .
Policies :
VIII.A .1 .     The City shall maintain and enhance the distinctiveness and integrity of neighborhoods an d
                districts in Winters .
VIII .A.2.      The City shall preserve the vital qualities of existing, stable residential neighborhoods and shal l
                promote the development of new residential neighborhoods with these same qualities .
VIII.A.3.       The City shall use the circulation system and the pedestrian and bicycle pathway system a s
                important structural elements to link and define neighborhoods and districts in Winters .
VIII .A.4.      The City shall promote the development of a well-defined, pedestrian-oriented downtown as th e
                center of Winters' commercial, civic, and cultural life.
VIII.A.5.       The City shall seek to maintain a distinct agricultural definition to the urban edge of the city a s
                a means of emphasizing Winters'small-townqualities and agricultural heritage .
VIII .A.6 . The City shall promote the creation of a continuouszand integrated open space network tha t
                includes Putah Creek, Dry Creek, city parks, schools, the golf course, the North Area drainag e
                detention lake, the Open Space Preserve, and landscaped roadways .
VIII .A.7 . The City shall establish design guidelines for new development along Highway 128/Grant Avenu e
                reflecting its designation as a Scenic Highway. The City shall work with Caltrans and Yolo
                County in developing consistent guidelines .
Goal VIII .B: To create a well-defined, pedestrian-oriented downtown which serves as the center o f
                Winters' commercial, civic, and cultural life .
Policies :
VIII.B.1 .       The City shall promote the development of a well-defined, pedestrian-oriented downtown tha t
                 includes commercial, civic, residential, cultural, and recreational uses .
VIII .B.2 . The City shall encourage the concentration and intensification of urban uses, including residentia l
                 uses, in the downtown as a means of increasing pedestrian activity and providing support fo r
                 commercial and civic activities in the downtown .
VIII .B.3 .      To the maximum extent possible, new buildings developed in the downtown shall front directl y
                 on streets, and parking shall be located behind buildings, out of view from the street .
                                                        II-67
Community Desig n
Goal VIII .C : To preserve existing community character and fabric and promote the development o f
                neighborhoods and districts that emphasize pedestrian convenience .
Policies :
VIII .C.1 .     In approving infill development, the City shall seek to ensure the compatibility of the ne w
                development with existing neighborhood scale and character.
VIII .C.2 . The City shall prornote the creation of well-defined residential neighborhoods in newly-developin g
                areas . Each of these neighborhoods should have a clear focal point, such as a park, school, or
                other open space and community facility, and should be designed to promote pedestria n
                convenience . To this end, the City shall encourage the use of existing Winters' neighborhoods ,
                including the grid street system, as models for the planning and design of new residentia l
                neighborhoods .
VIII .C .3 .    New commercial and office development should promote pedestrian convenience over parkin g
                considerations, especially in the downtown.
Goal VIII .D: To maintain and enhance the quality of the Winters' landscape and streetscape .
Policies :
VIII:D.1 .      The City shall endeavor to protect the tree canopy created by mature trees in existing develope d
                areas.
VIII.D.2.       The City shall require that all new development install street trees according to the City's Street
                Tree Plan and Standards .
VIII.D.3.       The City shall work with properly owners in the older parts of town to re-establish the street tre e
                system .
VIII .D.4 .     As a condition of the approval of development projects, the City shall require establishment o f
                permanent mechanisms for the ongoing maintenance of street trees .
VIII.D.5 .      Where possible, new developments should preserve and incorporate portions of existing orchards
                into their site plans .
VIII .D.6.      In conjunction with new development along I-505, the City shall require extensive landscapin g
                and the planting of new trees to screen development from view along I-505 .
VIII.D.7 . Lighting in new development, including street lighting, should be designed, installed, an d
                maintained to minimize excess light spillage, unnecessary brightness and glare, and degradatio n
                of night sky clarity .
                                                       II-68
                                                                                         Community Design
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS :
VIII
.1 .      The City shall prepare and adopt design guidelines for new development along Highway
          128/Grant Avenue reflecting its designation as a Scenic Highway .
          Responsibility :    City Council
                              Planning Ipartmen t
                              Public Works Departmen t
          Time Frame:         FY 92-9 3
VIII.2.   The City shall prepare and adopt a Street Tree Plan and Standards .
          Responsibility:     Streets and Trees Commissio n
                              Public Works Departmen t
          Time Frame:         FY 92-9 3
VIII .3 . The City shall amend the Zoning Ordinance to provide for design review of all new multi- famil y
          residential and non-residential uses and major alterations to these uses .
          Responsibility :    City Council
                              Planning Departmen t
          Time Frame: .       FY 91-92 ; 92-9 3
VIII.4.   The City shall prepare and CFQRV Community Design Guidelines to implement the urban design
          principles contained in the General Plan .
          Responsibility:     City Counci l
                              Planning Departmen t
          Time Frame:         FY 92-93
Community Desig
                                                SECTION IX
                            ADMINISTRATION AND IMPLEMENTATIO N
GOALS AND POLICIES :
Goal IX .A : To provide for the ongoing administration and implementation of the General Plan .
Policies :
IX.A.I .      The City shall conduct a major review of the General Plan, including the Policy Document and
              Background Report, every five years and revise it as deemed necessary .
IX.A.2 .      The City shall prepare, adopt, and periodically update a five-year Capital Improvement Program
              (CIP) . The CIP shall be reviewed for its consistency with the General Plan .
IX.A.3 .      The City shall review and amend, as necessary, the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision
              Ordinance to ensure consistency with the General Plan.
Adnrhiistrarion and Implementatio n
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS :
IX.1.             The Planning Commission shall review the General Plan Policy Document every year, focusing
                  principally on actions undertaken during the previous year to carry out the implementatio n
                  programs of the Plan . Among other purposes, this annual review shall be used to 1) monitor th e
                  city's jobs-housing balance, 2) monitor the City's progress in meeting its fair share of regiona l
                  housing needs, and 3) monitor CEQA mitigation for the General Plan EIR as required by Public
                 Resources Code §21081 .6. The Planning Commission's report to the City Council shall include ,
                  as the Commission deems appropriate, recommendations for amendments to the General Plan .
                  Responsibility :    Planning Commissio n
                                      Planning Department
                  Time Frame:         Annually
IX.2.             The City shall conduct a major review of the General Plan, including the Policy Document and
                  Background Report, every five years and revise it as deemed necessary .
                  Responsibility :     Planning Commissio n
                                       Planning Department
                  Time Frame:          FY 97-98 ; every five years thereafte r
IX.3.             The City shall prepare, adopt, and periodically update a Capital Improvement Program (CIP) .
                  Responsibility:      City Counci l
                                       Planning Commission
                                       City Manager
                                       City Department Head s
                  Time Frame:          FY 92-93, as neede d
IX.4.             The City shall review and amend, as necessary, the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision
                  Ordinance to ensure consistency with the General Plan .
                  Responsibility :     City Council
                                       Planning Commissio n
                                       Planning Department
                  Time Frame:          FY 91-92 ; 92-93
                                                          II-72

