2
  Development of the
  General Plan
   INTRODUCTION
   The City of South Gate believes that planning for the City’s future
   should involve extensive citizen involvement, consultation with major
   stakeholders, and cutting edge planning approaches. The three-year
   process of developing the General Plan has involved all of these. The
   extensive public outreach that occurred around the General Plan sug-
   gested important concepts and visions to be included in the General
   Plan, many of which were not known to the City before the process
                                                                           The extensive public outreach
   began. Public outreach also created energy and support for the Gen-
                                                                           that occurred around the Gen-
   eral Plan and the City’s continuing efforts to enhance the City.
   State Law requires planning agencies “to provide opportunities for      eral Plan suggested important
   the involvement of citizens, public agencies, public utility companies,
   and civic, education, and other community groups, through public        concepts and visions to be
   hearings and any other means the City or county deems appropriate”
   (Gov’t Code § 65353). From the start of the General Plan process in
                                                                           included in the General Plan
   2005, the City sought to aggressively implement this state require-
   ment through a unique blend of grassroots community outreach, cul-
   turally sensitive engagement, and participatory planning techniques.
   This public outreach process engaged hundreds of diverse residents
   in developing a vision for the future of the City and received a Public
   Outreach Award from the Los Angeles Section of the American Plan-
   ning Association in 2007.
   A major community outreach effort was undertaken prior to each of the
   dozen community workshops.
20 South Gate General Plan 2035

The outreach program proactively engaged the City’s        Throughout the General Plan process, residents
predominantly Latino population, based on the City’s       demonstrated an excitement about the future, a com-
awareness that many groups had been historically           mitment to positive change, and a desire to maintain
under-represented in the City’s decision-making            and support the South Gate community. Eleven public
processes. All public General Plan events were heav-       workshops, held on different topics throughout the
ily publicized to a diverse audience. Tactics included     development of the General Plan, were the lynchpin
widely-distributed flyers, posters and banners in Eng-     of the General Plan process and each saw an average
lish and Spanish, announcements and word-of-mouth          of 75 -100 attendees. As envisioned, the extensive
campaigns at schools, religious institutions, and citi-    public outreach process served as a productive two-
zen advisory committees, and postings at community         way dialogue between residents and the City and
events such as Family Day at the Park. Residents were      resulted in a shared vision for the future. Below is a
also advised of events through local media coverage        detailed overview of this process and how it guided
and the City’s telephone reminder system.                  the General Plan update.
Throughout the General Plan update process, the City staff and the consultants attended community events,
such as Family Day in the Park.
                                                                 Development of the General Plan 21

   INITIAL OUTREACH
   AND PUBLIC
   INVOLVEMENT
   Focused, preliminary outreach to key City stakeholders was the first stage
   of developing the General Plan. This involved establishing a citizen adviso-
   ry committee and conducting stakeholder interviews. These tasks provided
   an initial understanding of the key issues confronting the City. It also pro-
   vided a core of advisors that contributed to the process throughout.
   GPAC
   The 16-member General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC) was appointed
   by the City Council. It was comprised of representatives of local agencies,
   non-profit organizations and clubs in order to encourage stakeholder par-
   ticipation, solicit their opinions, and have access to their expertise through-
   out the process. The GPAC met regularly over the course of the General
   Plan’s development and provided advice and feedback on key issues and
   policy.
   Stakeholder Interviews
   In addition to convening the GPAC, the General Plan team conducted in-
   terviews at the beginning of the General Plan process with the community’s
   major stakeholders – such as city officials and local leaders in the fields of
   business, education, transportation, development, social services, and plan-
   ning. The General Plan team also held focus group discussions and out-
   reach sessions with a wide range of groups, including the South Gate Rotary
   Club, the Optimist Club, the Women’s Club, Padres Unidos (‘United Parents’
   group), the Commission for South Gate Youth, the Women’s Multicultural
   Club, South Gate Middle School Leadership Club, LAUSD Adult Education
   learners, East Los Angeles College classes, the Chamber of Commerce, the
   Tweedy Mile Business Association, and others. The intent of these interviews
   was to solicit interest in the General Plan, to identify the major issues fac-
   ing the City, and to engage the diverse formal and informal networks that
   exist in the City. These early stakeholder interviews accomplished this and
   provided direction for future workshops, technical reports, and development
22 South Gate General Plan 2035

                                           of General Plan content.
                                           ISSUES AND
                                           OPPORTUNITIES
                                           The next stage of the General Plan process was to identify the major
                                           issues and opportunities that should be addressed in the General Plan.
                                           Many of these had been suggested by the initial stakeholder interviews.
                                           They were then fleshed out by an issues and opportunities public work-
                                           shop and from analysis and conclusions in a series of technical issues and
                                           opportunities reports.
The community workshops included a
variety of activities that encouraged
interaction and conversation among
                                           Issues and Opportunities Workshop
residents.                                 The Issues and Opportunities Workshop was held on July 29, 2006
                                           and involved about 85 residents from the community. The participants
                                           were asked to reflect on the City’s most important strengths, chal-
                                           lenges, and opportunities. Through facilitated small group discussions
                                           and interactive exercises, residents identified the City’s key strengths
                                           to be its diverse neighborhoods, South Gate Park, Tweedy Mile, and
                                           the City’s small town feel. They identified safety, parking, sufficient tax
                                           revenues, and traffic congestion as some of the City’s major challenges.
                                           Residents also saw opportunities for increased walkability, preserva-
                                           tion and strengthening of neighborhoods, and increased retail options
Residents were provided with a variety     within the City.
of ways of expressing their ideas, such as
this map of post-it notes with key issues.
                                           Issues and Opportunities Reports
                                           Concurrent with the public outreach process, the General Plan team
                                           completed five technical issues and opportunities reports to inform the
                                           General Plan. These five technical reports covered the subjects of land
                                           use and urban design, economic development, housing, transporta-
                                           tion, and community health.
Community workshops were attended
by up to 200 residents. At each, resi-
dents provided ideas that formed the
basis of this General Plan.
                                                                   Development of the General Plan 23

   VISIONING PROCESS
   The visioning stage of the General Plan process involved exploring and
   crystallizing the community’s goals into a unified vision statement. The
   focal point of this stage of work was the public visioning workshop,
   which resulted in a vision statement and set of guiding principles for
   the City’s future. These were then reviewed and approved in a joint
   workshop with the City Council and Planning Commission.
   Visioning Workshop
   Approximately 180 residents, City officials and stakeholders attended
   the General Plan visioning workshop on September 30, 2006. Partici-
   pants engaged in interactive exercises and small group activities such as
   a visual preference survey, where they identified preferences for com-
   munity design, future development, and character of the City’s districts
   and corridors. Residents also took part in a visioning exercise, where
   they prioritized goals for the City over the next 20 years. “Greening the
   City” and “enhancing Tweedy Mile” were the top two priorities identi-     At the Vision Workshop, participants voted
   fied by workshop participants. The need to create more affordable         for their top 5 community-wide goals.
   housing options was also mentioned frequently. These priorities were      This exercise formed the basis of the Gen-
   then articulated in the City’s Vision Statement and Guiding Principles.   eral Plan’s Vision and Guiding Principles.
   A Community Image Survey was prepared where residents expressed
   their preferences for future development character in the City.
24 South Gate General Plan 2035

  LAND USE
  PLANNING PROCESS
  A land use plan provides one of the most critical functions of a General
  Plan, and is often one of its most contentious components. Because
  of this, the land use planning stage of the process involved three
  intensive public workshops and a large amount of work by the Gen-
  eral Plan team. The Vision and Guiding Principles generated in the
  previous stage provided a framework for this task. These two land use
  workshops and the extensive technical work by the General Plan team
  resulted in an initial set of land use objectives and policies for different
  areas of the City. Most of these fed directly into the General Plan. The
  progression of the land use planning process is described below.
  Identification of Change Areas
  The City and General Plan team first identified areas in the City that
  were likely to change significantly over the time horizon of the General
  Plan. These major potential change areas included Tweedy Mile, several
  of the City’s commercial and industrial districts, and several major cor-
  ridors such as Firestone Boulevard, Long Beach Boulevard, and Atlantic
  Avenue. The General Plan team also identified areas that were unlikely
  to change dramatically, including most of the City’s neighborhoods.
  The focus for these areas of stability would be to preserve and enhance
  the neighborhoods, while the focus in major change areas would be to
  create a positive vision for how they should transform over time.
  City-Wide Land Use Workshop
  The focus of this workshop was to develop big-picture land use alter-
  natives for the City of South Gate as a whole. More than 100 residents,
  City officials and stakeholders attended the workshop on December 9,
  2006. The workshop format included a town hall-style discussion and
  an opportunity for feedback on the vision, direction, and land use pos-
  sibilities for the City. It included an interactive “citizen planning” map-
  ping exercise that involved placing game pieces representing different
  types of development in parts of the City where residents wanted to
  see change. In terms of major land use preferences, residents expressed
  a desire for the City to encourage a healthy mix of uses, including retail
                               Development of the General Plan 25

   and housing; redevelop key districts as well as cor-
   ridors; increase economic development opportunities;      Strategy Framework
   attract more retail; preserve and enhance single family
   neighborhoods; and create varied housing options
                                                             Workshop
   such as town homes, condominiums, and multi-family        After the focus area land use workshop, the General
   housing units. The community also wanted to have          Plan team developed the big picture strategy frame-
   stores and services within walking distance of neigh-     work for the City. This included identifying major cor-
   borhoods, particularly grocery stores that sell healthy   ridors for redevelopment, the creation of new mixed
   and high-quality foods. These community preferences       use activity centers (such as the community college
   guided development of the land use plan for the City.     area, the civic center area and the gateway area near
                                                             the intersection of Firestone and Atlantic Boulevards),
                                                             a network of liner green spaces and a series of small-
   Focus Area Land Use                                       scaled walkable main streets. The strategy frame-
                                                             work was presented at a public workshop on January
   Workshop                                                  27, 2007 and the nearly 100 community members
   The goal of the second public land use workshop on        in attendance were strongly in support of the overall
   January 20, 2007 was to understand in greater detail      strategy presented.
   residents’ vision for specific change areas in the City.
   The 100-plus participants participated in an interactive
   mapping exercise that allowed them to develop de-
   tailed land use visions for the change areas of the City.
   There was significant discussion about Tweedy Mile,
   Long Beach Boulevard, Firestone Boulevard, the area
   around the community college, and the area around
   the Atlantic/Firestone intersection. The information
   generated at this workshop was far more fine-grained
   than at the previous workshop and allowed the Gen-
   eral Plan team to identify specific “Place Types” (or     The result of the workshop was a land use vision for
   land uses) for individual parcels in the City.            various districts and corridors within the City.
   Participants placed game pieces representing “place       At all workshops, participants reported back a sum-
   types” in different areas of the City.                    mary of the results of small group discussions.
26 South Gate General Plan 2035

                                              TOPIC-SPECIFIC
                                              WORKSHOPS
                                              In parallel with the series of community congress General Plan work-
                                              shops described above, the City held a number of topic-specific public
                                              workshops. These addressed the topics of transportation, economic
                                              development, and healthy communities (addressed in a series of three
                                              “healthy community” workshops), all three of which are addressed in
                                              dedicated elements of the General Plan Elements. The results and con-
                                              tent of each of these workshops are described below.
                                              Transportation Workshop
                                              This public workshop focused on the City’s major transportation
                                              challenges and opportunities, and solicited resident input on them.
                                              Workshop participants emphasized the general need for expanded
                                              public transit and a safer and more inviting pedestrian network. In
                                              coordination with the General Plan team’s transportation consultants,
                                              residents also provided invaluable “on-the-ground” knowledge of spe-
                                              cific problem areas and circulation patterns in the City. In many cases,
                                              discussions of these areas and patterns resulted in a consensus about
                                              how the General Plan should approach them. This included proposed
                                              solutions for specific intersections, locations of future bicycle and
                                              pedestrian facilities, concepts for specific streets like Tweedy Boule-
                                              vard, Firestone Boulevard, and Atlantic Avenue, and locations of public
                                              transportation improvements, among other things. The data generated
Residents of all ages participated in the     during this working session fed directly into the Mobility Element of
process of creating the future of South Gate. the General Plan.
                                                                        Development of the General Plan 27

   Economic Development                                      Healthy Community Workshop #1:
                                                             Designing a Healthy Active
   Workshop                                                  Community
   The economic development public workshop included
   a brainstorm about what types of retail and industrial    The first Healthy Community workshop, attended by
   activity residents wanted in the City, and a discus-      about 40 residents and City officials and held on Feb-
   sion of how these types of economic activity would        ruary 16, 2008, provided an overview of how public
   help the City achieve its long-term vision and guiding    health is impacted by land use and transportation
   principles. The overall economic development priori-      patterns, driving rates, pedestrian-friendly environ-
   ties identified by residents included preserving Tweedy   ments, and parks and recreation. It also informed
   Mile’s small town feel, enhancing economic prosperity     residents about how to be involved in the planning
   by adding favorable shops and commercial activities,      process and advocate for healthy communities and
   and making a continued investment in education. In        active lifestyles. Residents discussed their health
   terms of retail activity, residents expressed a desire to concerns and developed a list of priorities, which
   support existing businesses on Tweedy and in other        included increasing access to healthy foods; improv-
   locations, attract both nationally recognized retail      ing the cleanliness, aesthetics, and safety of streets;
   stores and small businesses tailored to the needs of      ensuring closer proximity to local services; providing
   residents, encourage higher-quality products in the       more recreational activities; creating less traffic; and
   stores that do exist, and provide positive entertain-     developing community gardens. All of these priority
   ment and activities for youth. Residents also ex-         issues became specific policies or policy sections in
   pressed a desire that industrial activity generate jobs   the Healthy Community Element.
   and pay higher wages by focusing on specialized
   technologies, be separated from residential areas,
   and be environmentally friendly. The data generated
                                                             Healthy Community Workshop #2:
   during this working session fed directly into the Eco-    Healthy Foods 101
   nomic Element of the General Plan.
                                                             At the second healthy community workshop held on
                                                             March 27, 2008, stakeholders used maps and local
   Healthy Community                                         knowledge to assess the availability of good and bad
                                                             food choices in different neighborhoods of the City.
   Workshops                                                 Over 100 residents participated, identifying their city-
                                                             wide nutrition priorities as creation of farmers markets;
   One the most innovative components of the South
                                                             support for local markets and grocery stores to provide
   Gate General Plan is the Healthy Community Ele-
                                                             more healthy food options; and limits on drive-through
   ment, one of the first of its kind in California. Devel-
                                                             restaurants and liquor stores, especially around schools.
   opment of the Healthy Community Element involved
                                                             The workshop offered strategies for changing land use
   three public workshops. The first addressed the
                                                             policy and working alongside city staff and elected of-
   link between the built environment and health, the
                                                             ficials to address issues of healthy food access.
   second addressed access to nutritious foods, and the
   third was an interactive walking audit of South Gate’s
   streets. These workshops and their role in developing
   the Healthy Community Element are discussed below.
28 South Gate General Plan 2035

Healthy Community Workshop #3:
South Gate Walks
The final Healthy Community workshop, held on
May 3, 2008, was a guided walk audit of the City’s
streets conducted by 30 residents. The audit evalu-
ated the safety and aesthetics of four different street
sections in the City – a residential neighborhood, the
Long Beach corridor, an area around an elementary
school, and a stretch of Tweedy Mile. Overall, resi-
dents expressed a strong desire for clean and safe
streets that encourage walking and public gather-
ing. Specific recommendations resulting from the
walk audit, included: more highly visible crosswalks,
more street lighting, more street trees that provide
shade, pedestrian-scale store fronts, higher activity
in commercial areas, and improving the maintenance
of sidewalks and streets. This data informed both the
Healthy Community Element and other portions of
the General Plan related to the pedestrian network.
Residents participated in a “walk audit” to identify
the areas of the pedestrian environment where im-
provements are needed.
                                                       Development of the General Plan 29

   COMMUNITY
   UPDATES
   In addition to public workshops designed to generate early resident
   feedback, vision frameworks, and policy content, the General Plan
   process also involved two workshops that apprised the community of
   the plan’s progress as it took form.
   Community Update 2007
   The 2007 Community Update involved presentations by the Community
   Development, Public Works, Parks and Recreation, and Police Depart-
   ments, and the Tweedy Mile Association. The subject of the Community
   Update was both the status of the General Plan and, more generally,
   upcoming and completed projects throughout the City. The Community
   Update also included presentations by most City departments on their
   recent activities. The public information event was attended by around
   150 residents and stakeholders. After the presentations, residents
   provided city officials with feedback and ideas about the City’s various
   activities, including the General Plan. The meeting concluded with an
   information resource fair. Twenty-four City departments, county and
   regional agencies and non-profit organizations had tables around the
   auditorium where staff members provided information on their programs
   and services and received further public comment.
   The key strategies in the General Plan were presented at numerous
   community meetings, such as the Community Update in 2007.
30 South Gate General Plan 2035

  DRAFTING AND
  COMPLETION OF
  THE GENERAL PLAN
  The workshops described above provided an orienting structure for the
  development of the General Plan. They generated public ownership,
  an overall vision, and direction and invaluable ideas for the creation
  of policies and implementation actions in the General Plan. Over the
  course of the project, the technical experts involved in the process
  supplemented and verified the issues identified by the community and
  presented alternatives for accomplishing city goals.
  Once this process had defined the direction and policy framework for
  the General Plan, the General Plan consultant team worked with City
  staff to draft the General Plan. In this way, the content of the General
  Plan directly reflects the aspirations of the community, understood
  through a variety of strategies and from a number of different perspec-
  tives. This public input has formulated a policy and regulatory structure,
  informed by the most up-to-date best practices in the planning profes-
  sion, to implement community goals.
                            Development of the General Plan 31
32 South Gate General Plan 2035
3
  Community Design Element
   INTRODUCTION
   This chapter of the General Plan provides goals, objectives, policies
   and implementation actions on community design, which includes
   land use, urban design, and the characteristics that give South Gate its
   unique image and identity. The Community Design chapter is one of
   the central components of the General Plan because it provide policy
   guidance on the characteristics of the built environment – the location
   and design of our homes, stores, parks, offices and other spaces – and
                                                                             The chapter includes a brief
   the way that we move between these various places to fulfill our daily
                                                                             overview of the existing condi-
   needs to work, shop and play.
   The chapter includes a brief overview of the existing conditions in       tions in South Gate as of 2007
   South Gate as of 2007 and a summation of the existing issues that
   this General Plan was developed to cover. Looking to the future, the      and a summation of the exist-
   chapter includes a summary of how these existing challenges might be
                                                                             ing issues that this General
   addressed, and proceeds to outline the big picture planning concepts
   that influence the community design of the City. This is followed by
                                                                             Plan was developed to address.
   regulations for future land uses in the City.
   Unlike other general plans, which provide an allowable future land
   use for each parcel, the South Gate General Plan uses “Place Types”
   – designations that move beyond land use to also include form and
   character requirements. The Place Types are then applied to unique
   regulatory geographies of the City – Neighborhoods, Districts, and Cor-
   ridors. Following Place Types, is a section on citywide policy, providing
   guidance for a number of topics including regional coordination, the
   preservation of the identity of the community, the preservation of exist-
   ing neighborhood character, and community participation and involve-
   ment in the planning process. At the end of the chapter are vision
   statements and policies for each District and Corridor in the City. The
   final section of the chapter contains the implementation actions for the
   Community Design Element.
34 South Gate General Plan 2035

3
  Community Design Element
   INTRODUCTION
   This chapter of the General Plan provides goals, objectives, policies
   and implementation actions on community design, which includes
   land use, urban design, and the characteristics that give South Gate its
   unique image and identity. The Community Design chapter is one of
   the central components of the General Plan because it provide policy
   guidance on the characteristics of the built environment – the location
   and design of our homes, stores, parks, offices and other spaces – and
                                                                             The chapter includes a brief
   the way that we move between these various places to fulfill our daily
                                                                             overview of the existing condi-
   needs to work, shop and play.
   The chapter includes a brief overview of the existing conditions in       tions in South Gate as of 2007
   South Gate as of 2007 and a summation of the existing issues that
   this General Plan was developed to cover. Looking to the future, the      and a summation of the exist-
   chapter includes a summary of how these existing challenges might be
                                                                             ing issues that this General
   addressed, and proceeds to outline the big picture planning concepts
   that influence the community design of the City. This is followed by
                                                                             Plan was developed to address.
   regulations for future land uses in the City.
   Unlike other general plans, which provide an allowable future land
   use for each parcel, the South Gate General Plan uses “Place Types”
   – designations that move beyond land use to also include form and
   character requirements. The Place Types are then applied to unique
   regulatory geographies of the City – Neighborhoods, Districts, and Cor-
   ridors. Following Place Types, is a section on citywide policy, providing
   guidance for a number of topics including regional coordination, the
   preservation of the identity of the community, the preservation of exist-
   ing neighborhood character, and community participation and involve-
   ment in the planning process. At the end of the chapter are vision
   statements and policies for each District and Corridor in the City. The
   final section of the chapter contains the implementation actions for the
   Community Design Element.
34 South Gate General Plan 2035

                               STATUTORY
                               REQUIREMENTS
                               State of California law (Government Code Section 65302(a)) requires
                               that a City’s General Plan include:
                                        . . . a land use element which designates the proposed
                                        general distribution and general location and extent
                                        of uses of the land for housing, business, industry and
The land use element has the            open space, including agriculture, natural resources,
                                        recreation, and enjoyment of scenic beauty, public
broadest scope of the General
                                        buildings and grounds, solid waste disposal facilities
                                        and other categories of public and private uses of
Plan elements required by law.
                                        land. The land use element shall include a statement
                                        of the standards of population density and building
                                        intensity recommended for the various districts and
                                        other territory covered by the plan.
                               The land use element has the broadest scope of the General Plan ele-
                               ments required by law. Since it regulates how land is to be used, many
                               of the issues and policies contained in all other General Plan elements
                               are impacted by and/or impact this chapter.
                                                                 Community Design Element 35

   EXISTING LAND USE
   CONDITIONS
   The City of South Gate is an entirely urbanized city that has a diverse
   mix of land uses. The current uses reflect two of the City’s key historical
   development trends – the City as a residential community and the City as
   an industrial center. As a result, the broad pattern of land uses in the City
   can be described as follows:
   •	 A downtown “main street” on Tweedy Boulevard (known as the “Tweedy Mile”).
   •	 Retail and service commercial uses along the major arterial roadways in the City – Fires-    The current uses reflect two of
      tone Boulevard, Atlantic Avenue and Long Beach Boulevard.
   •	 Neighborhood-serving retail (such as convenience stores) at intersections of secondary       the City’s key historical devel-
      roadways throughout the City.
   •	 Industrial development on the eastern side of the City, which is served by a railroad
                                                                                                   opment trends – the City as a
      spur connecting to the main line.  There is also industrial development in the northwest
      corner of the City (near the site of the former Firestone tire factory) and in the southwest residential community and the
      corner of the City.
   •	 Single family residential neighborhoods with relatively small homes on small parcels.        City as an industrial center.
   •	 Mixed-density residential neighborhoods where single family homes have been replaced
      with duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes and multi-unit buildings.
   •	 Major infrastructure running in a north-south direction that borders and dissects the
      City.  These include the Alameda Railroad Corridor, I-710, the Los Angeles River and the
      Rio Hondo Channel.
   Table CD-1 presents the existing land uses in the City, divided into numerous
   broad categories. These land uses are reflected in the map in Figure CD-1.
   Table CD-1: Existing Land Use
    Use                                                                                 Acres                  Percent of Total
    Residential                                                                         1966                       41.0%
    Commercial                                                                           308                        6.4%
    Industrial                                                                           762                       15.9%
    Parks                                                                                166                        3.4%
    Schools                                                                              109                        2.3%
    Civic/Institutional                                                                   99                        2.1%
    Vacant                                                                                80                        1.7%
    Public Works, Water Bodies, Easements                                                342                        7.1%
    Transportation                                                                       968                       20.2%
    Total                                                                               4800
   Source: Los Angeles County Assessor, 2006; Raimi + Associates, 2006.
36 South Gate General Plan 2035

Residential
Residential comprises the single largest land use cat-           cent of the total residential land is single family while
egory in South Gate with 1,956 acres and 40.8 per-               29.1 percent of the land contains multi-family uses.
cent of the total land in the City. Using Los Angeles
                                                                 In addition to the acres of land, another way of look-
County Assessor data from July of 2006, the residen-
                                                                 ing at residential land use is by number and type of
tial land can be divided into numerous sub-categories
                                                                 housing units. According to the City and the 2000 US
depending on the number of units on each parcel.
                                                                 Census, there are 24,277 housing units in South Gate.
This information is presented in Table CD-2.
                                                                 Of these, there are 15,606 single- family units (64.3
Single family parcels cover the largest total area of            percent) and 8,672 multi-family units (35.7 percent). A
land, followed by duplexes and then parcels with five-           detailed breakdown is presented in Table CD-3.
plus units. This information also shows that 70.9 per-
Residential neighborhoods comprise the majority of land in South Gate and the majority of residences are single
family homes.
Table CD-2: Residential Land Use
  Residential Use                                                      Acres                Pct of Total Residential Land
  Single Family                                                        1396                              71.0%
  Double, Duplex or Two Units                                           224                              11.4%
  Three Units or Triplex                                                109                               5.5%
  Four Units                                                             76                               3.9%
  Five to Ten Units                                                     119                               6.1%
  11 to 20 Units                                                         11                               0.6%
  21 to 40 Units                                                        3.6                               0.2%
  Greater than 40 Units                                                 4.6                               .02%
  Manufactured Home Park                                                 20                               1.0%
  Total                                                                1963
Source: Los Angeles County Assessor, July 2006; Raimi + Associates, 2006.
                                                                                 Community Design Element 37
   Table CD-3: Residential Housing Units
    Residential Use                                                   Units                  Percent of Total Units
    Single Family - Detached                                         12,343                          50.8%
    Single Family - Attached                                          3,262                          13.4%
    Double, Duplex or Two Units                                       1004                            4.1%
    Three Units or Four Units                                         2,692                          11.1%
    Five to Nine Units                                                2,375                           9.8%
    10 to 19 Units                                                    1,116                           4.6%
    20 to 49 units                                                     818                            3.7%
    More than 50 Units                                                 389                            1.6%
    Manufactured Home Park                                             278                            1.1%
    Total                                                            24,277
   Source: Community Development Department, City of South Gate, September 6, 2006.
   Commercial
   Commercial development covers a broad spectrum of
   uses including retail, office, and service commercial.
   Table CD-4 shows a breakdown of the commercial
   uses by type. Overall, only 6.1 percent of the total
   land has a commercial use. This is a relatively small
   number for a city the size of South Gate.
   The commercial uses are generally located along
   major corridors and in concentrated retail nodes.
   The primary retail areas in the City are along Tweedy
   Boulevard, Firestone Boulevard, Long Beach Bou-
   levard and in the El Paseo/South Gate Towne Cen-
   ter shopping area. Other commercial districts are
   located along State Street, California Avenue, Atlantic
   Avenue, Garfield (between Lincoln and Century),
   Paramount and around the intersection of Garfield
                                                                El Paseo is a major destination for residents of the
   and Imperial. The distribution of commercial land
                                                                greater South Gate area.
   throughout the City is a strength because it means a
   large number of residents are located within walk-
   ing distance of uses such as food stores. In addition,
   there are small neighborhood grocery stores and
   other service uses located throughout the City within
   or on the edges of residential neighborhoods, which
   provides nearby shopping for many residents.
38 South Gate General Plan 2035
                                                   Existing Land Uses
                                                   Figure CD 1	
South Gate General Plan 2035   Community Design Element

Table CD-4: Commercial Land Use
 Commercial Use                                          Acres                  Percent of Total Commercial Acres
 Restaurant                                                20                                  6.6%
 Shopping and Department Store                             49                                 15.8%
 Office                                                    25                                  8.4%
 Hotel/Motel                                               13                                  4.2%
 Mixed Use                                                 25                                  8.2%
 Auto Related                                              64                                 25.9%
 Recreational (Private)                                     8                                  2.5%
 Other/Not Specified                                       88                                 28.5%
 Total                                                    292
 Source: Los Angeles County Assessors Office, July 2006; Raimi + Associates 2006.
Industrial
Industrial development comprises approximately 15.5
percent of the land in the City of South Gate and is
the third-largest land use after residential and trans-
portation. The large amount of industrial uses pres-
ents a strength that can be built upon in the updated
General Plan.
As is shown in Figure CD-1, the industrial uses are
concentrated in several specific locations within the
City. The major concentration is north and east of
the Firestone/Atlantic Intersection. Another large
concentration is east of I-710 and the Los Angeles                Heavy industrial uses are still thriving in South Gate.
River. There are smaller concentrations of industrial
uses in the northwest and southwest corners of the
City. Additionally, there are several smaller industrial
parcels located throughout the City.
Table CD-5 shows a breakdown of the sub-catego-
ries of industrial land. Overall, there is a relatively
even distribution of the three sub-types of industrial
land – heavy manufacturing, light industrial and
warehouse/distribution.
                                                                  Over the past several decades, smaller manufacturing
                                                                  and fabrication businesses have located in the City.
                                                                                  Community Design Element 41

   Table CD-5: Industrial Land Use
                                                                                                   Percent of Total
    Industrial Use                                                 Acres                         Commercial Acres
    Heavy Manufacturing                                             286                                 37.5%
    Light Industrial                                                209                                 27.4%
    Warehouse/Distribution                                          250                                 32.8%
    Other/Not Specified                                              18                                  2.3%
    Total                                                           763
   Source: Los Angeles County Assessors Office, July 2006; Raimi + Associates, 2006.
   Parks
   The City of South Gate Parks and Recreation De-
   partment is responsible for the development and
   maintenance of the City’s park facilities. Accord-
   ing to the department, there are 9 parks in the City
   that total 165.85 acres. As is seen in Table CD-6,
   the majority of the acres are located in 2 parks –
   South Gate Park and Hollydale Regional Park. These
   facilities contain a wide range of passive and active
   recreational facilities and, due to their size, are
   considered regional facilities and used by residents
   in surrounding areas. South Gate’s parks provide
   a range of facilities including athletic fields, play
   equipment, picnic areas, a swimming pool, grassy
   open spaces, and activity buildings.                             The City is home to a diversity of parks, including 96-
   In addition to these park facilities, there are Class I          acre South Gate Park.
   multi-use trails that run along the Los Angeles River
   and Rio Hondo Channel. (Class I facilities are physi-
   cally separated from roadways and dedicated to cy-
   cling and other recreational activities.) These facilities
   do not appear to be heavily used but they do provide
   an additional recreational amenity as well as a non-
   motorized transportation connection to many other
   cities in the Los Angeles Region.
42 South Gate General Plan 2035

Table CD-6: Parks
 Park Name                                 Acres        Facilities
                                                        Auditorium, Sports Center with gym and pool, athletic
                                                        fields, playgrounds, tennis courts, golf course, junior
 South Gate Park                            96.8        hockey rink, senior recreation center
 Hollydale Regional Park                    56.0        Playground, tennis courts, ball fields, equestrian arena
 Cesar Chavez Park                           5.0        Soccer fields, pergola
 Circle Park                                 4.0        Playground, ball field
 Hollydale Community Park                    2.2        Community center, playground and ball field
 State Street Park                           0.8        Grass field
 Gardendale Tot Lot                         0.45        Playground
 Triangle Park                               0.3        Pergola, seating
 Stanford Avenue Park                       0.19        Playground
 Total                                    165.74
Source: City of South Gate, 2006.
                                                               within South Gate are run by the LAUSD. Many resi-
Schools                                                        dents on the east side of town attend schools outside
As of 2008, there are 14 public schools in South Gate          South Gate City limits in three other school districts:
occupying a total of 107 acres. Of the 14 schools,             Downey Unified School District, Paramount Unified
two are high schools, two are middle schools and ten           School District and Lynwood Unified School District.
are elementary schools. The primary school district            There are three adult school campuses, including one
serving the City is the Los Angeles Unified School             run by the LAUSD at the South Gate High School
District (LAUSD). With the exception of a combined             campus, and the Odyssey Continuation School on
elementary and middle school in Hollydale that is in           Dearborn Avenue. In addition, several new public
the Paramount Unified School District, schools located         schools in the planning stages. The Los Angeles
South Gate has 14 public schools, including the relatively new Southeast High School on Tweedy Boulevard.
                                                                               Community Design Element 43
   County Department of Education has purchased a site
   on Gardendale and Paramount Boulevard to build a         Civic and Institutional
   school for special-needs children and pregnant teens,    There are 99 acres of Civic and Institutional uses,
   and the LAUSD has two elementary schools (ES #4          comprising just over three percent of the total land
   and ES #9) and a high school (HS #9) planned within      area in the City. These uses include City Hall, city
   South Gate. These schools are not reflected in the       yard, two libraries (one on Tweedy Boulevard and
   existing conditions map (Figure CD 1.)                   another on Garfield Avenue), approximately 30
                                                            churches, several private schools, and other civic and
   There are also several private schools in the City
                                                            institutional uses.
   including the Redeemer Lutheran School and Saint
   Helen’s Catholic School, the Teen Challenge Ministries
   ministerial school on State Street and a private con-
   tinuation school on San Antonio Avenue, just north
   of Tweedy Boulevard. There are also several private
   trade schools scattered throughout the City, particu-
   larly on the east side of town. The private schools
   total just over 2 acres. Private schools are recorded on
   the existing conditions map (Figure CD 1) as civic and
   institutional uses.
   Additionally, the East Los Angeles College has a
   facility in South Gate on Firestone Boulevard and        The majority of the City’s administrative functions are
   Alameda Street. The 50,000 square foot facility          in City Hall, which is located on California Avenue.
   contains 24 classrooms, a bookstore, a library and
   student support services. The College is considering a
   largely expanded campus complex that would include
   adaptive reuse of the former Firestone plant facili-
   ties north of Firestone Boulevard and replacement of
   the existing facility south of Firestone Boulevard with
   new buildings and multi-level parking structure that
   extend to Southern Avenue.
44 South Gate General Plan 2035

Water Bodies, Easements                                  Vacant Lands
and Public Works                                         Since the City is essentially completely developed,
                                                         there is very little land that is classified as vacant.
There are 342 acres of water bodies, easements and       According to the Los Angeles County Assessor only
public works lands in the City of South Gate. These      80 acres comprising 1.7 percent of the total land is
include the Los Angeles River, the Rio Hondo Channel,    categorized as vacant. This small amount of vacant
railroad lines, the high-tension power line along South- land means that future development will require the
ern Avenue and other utility easements in the City.      redevelopment of existing sites that contain buildings.
The Los Angeles River passes through South Gate and
creates a physical barrier between east and west.
                                                                          Community Design Element 45
   KEY ISSUES AND
   CHALLENGES
   As a starting point for the General Plan Update process, the City and
   consultant team worked with the community to understand the City’s
   most important strengths as well as its physical, social and community
   challenges and opportunities for change. This information is necessary
   because the purpose of the General Plan is both to preserve and build on    According to residents, South
   the unique and important characteristics of a community and to mitigate
   the negative features that exist. In this way, the General Plan can move
                                                                               Gate is already a great place to
   the City towards being a better place to live and work in the future.
                                                                               live and work.
   According to residents, South Gate is already a great place to live and
   work. There are strong neighborhoods, a unique town character and a
   dedicated and active citizenry. These qualities should be preserved and
   enhanced through the General Plan. At the same time, residents and
   business owners feel that improvements need to be made to South
   Gate, including improving the visual quality of the City, addressing
   residential overcrowding and providing expanded economic develop-
   ment opportunities. The following is a discussion of these and other
   key challenges facing the City.
   Overcrowded Residential Areas
   Citizens noted that many of the residential areas are overcrowded. The
   overcrowding is a result of a number of factors, including the addition
   of multi-family housing in traditionally single family residential areas,
   construction of illegal living space such as the conversion of garages to
   living quarters and social issues such as more than one household and
   numerous generations living in single units. Overcrowding impacts the
   community because public facilities and services, such as parks, utilities,
   schools and youth programs, are over-used and there is a lack of park-
   ing on many residential streets.
46 South Gate General Plan 2035

Residential Neighborhoods Need Upgrades                              Traffic Congestion and Insufficient
While there are strong residential neighborhoods in                  Public Transit Services
the City, many with a unique character, many have                    Major streets in the City are heavily congested and
issues that need to be addressed in the General Plan.                traffic and parking demands are spilling over into
The identified issues include:                                       neighborhoods. Public transit is available throughout
•	 The construction of large homes on small lots, which are out of   the City, but many transit routes do not reach resi-
   character with existing homes.                                    dents’ desired destinations.
•	 Numerous code violations, especially illegal residential units
   and living spaces.                                                Unknown Historic and Cultural Resources
•	 Streets and sidewalks that are in need of repair due to a lack of  A comprehensive survey of cultural and historic
   maintenance and upkeep over the years.                            resources has never been conducted. A survey should
•	 An abundance of trash and graffiti that detracts from the visual  be conducted so that resources can be protected.
   character of the neighborhood.
                                                                     Major Corridors that Detract from
Physical and Economic Blight in
                                                                     Community Character and Design
Some Areas of the City                                                The major corridors in the City – including Long
There are conditions of blight throughout the City,
                                                                     Beach, Firestone Boulevard, California, Imperial and
including both physical and economic blight. Many of
                                                                     Atlantic – are visually unattractive and do not contrib-
these areas are along the major corridors – Firestone,
                                                                     ute to the overall appearance and identity of the City.
Atlantic, Long Beach, Tweedy and Garfield.
                                                                     Specific issues include the following:
                                                                     •	 There are a large number of used car dealers and automobile-
Physical Barriers that Divide the City                                  related uses such as auto repair shops.
There are numerous human-made barriers in the City
                                                                     •	 The pedestrian environment is unsafe and unattractive. Side-
that separate the Hollydale area, the “triangle” area                   walks are relatively narrow, wide roadways make pedestrian
and the older part of South Gate from each other.                       crossings difficult, there is a lack of a consistent street cover,
These barriers include I-710, the Los Angeles River and                 sidewalks in some areas are in disrepair and there is an abun-
                                                                        dance of trash and graffiti.
the Rio Hondo Channel, Power Transmission rights-of-
way (owned by Los Angeles Department of Water and                    •	 The parcels are relatively small and shallow and there are irregu-
                                                                        lar parcel sizes. This makes large-scale redevelopment difficult.  
Power, Southern California Edison or the Metropolitan
Water District of Southern California) and railroad                  •	 There is an abundance of underutilized lots and buildings that could
                                                                        be redeveloped to contribute to the character of the community
rights-of-way. Some barriers are also a source of blight
or air pollution, which needs to be addressed.                       •	 Some of the buildings suffer from a lack of upkeep or are in disrepair.
                                                                     •	 There is a lack of uniform or consistent urban character with
                                                                        buildings that have different setbacks, heights and design styles.
                                                                                          Community Design Element 47

   Tweedy Mile Needs Improvement                                              Lack of Diversity of Employment Uses
   While Tweedy Mile provides great “bones” for a down-                       While the City has a large number of industrial uses,
   town Main Street, there are numerous issues that need                      there is a lack of a diversity of other job-producing
   to be addressed. These include the following:                              uses, namely office and research and development
   •	 The street and sidewalks are dirty and in disrepair.                    uses. These uses could help to diversify the economy
                                                                              and advance the economic position of city residents.
   •	 There is a lack of a uniform urban character.  Many of the
       parcels have a main street character with storefronts adjacent
       to the sidewalk.  However, there are numerous places where the         Lack of Restaurants and Retail
       character is disrupted by uses with large parking lots and build-
                                                                              There is a lack of variety of restaurants and retail
       ings set back from the street.
                                                                              stores, especially higher end stores, sit-down restau-
   •	 The buildings need a “face lift” to make them more attractive.
                                                                              rants and main stream stores. There are opportunities
       Measures suggested during the planning process include new
       paint and awnings and consistent signage.                              to increase the number, location and variety of retail
                                                                              stores and establishments throughout the City, espe-
   •	 There is a lack of a diversity of retail and a relatively high percent-
       age of ground floor medical facilities and office uses, which          cially along Tweedy Mile.
       diminishes the pedestrian environment.  
   •	 The pedestrian environment is unattractive.  Street furniture is        Negative Impacts from Industrial Uses
       old and in disrepair, crosswalks need better markings and traffic      Numerous issues with the type and location of indus-
       speeds make mid-block crossings unsafe.  
                                                                              trial uses were identified. These issues include: close
                                                                              proximity of industrial uses to some residential areas,
   Neighborhood Retail Areas                                                  locations where industrial uses are located on parcels
   Need Improvement                                                           designated for residential and commercial uses, in-
   There are numerous small grocery stores and other                          dustrial buildings that are in disrepair and a high level
   service-oriented uses located around the City, primar-                     of truck traffic on City streets.
   ily at the intersection of arterial and collector streets.
   Though some of these smaller retail centers offer                          Lack of Parks Space in the City
   goods and services to surrounding neighborhoods,                           The community identified a lack of park space and
   two of the primary smaller retail centers – State Street                   an uneven distribution of parks in the City as a major
   and Hollydale – are not fulfilling their potential for be-                 land use concern.
   ing small main street districts.
48 South Gate General Plan 2035

                               COMMUNITY
                               DESIGN STRATEGIES
                               The General Plan is designed to provide a forward-looking vision for
                               the future of South Gate through the year 2030 and beyond. It should
                               provide guidance not just for day-to-day planning decisions but for
                               how these individual decisions should move the City toward a new fu-
For South Gate, which is a     ture. It is important to keep this bigger picture in mind: the goal of the
                               community design concepts and land use designations presented here
completely urbanized area,     is to achieve an “on the ground” vision.
growth and change must be      For South Gate, which is a completely urbanized area, growth and
                               change must be delicately balanced with preserving the existing char-
delicately balanced with pre-  acter of the community. The City, through the General Plan, should
                               preserve and build on the unique aspects of the community while selec-
serving the existing character tively making changes that will improve the quality of life for existing and
                               future residents. In other words, the change that does occur must be
of the community.              designed to make the City a better place to live, play, work and do busi-
                               ness, while avoiding negative impacts to the community.
                               During the General Plan update process, South Gate citizens and the
                               City Council provided their vision of what the City should look like in the
                               future. They identified the unique aspects of the City, as well as where
                               change should occur and what that change should look like. They also
                               identified key community design concepts, described below, which are
                               A key strategy in the plan is to preserve and enhance South Gate’s
                               neighborhoods.
                                                                  Community Design Element 49

   the foundation for both the City’s future land use vi-    Revitalize Tweedy Mile
   sion and for the specific goals, objectives, policies and Tweedy Mile provides the bones for a great down-
   actions that will guide the day-to-day decisions of the   town, differentiates South Gate from nearby communi-
   City Council and staff. A graphical representation of     ties, and could be developed as a citywide or regional
   the key community design strategies are presented in      destination. Unfortunately, Tweedy Mile is not living up
   Figure CD 2.                                              to its potential as a strong community asset. During
                                                             the life of the General Plan, this untapped asset should
   Preserve Character of Existing Distinct                   be revitalized to become the heart of the City. The
   and Well-Designed Neighborhoods                           area should be beautified, new uses such as ground-
   The greatest strength of the community is its diverse,    floor retail should be added, and housing should be
   stable and well-designed residential areas, most of       built at its edges to add vitality and life to the area.
   which were built before 1960. The character and
   quality of these residential areas should be preserved    Create the Firestone Retail
   and enhanced in the future. Actions should be taken       and Entertainment Corridor
   to improve on these residential areas’ strengths,         Firestone Boulevard between the east side of San
   which include: narrow streets, good street trees,         Miguel Avenue and the Rio Hondo Chanel should be
   uniform building types/styles and sidewalks with wide     transformed into a destination entertainment and retail
   planting strips. Infill development should only be al-    area that attracts visitors from throughout the region.
   lowed that is consistent with the existing character,     This area will include a major destination retail center
   and neighborhoods must be buffered from future            at the intersection of Firestone and Long Beach Boule-
   development in districts and corridors on their edges.    vards – the El Portal retail center – which was entitled
                                                             in 2008. The Corridor should also be coordinated with
   Focus New Development on                                  expansions to the El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center
   Transit Corridors                                         District and streetscape improvements, gateway treat-
   The major transit corridors in the City – Long Beach,     ments and other beautification activities.
   Firestone, Garfield, Atlantic, Imperial and Paramount
   – are currently underutilized community assets that
   are visually and economically blighted. These cor-
   ridors should be redeveloped with a mix of uses that
   provide additional opportunities for shopping, work-
   ing and living. As the corridors are redeveloped, spe-
   cial attention must be paid to buffering the new uses
   from the existing residential areas that are typically
   located just beyond the edge of the corridor. Adding
   development near existing and expanded future tran-
   sit service will help to reduce the overall number of
   driving trips as public transit becomes a more viable
   transportation option.
                                                             Tweedy Mile should be revitalized as citywide or
                                                             regional destination with a diversity of retail stores,
                                                             restaurants, and new housing.
50 South Gate General Plan 2035

                                                           Create a Transit Village
                                                           A new transit village should be created near the
                                                           Firestone and Atlantic intersection. New transit uses
                                                           should be explored for the area and a mixed use dis-
                                                           trict with high density housing, retail, and office use
                                                           should be created. There is also the distinct possibility
                                                           of a second transit village on Garfield Avenue north
                                                           or south of Hollydale. The facility could be developed
New development will be focused along the City’s major     to compliment the redevelopment of a mixed use pri-
transportation thoroughfares, such as Firestone Boulevard. vate/public government center on Imperial Highway
                                                           in the City of Downey.
Capitalize on the Los Angeles River
                                                           Create a College District
and Rio Hondo Channel
                                                           The East Los Angeles Community College is consider-
While presently a visual scar and a physical barrier in
                                                           ing a largely expanded campus complex that would
the City, these two waterways could be revitalized to
                                                           include adaptive reuse of the former Firestone plant
be a community asset. Recreated river corridors could
                                                           facilities north of Firestone Boulevard and replacement
beautify and revitalize South Gate and turn the areas
                                                           of the existing facility south of Firestone Boulevard with
into regional assets instead of underused physical bar-
                                                           new buildings and multi-level parking structure that
riers. Actions that could be taken include beautifying
                                                           extend to Southern Avenue. This expansion creates an
the multi-use trails that currently exist with landscap-
                                                           opportunity for lifelong learning in the community, and
ing and pedestrian/bicycle facilities, improving access
                                                           for drawing such auxiliary college uses as bookstores,
from the community, using public art, cultural and
                                                           cafés and restaurants. Adaptive reuse of the former
historical landmarks to beautify and drawing atten-
                                                           Firestone plant facilities will allow the creation of a
tion to the river, and creating development projects
                                                           public/private research and development hub special-
that create an urban waterfront.
                                                           izing in emerging green technology that supports the
                                                           college’s “green workforce” training programs.
Create Neighborhood Nodes
Throughout the City                                        Create a Civic Center District
Neighborhood nodes are local community meeting
                                                           The City should expand its current City Hall site to
and gathering places that contain a mix of uses that
                                                           create a state/county/city civic complex that includes
serve the daily needs of residents. A small number of
                                                           offices and courthouses. This will expand the job
existing neighborhood-serving retail establishments –
                                                           base in the City. Mixed use opportunities, including
such as those on State Street, on Garfield in Holly-
                                                           retail and residential, should also be explored.
dale, and in other smaller centers throughout the City
– provide needed services for local residents. These
                                                           Create a Mixed Use Educational Center
neighborhood nodes are located on the periphery
                                                           The Los Angeles Unified School District is planning an
of existing neighborhoods on secondary roadways
                                                           educational center along Tweedy Boulevard east of
such as State Street and California Avenue. The plan
                                                           Atlantic Avenue. This district can beautify an underuti-
envisions supporting these neighborhood nodes and
                                                           lized part of the City, improve access to the waterfront
developing a series of them throughout the City.
                                                           and enhance lifelong learning in the City. Mixed use
                                                           amenities should also be explored as part of this plan.
                                                                            Community Design Element 51

   Expand the El Paseo/South Gate                            Transform Industrial Uses into Higher
   Towne Center Area                                         Intensity Employment Centers
   This area should be expanded and upgraded to a            The City contains a wide variety of industrial, ware-
   regional retail and entertainment destination. Large      house and distribution areas. This General Plan seeks
   parcels should be redeveloped with new uses, the          to transform some of these areas to allow for higher
   streetscape should be beautified and made more            intensity, job producing uses. Desired new uses include
   walkable, and multi-family residential uses should be     an expansion of the light industrial/flex condominium-
   added to create a more vibrant district.                  style development that builds on and supports the
                                                             boutique fabrication industry currently present in the
   Support and Expand Parks                                  City, office uses and research and development uses.
   and City Green Spaces
   South Gate is already home to one of the largest and
   most used parks in the region – South Gate Park. This
   park is a regional destination and a local destination
   for residents to socialize and exercise. “The Park”
   was identified by South Gate residents during the
   General Plan public outreach process as South Gate’s
   most important community asset. Improvements to
   other green spaces – including Hollydale Park, the Los
   Angeles River multi-use trail, the Rio Hondo multi-use
   trail, and linear parks along the Independence/Ardmore
   railroad right-of-way and the Southern Avenue utility
                                                             The amount of park space in the City should be ex-
   corridor – will provide additional community amenities,
                                                             panded and existing parks should be maintained.
   as well as additional opportunities for physical exercise
   throughout the community. A priority will be redevel-
   oping the railroad right-of-way along Ardmore/Inde-
   pendence as a green belt, parking strip and bike path,
   with opportunities for future expansion. This should be
   supported by a streetscape beautification process that
   adds greenery to all areas of the City.
52 South Gate General Plan 2035

                                                    Santa Ana
                                                                               State
                                                 Liberty                                                                                                                      Gateway
                                                                    or                 State Street                                                                           District
                                                                State Corrid
                                               Independ
                                                        ence
                                                                                       Main Street         Civic Center
                                               Ardmore
                                                                                                           District      Otis
      South Gate                                                                                             Independe
                                                                                                                        nce/Ardm
         College                                                                                                                       ore Green
                                                                                                                                                 way
                            Southern
                                                                                                                                  Firestone
          District                                                                                                                          Corridor
                                            Long B
                                                                                                          Southern
                                                                                                                     Greenway
                                               each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ld
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Garfie
                                                                                           Corridor                             Alexander                                                                             I-710
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Garfield
                                                                                                                                                                Corridor             LA River T
                                                   Corrid
                                                                                                                                                                                               rail
                                                                                                                                  Tweedy C                                                                                                                        El Paso/South Gate
                                                                                       California
                                                                                                                                           orridor                                                                                                    l
                                                         or                                                                                                                                           I-710
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rTrai         Towne Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ive
                                                                                                      Tweedy Mile
                                                                                                                                                             Atlantic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      oR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nd
                                            C
                                            Ceen
                                               ntur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ho
                                                 tuyry
                                                                Long B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Key Community Design Concepts
                                                                   each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              South Gate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Triangle
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ImIm
                                                                                                                                                                                                        peperia
                                                                                                                                                                                                              riall
                                                                                                                                                      ntic
                                                                                                                                                     Atla
                     Greenway/Multi-use Trail
                     Residential Cooridor
                     Mixed Use Corridor                                                                                                                                                                           Garfield
                     Main Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            un
                                                                                                                                                                           Garfield Main Street                                                             mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Par
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure CD 2	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a
                     Major Activity Center
South Gate General Plan 2035                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Community Design Element

                               PLACE TYPES: LAND
                               USE DESIGNATIONS
                               IN SOUTH GATE
                               Overview of the Approach
                               This section describes the intended future land uses and character for
                               the City of South Gate.
                               This General Plan takes a different approach to land use in three
                               significant ways. First, it divides the City of South Gate into unique
                               and identifiable “Neighborhoods,” “Districts,” and “Corridors.” Every
                               parcel in the City is located in one of many neighborhoods, districts
                               and corridors. As is discussed below, this approach goes beyond
...this approach goes beyond   simple allowable land uses and identifies the character and form of a
                               community. Neighborhoods, Districts and Corridors define the geogra-
simple allowable land uses and phy of the community and provide the City with a sense of identity and
                               uniqueness. Further, the Districts and Corridors serve as the regulatory
identifies the character and
                               geography of the General Plan instead of parcels, as is typical in most
                               general plans. Thus, the future potential land uses and densities are
form of a community.
                               not applied to individual parcels in this General Plan. Instead, they are
                               applied to the entire District or Corridor (or identified sub-area within
                               the individual District or Corridor). In addition, each District and Cor-
                               ridor includes policy guidance that includes a statement of existing
                               conditions, a vision statement, allowable Place Types and specific poli-
                               cies that will help achieve the vision of the area.
                               A second difference between this General Plan and the previous General
                               Plan for South Gate is that conventional land use designations (which
                               identify only use and density/intensity) are replaced with the “Place Type”
                               designations described above. Similar to land use designations, Place Type
                               Designations identify the allowable land use and the density or intensity of
                               use. However, Place Type designations also include policy guidance that
                               addresses the form and character of future development. Thus, each Place
                               Type designation also includes design guidance: building location and front-
                               age, pedestrian access and design, public transportation access and design,
                               and private vehicle access, parking and services. In this way, Place Types
                               add a third dimension to the traditionally two-dimensional land use plan.
                                                                   Community Design Element 55

   Third, more than one Place Type may be applied to
   each District and Corridor (or sub-part thereof). This                     Neighborhoods, Districts
   is designed to allow for a greater mixing of uses and
   for flexibility in meeting future economic and envi-
                                                                              and Corridors – The Build-
   ronmental conditions or changes in the community’s
   vision for the area. Additionally, in order to better
                                                                              ing Blocks of Community
   express the desired vision for each District or Corridor,                  The Neighborhoods, Districts and Corridors concept
   a hierarchy of permitted Place Types was identified,                       sub-divides the City into unique and distinct sub-parts
   ranging from “highly desired” to “discouraged.” The                        because strategies for change, growth and prosperity
   table of allowable Place Types for each District and                       will be a result of area-specific planning efforts. Each
   Corridor is presented in Tables CD 7 and CD 8. The                         and every parcel in the City is located in one of the
   hierarchy contains a three-tiered order of preference                      identified Neighborhoods, Districts and Corridors, and
   that is described below:                                                   the policies for growth and change are organized around
                                                                              this planning concept, supplemented by additional goals,
   •	 Highly Desired – This is the preferred Place Type for a District
      or Corridor and should be implemented unless there is a strong          objectives and policies that apply to the entire City.
      overriding reason not to implement it.  This is the Place Type
      that best meets the vision for each District or Corridor.  For
      districts and corridors, these are represented with a green dot         Neighborhoods
      in the Place Type tables.
                                                                              Like any great city, South Gate has developed around
   •	 Desired – Place Types with this designation are allowed in the area
                                                                              the basic unit of the neighborhood. A true neighbor-
      but are not as highly desired.  Certain restrictions may be placed on
      future projects that would like to build with this Place Type.  This is hood is not a subdivision but rather a unique and
      represented with an orange dot in the Place Type tables.                identifiable area containing a neighborhood center
   •	 Discouraged – These Place Types are allowed in the District or          with a pedestrian-friendly mix of uses and a range of
      Corridor but in very limited amounts.  This is represented with a       housing types for people in all stages of life. Neigh-
      red dot in the Place Type tables.
                                                                              borhoods are often defined as the area within a quar-
   Place Types that do not fall under one of these three                      ter mile walking distance from the center to the edge,
   categories are not allowed in the District or Corridor.                    within which most residents can walk to meet their
                                                                              daily needs. Neighborhoods are also often bounded
   Neighborhoods are treated somewhat differently from
                                                                              by physical characteristics, such as major roadways or
   Districts and Corridors in the General Plan. Due to the
                                                                              railroads. However, it is also common for neighbor-
   fact that most residents of existing residential areas
                                                                              hoods to have overlapping boundaries, especially as
   desire to preserve the character and stability of their
                                                                              these boundaries are perceived by residents. Thus,
   neighborhood, only one Place Type is applied to each
                                                                              specific boundaries for individual neighborhoods are
   area. The majority of the City is designated with the
                                                                              not identified in this General Plan.
   Neighborhood Low designation and a small percent-
   age of areas are designated as Neighborhood Medium.                        Unlike Districts and Corridors, which allow more than
                                                                              one Place Type, primarily residential areas of the City
                                                                              are designated with either the Neighborhood Low or
                                                                              Neighborhood Medium designation. As is discussed
                                                                              below, the Neighborhood Low designation allows
                                                                              single family homes and the Neighborhood Medium
                                                                              designation allows for a range of housing types in-
                                                                              cluding single family, duplex, triplex, and small apart-
56 South Gate General Plan 2035

ments. This was done to ensure stability of these
areas for current residents and to support one of the     How to Identify Place
primary guiding principles of the General Plan – the
preservation of existing neighborhoods. Figure CD 3       Types for Individual
identifies the Neighborhood Low and Neighborhood
Medium areas of the City. Neighborhood Medium             Parcels
High and Neighborhood High areas are incorporated
into the Districts and Corridors areas shown below.
                                                          In order to figure out what is allowed on each
                                                          parcel of land in the City, follow the steps out-
Districts                                                 lined below:
Districts are areas of higher intensity development       Identify the parcel of land in question on the
located throughout the City. They often consist of        maps shown in Figures CD 3, CD 4 or CD 5.
streets or areas emphasizing specific types of activi-
                                                          If the parcel is in an area in Figure CD 3, then
ties or characteristics. Districts are important activity
                                                          it is either designated as Neighborhood Low
centers that include residents, but also serve to draw
                                                          or Neighborhood Medium. To understand the
employees, shoppers and visitors to the City. The de-
                                                          allowable densities and uses, see the section
sign and desired land use mix of Districts varies from
                                                          below titled “Place Type Designations.”
area to area. Some, such as the new transit-oriented
village near the intersection of Firestone and Atlantic   If the parcel is in a District or Corridor, find
Avenues, will create a pedestrian- and transit-oriented   the name of the District or Corridor and go to
environment. They will incorporate some mixed use         the section in the General Plan below titled
residential development at a higher density than the      “Districts” or “Corridors.” These sections will
surrounding areas. The Districts will serve as a focal    contain information on each individual District
point for new housing to meet anticipated growth in       or Corridor, including a description of the exist-
population. Other Districts are designed to be pri-       ing conditions in the area, a vision statement,
marily job centers. They will naturally have more of a    the allowable Place Types and specific policies
focus on commerce, and may be less conducive to a         for the area.
pedestrian environment. At the same time, a certain
                                                          To determine what is allowed within each Place
number of mixed uses would be allowed in such Dis-
                                                          Type, go to the description of “Place Type Desig-
tricts and a pedestrian- and transit-friendly environ-
                                                          nations” presented below. Place Types identified
ment would be encouraged wherever feasible.
                                                          with a green dot are highly desired. Place Types
In the General Plan, some Districts are targeted for      identified with a yellow dot are “desired.” Place
significant change and evolution over the time hori-      types with a red dot are “discouraged.” Place
zon of the plan. Other Districts are expected to gen-     Types without any dot are not allowed in the area.
erally remain as they are today, with minor changes
                                                          Check to see whether the parcel is in the area
to improve and enhance the areas. The Districts in the
                                                          identified as the “Corridor Transition Overlay.”
City are shown in Figure CD 4.
                                                          If it is in this area, then refer to the description
                                                          of the Corridor Transition Overlay in the “Place
                                                          Type Designation” section.
                                                                          Community Design Element 57

   Corridors
   Corridors are the major transportation thoroughfares
   and access routes in the City. Corridors also include
   the parcels fronting the roadway and may be several
   parcels deep to allow for significant redevelopment
   opportunities. They serve both as boundaries be-
   tween Neighborhoods and Districts and as places that
   knit the community together by creating destinations
   for residents as well as visitors from across the region.
   Figure CD 5 shows the identified Corridors in the
   City. Corridors in South Gate are, by and large, an
   underutilized resource. They contain a variety of
   strip and stand-alone commercial buildings. Most
   have buildings set back from the street with little
   relationship to one another. Some stretches of
   these important thoroughfares have parcels that are
   vacant or contain buildings that are underutilized or
   in a state of disrepair.
   This General Plan seeks to transform Corridors from
   features that divide the community into areas that
   bring people together. Corridors should be attractive,
   contain a diverse mix of uses – including residential
   uses at higher densities than currently exist – provide
   safe travel for pedestrians, bicycles, transit vehicles
   and automobiles, and enable people and goods to
   circulate with relative ease.
58 South Gate General Plan 2035

                                                Santa Ana                    California
                                              Liberty                State
                                            Independ
                                                     ence
                                            Ardmore
                                                                                          Otis
                               Southern
                                                                                                             Firestone
                                                                                                 Alexander
                                                                                                                                                                   Garfield
                                                                                                                         Tweedy
                                                                                                                                             I-710
                                                                                                                                  Atlantic
                                          Century
                                                            Long B
                                                              each
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Neighborhoods
                                                                                                                                             Imperial
 Neighborhoods
       Corridor Overlay Zone
       Neighborhood-Low
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure CD 3	
       Neighborhood-Medium
       South Gate Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                               mo
                                                                                                                                                        Garfield
                                                                                                                                                                                 unt
                                                                                                                                                                              Para
South Gate General Plan 2035                                                                                                                                                     Community Design Element

                                                         Santa Ana                    California
                                                     Liberty                  State
                                                   Independ
                                 1                 Ardmore
                                                            ence
                                                                                                   Otis
                                      2
                                 Southern
                                                                                                                      Firestone     1
                                                                                                                                                2              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                          Alexander                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                           1                                                 Garfield
                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                  Tweedy
                                                                                                                                                                       I-710
                                                                                                                                            Atlantic
                                                 Century
                                                                     Long B
                                                                       each
                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                       Imperial                              1
                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
  Districts
        Ardine Industrial
        Civic Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Districts
        South Gate College [2 Sub Areas]
        El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center [3 Sub Areas]                                                                                                                                                                          unt
                                                                                                                                                                                  Garfield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mo
        Firestone Industrial                                                                                                                                                                                                Par a
        Gateway [4 Sub Areas]
        Hollydale Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure CD 4	
        Imperial [3 Sub Areas]
        Tweedy Educational District
        Rayo Industrial [2 Sub Areas]
        South Gate Triangle [2 Sub Area]
        Southwest Industrial
South Gate General Plan 2035                                                                                                                                                                                                          Community Design Element

                                                                Santa Ana                                  California
                                                     1        Liberty           1      State
                                                                                                       1
                                                           Independ
                                                                    ence
                                                           Ardmore
                                                                                                                        2
                                                 2                                                                              Otis
                                                                                               2
                                  Southern
                                                                                                                                                   Firestone
                                                                        3
                                                                                                   3
                                                          3
                                             1
                                                                                       4                                               Alexander
                                                                                                                            6                                                      1                              Garfield
                                                                            2
                                                                                           4                                                                   Tweedy
                                                                                                               5                                                                       I-710
                                                                                                                                   3                           4        Atlantic
                                                                                           5
                                                         Century
                                                                            Long B
                                                                                each                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                       Imperial
 Corridors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Corridors
       Atlantic [2 Sub Areas]                                                                                                                                                                  1
       California [5 Sub Areas]                                                                                                                                                                                                  unt
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Garfield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Par
       Century                                                                                                                                                                                                                   am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o
       Firestone
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
       Garfield [3 Sub Areas]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure CD 5	
       Imperial West
                                                                                                                                                                                               3
       Long Beach [3 Sub Areas]
       Paramount
       State [4 Sub Areas]
       Tweedy [6 Sub Areas]
South Gate General Plan 2035                                                                                                                                                                                                            Community Design Element

Table CD 7: Allowable Place Types by District
    Legend:
                                                                                                                                                                 Place Types
     • Highly Desired
     •
                                                                                         Neighborhood Medium-High
       Desired
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Manufacturing/Distribution
     • Discouraged
                                                                   Neighborhood Medium                                                                        Boulevard Medium-High
     x Not Allowed
                                                Neighborhood Low                                                    Nieghborhood High   Neighborhood Center                                                            Single-Use Retail                              Light Industrial/Flex                                Civic/Institutional
                                                                                                                                                                                      Boulevard High   Urban Village                       Main Street   Office/R&D                                                                              Open Space
               District Name
El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center - Sub-area 1      x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x             • •                                   x           •                x                         x                          x                 •
El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center - Sub-area 2      x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x               x                  x             x              x                   •                                x                 •
El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center - Sub-area 3      x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x            •                     x           • • x •                                                                                 •
South Gate Triangle - Sub-area 1                   x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x            •                     x           • • • •                                                                                 •
South Gate Triangle - Sub-area 2                   x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x            •                     x           • • • •                                                                                 •
Imperial - Sub-area 1                              x                   x                 •                             x                    x                 •                          x                x            •                     x             x              x                         x                          x                 •
Imperial - Sub-area 2                              x                   x                 •                             x                    x                 •                          x                x            •                     x             • x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           x                                                                   x                 •
Imperial - Sub-area 3                              x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x            •                     x           • • •                                                                 x                 •
Hollydale Industrial                               x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x               x                  x           x • •                                                                 x                 •
Tweedy Educational District                        x                   x                 •                             x                    x                 •                          x                x               x                  x             x   •          x                         x                                            •
Rayo Industrial - Sub-area 1                       x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x               x                  x           • • • •                                                                                 •
Rayo Industrial - Sub-area 2                       x                   x                      x                        x                    x                 •                          x               •x                                  x           • • x •                                                                                   x
Gateway - Sub-area 1                               x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x             • •                                   x             x              x                         x                          x                 •
Gateway - Sub-area 2                               x                   x                      x                     •                       x                     x                      x             • •                                   x           • • x •                                                                                 •
Gateway - Sub-area 3                               x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x             x •                                   x           • • • x                                                                                 •
Gateway - Sub-area 4                               x                   x                      x                        x                    x                 •                          x             x •                                   x             x              x                         x                          x                 •
Ardine Industrial                                  x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x               x                  x             • • x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           x                                                                                     •
Firestone Industrial                               x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                   •                   x            •                     x           • • • •                                                                                 •
Southwest Industrial                               x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x               x                  x           x • • x                                                                                 •
South Gate College - Sub-area 1                    x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x               x                  x           • • x •                                                                                 •
South Gate College - Sub-area 2                    x                   x                 •                             x                    x                 •                          x                x            •                     x           • x x •                                                                                 •
Civic Center                                       x                   x                      x                        x                    x                 •                          x             •                  x                  x           x x x •                                                                                 •
                                                                                                                                                                             Community Design Element 65

   Table CD 8: Allowable Place Types by Corridor
                                                                                                                                                                         Place Types
       Legend:
                                                                                   Neighborhood Medium-High
         •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Manufacturing/Distribution
           Highly Desired
         •
                                                             Neighborhood Medium                                                                        Boulevard Medium-High
           Desired
                                                                                                                                  Neighborhood Center
         • Discouraged
                                          Neighborhood Low                                                    Neighborhood High                                                                                                                                 Light Industrial/Flex                                Civic/Institutional
         x Not Allowed
                                                                                                                                                                                Boulevard High   Urban Village   Single-Use Retail   Main Street                                                                                           Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Office/R&D
                 Corridors
    Garfield - Sub-area 1                    x               •                          x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x               x                  x             x              x                         x                          x                 •
    Garfield - Sub-area 2                    x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x            • •                                 x              x                         x                          x                 •
    Garfield - Sub area 3                    x               •                          x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x            • •                                 x              x                         x                          x                 •
    Paramount                                x                   x                      x                        x                    x                 •                          x                x            • •                                 x              x                         x                      •                     •
    Atlantic - Sub-area 1                    x                   x                      x                     •                       x                     x                   •                   x            • x                                 x              x                         x                      •                     •
    Atlantic - Sub-area 2                    x                   x                 •                             x                    x                 •                          x                x            • x                                 x              x                         x                      •                     •
    California - Sub-area 1                  x               •                          x                        x                •                         x                      x                x            • x                                 x              x                         x                          x                 •
    California - Sub-area 2                  x               •                          x                        x                •                         x                      x                x            • x                                 x              x                         x                          x                 •
    California - Sub-area 3                  x               •                          x                        x                •                         x                      x                x               x                  x             x              x                         x                          x                 •
    California - Sub-area 4                  x               •                          x                        x                •                         x                      x                x               x                  x             x              x                         x                      •                     •
    California - Sub-area 5                  x               •                          x                        x                •                         x                      x                x               x                  x             x              x                         x                      •                     •
    Firestone                                x                   x                      x                     •                       x                     x                   •                   x            • x                                 x              x                         x                      •                     •
    Century Boulevard                        x                   x                 •                             x                •                         x                      x                x            • x                                 x              x                         x                          x                 •
    Imperial West                            x               •                          x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x            • x                                 x              x                         x                          x                 •
    Tweedy - Sub-area 1                      x               •                          x                        x                •                         x                      x                x            • x                                 x              x                         x                      •                     •
    Tweedy - Sub-area 2                      x                   x                      x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x            • •                                 x              x                         x                          x                 •
    Tweedy - Sub-area 3                      x                   x                 •                             x                    x                 •                          x                x            • •                                 x              x                         x                          x                 •
    Tweedy - Sub-area 4                      x               •                          x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x               x                  x             x              x                         x                      •                     •
    Tweedy - Sub-area 5                      x                   x                      x                        x                    x                 •                          x                x            • •                                 x              x                         x                          x                 •
    Tweedy - Sub-area 6                      x                   x                      x                        x                    x                 •                          x                x            • •                                 x              x                         x                          x                 •
    Long Beach - Sub-area 1                  x                   x                 •                             x                    x                 •                          x                x            • x                                 x              x                         x                      •                     •
    Long Beach - Sub-area 2                  x                   x                 •                             x                    x                 •                          x                x            • x                                 x              x                         x                      •                     •
    Long Beach - Sub-area 3                  x                   x                 •                             x                    x                 •                          x                x            • x                                 x              x                         x                      •                     •
    State - Sub-area 1                       x                   x                 •                             x                    x                     x                      x                x            x •                                 x              x                         x                      •                     •
    State - Sub-area 2                       x               •                          x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x            • x                                 x              x                         x                      •                     •
    State - Sub-area 3                       x               •                          x                        x                    x                     x                      x                x            • x                                 x              x                         x                      •                     •
    State - Sub-area 4                       x               •                          x                        x                •                         x                      x                x            • x                                 x              x                         x                      •                     •
66 South Gate General Plan 2035

Place Type Designations                                                   Neighborhood Low
State Law requires that the General Plan identify                         Description: This designation covers the majority
the future intended land use in the City and the al-                      of residential areas of the City and the majority of
lowable density or intensity of development. As is                        existing residential units, and is intended to preserve
stated above, this General Plan does not include the                      the existing character and nature of these neighbor-
typical land use designations. Rather, this General                       hoods. This designation provides for low to moder-
Plan contains “Place Type” designations. Place Type                       ate intensity single family residential uses with some
designations differ from traditional land use desig-                      parcels allowing second units on the parcel. Access
nations in that they move beyond just the use and                         to Neighborhood Low residential property is primarily
intensity of development and address its desired form                     by private vehicle or bicycle network, with secondary
and character, which adds a third dimension to the                        access by public transit and sidewalks.
built environment. This switch was made for a variety
                                                                          Land Use: Single family residential, parks/plazas/open
of reasons including a desire to provide more specific
                                                                          space, education, public
guidance on the intended future character of the City.
                                                                          Density/Intensity: 0 - 12 units/acre, maximum of 2 stories
The following is a description of each Place Type
Designation that is allowed in the City of South Gate.                    Pedestrian Access: Primary pedestrian access from the main
Each Place Type contains the following information:                       street with secondary access from alleys, where present.
•	 Statement describing the Place Type.                                   Frontage and Building Placement: Buildings will be
•	 Allowable land uses.                                                   set back from the street and sidewalk to a depth that
                                                                          is consistent with those in the existing neighborhood.
•	 The density or intensity of development.  Residential develop-
   ment is measured in net dwelling units per acre and non-               Where two story residential buildings are constructed,
   residential intensity is measured in floor-area ratio, which is        the City desires that the second story be set back
   the ratio of the building square footage (excluding structured
                                                                          from the street in order to reduce the massing of the
   parking) to the land area of the parcel.
                                                                          building on the street and maintain the low-density
•	 Pedestrian and public transit access to the building.
                                                                          character of the area. Landscaped front yards should
•	 Frontage and building placement, including the relationship            separate buildings from the sidewalk and paving of
   between the parcel and the street.
                                                                          front yards is prohibited. Open front porches that cre-
•	 Parking, vehicle access and services, including the location of        ate private outdoor gathering spaces are encouraged;
   parking, how vehicles access the site and the general location
                                                                          porches enclosed with glass or screens are allowed
   of services such as truck loading facilities or garbage collection.
                                                                          but discouraged.
    Please see Figure CD 8 (at end of section) for photos of Place Types.
                                                                                          Community Design Element 67

   Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Resident             Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: Primary pedes-
   automotive vehicles should be parked off-street in a       trian access from the primary street sidewalk frontage
   garage, car port or uncovered parking spaces. Garag-       with secondary access from alleys where present.
   es may be attached to, or detached from, the dwell-        Pedestrian access to duplexes/triplexes/fourplexes may
   ing. Parking must be in spaces set back from the           be from private driveways, sidewalks and walkways.
   primary structure and located to the side or behind
                                                              Frontage and Building Placement: The set-back of
   the structure. The parking structure may be either
                                                              buildings should depend on the building type and
   attached to or detached from the primary residential
                                                              overall character of the block. The setbacks will be
   structure. Access to the parking will be from alleys
                                                              generally consistent on a block-by-block basis so
   (where available) or the primary street frontage. For
                                                              long as the buildings create an attractive pedestrian
   houses located on corner lots, parking access may be
                                                              and street environment. Setbacks that vary by par-
   provided from either street frontage, but not both.
                                                              cel are discouraged.
   Neighborhood Medium                                        Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking will be
                                                              in a garage, car port or uncovered parking spaces.
   Description: The purpose of this designation is to         Garages may be attached to or detached from the
   provide areas for a mix of single family and lower         dwelling. Parking must be set back from the pri-
   density multi-family residential housing. These areas      mary structure and located to the side or behind the
   are located along collector streets with a relatively      primary structure. In townhouses/rowhouses, parking
   low traffic volume, such as State Street and California    garages may not front the public street, but must be
   Avenue, as a transition between higher intensity uses      on the side or behind the building. Access to parking
   and lower intensity single family areas, as well as in     may be from the primary street or, where available,
   neighborhoods that already exhibit a high degree of        will be from the alley. For houses located on corner
   diversity in the type and density of residential hous-     lots, parking access may be provided from either
   ing. Despite the range of housing types allowed,           street frontage, but not both.
   these areas will be designed to contain a consistent
   character so that no building seems out of place with
   the others on the block. Access to Neighborhood Me-
                                                              Neighborhood Medium-High
   dium residential property is by private vehicle, public    Description: This designation provides for attached
   transit, bicycle network or sidewalk.                      single family and multi-family housing. The designa-
                                                              tion is generally located along relatively high frequen-
   Land Use: Single family residential, duplex/triplex/
                                                              cy roadways such as parts of Tweedy, Century, Long
   fourplex, townhouses/rowhouses, parks/plazas/open
                                                              Beach and Atlantic. Development in this designation
   space, education, public
                                                              will add a mix of housing types in the City and serve
   Density/Intensity: 9 - 20 units/acre, maximum of 3 stories as a transition between the corridor and the adjacent
                                                              single family areas. New development should be
                                                              designed to create an attractive street front where
                                                              residents can meet and interact. Access to Neighbor-
                                                              hood Medium-High residential property is by private
                                                              vehicle, public transit, sidewalks, or bicycle network.
68 South Gate General Plan 2035
Land Use: Duplexes/triplexes/fourplexes, townhouses/
                                                            Neighborhood High
rowhouses, multi-family, parks/plazas/open space,
education, cultural, public assembly, civic/institutional   Description: The purpose of this designation is to
                                                            provide for condominiums and apartment develop-
Density/Intensity: 21-40 units/acre, maximum of 4 sto-
                                                            ments where high-frequency public transit is readily
ries (with bonus of up to 45 units per acre and 5 stories)
                                                            available or desired in the future and where there
Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: The primary           is a diverse mix of uses within walking distance of
pedestrian entrance to each ground floor dwelling           the homes. This designation is typically found along
will be accessed directly from and will face the street     major transportation corridors or as a part of districts
sidewalk, a courtyard, or lobby (for multi-family uses).    that are expected to be redeveloped over the life of
Access to upper floor units (in multi-family land use       the General Plan. This designation will be applied to
types) will be by elevator or stair, which may be open      larger parcel sizes and the City expects that parcel
or enclosed. Secondary access to the building may be        assembly may be necessary to build to the maximum
from a structured parking facility or surface parking       density. Access to Neighborhood High residential
lot. Neighborhood Medium-High should be served by           property is primarily by public transit and sidewalks
frequent public transit, including local bus and bus        as well as by auto or bicycle network.
rapid transit services. Bus stops should be strategically
                                                            Land Use: Multi-family, parks/plazas/open space, edu-
located to provide convenient access to the land uses
                                                            cation, cultural, public assembly, public uses
and attractively designed to provide shelter, seating
and protection from street traffic. Sidewalks will be       Density/Intensity: 41-75 units/acre, between 3 and 6
designed to comfortably handle the anticipated pe-          stories (with bonus of up to 85 units per acre and up
destrian volumes with information signage and guide         to 8 stories, as described in Objective CD 2.7)
posts to identify popular destinations.
                                                            Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: The primary
Frontage and Building Placement: Buildings should           pedestrian entrance to each ground floor dwelling
have minimal setbacks from the street with frontages        will be accessed directly from the street sidewalk and
that support the creation of attractive and public          pedestrian walkways, a courtyard, or lobby. Access
spaces along streets and sidewalks. Front yard, stoop       to upper floor units will be by elevator or stair, which
and forecourt frontages are recommended.                    may be open or enclosed. Secondary access to the
                                                            building may be from a structured parking facility or
Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking will be
                                                            surface parking lot. Neighborhood High areas should
in an underground garage, tuck-under, car port or
                                                            be served by frequent public transit, including local
uncovered parking spaces located behind or within the
                                                            bus and bus rapid transit services. Bus stops should
building. Parking garages may not front the primary
                                                            be strategically located to provide convenient access
public street; parking may front alleys or side streets, if
                                                            to the land uses and attractively designed to provide
the parcel has two or more street frontages. Vehicular
                                                            shelter, seating and protection from street traffic.
access to the parking lot should be from the primary
                                                            Sidewalks will be designed to comfortably handle the
street through shared driveways or alleys, where avail-
                                                            anticipated pedestrian volumes with information sig-
able. Vehicle access may also be from side streets if
                                                            nage and guide posts to identify popular destinations.
the parcel has frontage on more than one street.
                                                                            Community Design Element 69
   Frontage and Building Placement: Buildings will be
   located directly at the property line or pushed back
                                                             Neighborhood Center
   from the property line and landscaped. Buildings          Description: This designation is intended to establish
   should contribute to an attractive streetwall that is in- a neighborhood focus that is distinguished by civic
   viting and comfortable for pedestrians. Fences should     buildings, small-scale commercial and mixed use
   not be used to separate the building or landscaped        buildings and multi-family housing. The designa-
   setback from the public street. Recommended front-        tion allows for a diverse mix of uses at points where
   age types include stoop and forecourt. Soundwalls         numerous neighborhoods meet in order to create
   or high fences separating the buildings from primary      nodes or focal points for neighborhoods and provide
   street frontages are prohibited.                          for a variety of activities and services within walking
                                                             distance from homes. Uses will be designed to sup-
   Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking will be
                                                             port daily convenience shopping and personal service
   in an underground garage, surface parking, tuck-
                                                             needs of nearby residents.
   under parking, above ground garage or any combina-
   tion of these. Surface parking will be set back from      Land Use: Retail/service, restaurant, office, multi-
   the street and located toward the back of the lot.        family, parks/plazas/open space, education, cultural,
   Parking garages should be designed so that they do        public assembly, public uses
   not face the primary public streets; parking may front
                                                             Density/Intensity: 12-40 units/acre, 0.3 to 1.5 FAR;
   alleys or side streets if the parcel has two or more
                                                             up to 3 stories
   street frontages. Vehicular access to the parking lot
   should be from the primary street through shared          Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: Primary pedes-
   driveways or alleys, where available. Vehicle access      trian access to ground floor uses will be directly from
   may also be from side streets if the parcel has front-    the main street. Entrances to residential portions of
   age on more than one street.                              the project or upper-floor non-residential uses will
                                                             be through a lobby accessed from the main street
                                                             or parking facility. Neighborhood Centers should be
                                                             served by frequent public transit, including local bus
                                                             and bus rapid transit services. Bus stops should be
                                                             strategically located to provide convenient access to
                                                             the land uses and attractively designed to provide
                                                             shelter, seating and protection from street traffic.
                                                             Sidewalks will be designed to comfortably handle the
                                                             anticipated pedestrian volumes with information sig-
                                                             nage and guide posts to identify popular destinations.
70 South Gate General Plan 2035
Frontage and Building Placement: Buildings will be        Density/Intensity: 21-40 units/acre; 0.5 to 1.5 FAR;
placed at the back of the sidewalk or pushed back         maximum of 4 stories (with a bonus of up to 5 stories
from the sidewalk with public uses, such as plazas or     and up to 1.75 FAR, as described in Objective CD 2.7)
outdoor seating that separate the buildings from the
                                                          Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: Primary pedes-
sidewalk. The preferred frontage type is shopfront,
                                                          trian access to ground floor retail uses will be directly
and ground-floor retail is desired in all buildings.
                                                          from the main street. Entrances to residential por-
Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking will be in  tions of the project or upper-floor non-residential uses
an underground garage, surface parking, tuck-under        will be through a lobby accessed from the main street
parking, above ground garage or any combination of        or parking facility. Secondary access to the building
these. Surface parking will be set back from the street   may be from a parking facility. Mixed use corridors
and toward the back of the lot. Parking garages may       will be served by frequent public transit, including
not front the public street. Vehicular access to park-    local bus and bus rapid transit services. Bus stops
ing lots will be from the primary street through shared   should be located at ½-mile spacing, attractively de-
driveways or alleys where available. Services and         signed to provide shelter and seating and protection
deliveries should be located at the rear of buildings and from street traffic. Sidewalks will be designed to com-
accessed via a service driveway or alley.                 fortably handle the anticipated pedestrian volumes
                                                          with information signage and guide posts to identify
Boulevard Medium-High                                     popular destinations.
                                                          Frontage and Building Placement: Buildings will be
Description: This designation provides for vertical and
                                                          placed at the back of the sidewalk or pushed back
horizontal mixed use developments along corridors
                                                          from the sidewalk on the primary frontage to provide
throughout the City, such as Paramount, Atlantic and
                                                          space for gathering places, such as plazas or outdoor
Tweedy. The designation is intended to allow for
                                                          seating. The preferred frontage type on primary
relatively high intensity uses that increase the amount
                                                          streets is shopfront and ground-floor retail is desired,
and diversity of housing units in South Gate and also,
                                                          but not required, in all buildings. Shopfront frontages
in some instances, allow for the addition of office uses.
                                                          are not required on building frontages that are facing
Mixed use projects along the corridors must be devel-
                                                          side streets. Buildings will be designed to step down
oped in a manner that protects and preserves the adja-
                                                          to the adjacent residential areas so as not to impact
cent low density residential neighborhoods by stepping
                                                          the character of the neighborhoods.
down in density and/or by providing appropriate buffer
areas between the building and the neighborhood.          Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking will be
The mixed use buildings will front the primary roadway    in an underground garage, tuck-under parking, above
and be designed to create an attractive pedestrian envi-  ground garage or any combination of these. Surface
ronment. Retail uses or other uses that attract pedes-    parking is strongly discouraged but, if used, will be
trian activity are desired on the ground floor.           set back from the street and toward the back of the
                                                          lot. At-grade structured parking garages should not
Land Use: Multi-family, small-floorplate office, retail/
                                                          front the primary street frontage. Vehicular access to
service, restaurant, entertainment, lodging, parks/
                                                          parking lots will be from a primary street, a side street
plazas/open space, education, cultural, public as-
                                                          or alleys, where available.
sembly, public uses
                                                                          Community Design Element 71

   Boulevard High                                           Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: Primary pedestrian
                                                            access to ground floor retail uses will be directly from
   Description: This designation provides for vertical      the primary street. Entrances to residential portions
   and horizontal mixed use developments along major        of buildings or upper-floor non-residential uses will be
   corridors throughout the City, such as Firestone and     through a lobby accessed from the main street or park-
   Long Beach. The designation is intended to allow for     ing facility. Secondary access to buildings may be from
   higher intensity uses that increase the amount and       parking facilities. Mixed use corridors will be served
   diversity of housing units in South Gate and allow       by frequent public transit, including local bus and bus
   for the addition of office uses to the City’s land use   rapid transit services. Bus stops should be located at
   mix. Mixed use projects along the corridors must be      ½-mile spacing, attractively designed to provide shelter
   developed in a manner that protects and preserves        and seating and protection from street traffic. Side-
   the adjacent low density residential neighborhoods       walks will be designed to comfortably handle the an-
   by stepping down in density and/or by providing ap-      ticipated pedestrian volumes with information signage
   propriate buffer areas between the building and the      and guide posts to identify popular destinations.
   neighborhood. The mixed use buildings will front
                                                            Frontage and Building Placement: Buildings will be
   the primary roadway and be designed to create an
                                                            placed at the back of the sidewalk or pushed back
   attractive pedestrian environment. Retail uses or other
                                                            from the sidewalk on the primary frontage to provide
   uses that activate the street are desired on the ground
                                                            space for gathering places, such as plazas or outdoor
   floor. This designation will be applied to larger parcel
                                                            seating. The preferred frontage type on primary
   sizes and the City expects that parcel assembly may
                                                            streets is shopfront and ground-floor retail is desired,
   be necessary to build to the maximum density.
                                                            but not required, in all buildings. Shopfront frontages
   Land Use: Multi-family, office, R&D, retail/service,     are not required on building frontages that are facing
   restaurant, entertainment, lodging, parks/plazas/open    side streets. Buildings will be designed to step down
   space, education, cultural, public assembly, public uses to the adjacent residential areas so as not to impact
                                                            the character of surrounding neighborhoods.
   Density/Intensity: 41-75 units/acre; 0.5 to 2.0 FAR;
   between 3 and 5 stories (with bonus of up to 85          Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking will be
   units per acre; up to 2.5 FAR and up to 8 stories, as    in an underground garage, tuck-under parking, above
   described in Objective CD 2.7)                           ground garage or any combination of these. Surface
                                                            parking is strongly discouraged but, if used, will be
                                                            set back from the street and toward the back of the
                                                            lot. At-grade structured parking garages should not
                                                            front the primary street frontage. Vehicular access
                                                            to parking lots will be from the primary street, a side
                                                            street or alleys where available.
72 South Gate General Plan 2035

Urban Village                                            Frontage and Building Placement: Buildings will be
                                                         placed at the back of the sidewalk or pushed back
Description: This designation is intended to create      from the sidewalk to provide space for gathering
mixed use districts in key locations of the City, such   places, such as plazas or outdoor seating. The pre-
as the Gateway Transit Village area. The designation     ferred frontage type is shopfront and ground-floor
provides for vertical and horizontal mixed use devel-    retail is desired, but not required, in all buildings.
opments that increase residential and employment
                                                         Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking will be
opportunities in the City. Since this designation is ap-
                                                         in an underground garage, tuck-under parking, above
plied to areas of the City with existing large parcels,
                                                         ground garage or any combination of these. Surface
the density is higher than is allowed in the Boule-
                                                         parking is strongly discouraged but, if used, will be
vard High designation. Mixed use buildings will be
                                                         set back from the street and toward the back of the
designed to create attractive and vibrant districts with
                                                         lot. Parking garages may not front the primary street.
building designs that support activity along streets
                                                         Vehicular access to parking lots will be from the pri-
and pedestrian pathways.
                                                         mary street, a side street or alleys where available.
Land Use: Multi-family, office, R&D, retail/service,
restaurant, entertainment, lodging, parks/plazas/open
space, education, cultural, public assembly, public uses
                                                         Single-Use Retail
                                                         Description: This designation provides for a wide
Density/Intensity: 41-100 units/acre; 0.5 to 2.5 FAR;
                                                         range of retail and similar service-oriented uses
up to 8 stories (with bonus of up to 120 units per
                                                         including large-format supermarkets, big box centers,
acre, up to 3.0 FAR and up to 10 stories, as described
                                                         regional destination shopping areas, strip commercial
in Objective CD 2.7)
                                                         development and highway commercial uses, such as
Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: Circulation within gas stations. The uses in this designation are typical
Urban Villages will emphasize pedestrian pathways        of a suburban, auto-oriented design with a relatively
and separation of pedestrian and auto traffic as much    low FAR and parcels dominated by surface parking
as possible. Primary pedestrian access to ground         lots. The application of Single-Use Retail throughout
floor retail uses will be directly from the pedestrian   South Gate will be limited to areas located along the
circulation system along the main street. Entrances      City’s major transportation corridors.
to residential portions of the project or upper-floor
                                                         Land Use: Retail/service, office, restaurant, gas station,
non-residential uses will be through a lobby accessed
                                                         auto sales/repair, lodging, entertainment, public assem-
from the pedestrian pathways, main street sidewalks
                                                         bly, parks/plazas/open space, cultural, public uses
or parking facilities. Secondary access to the building
may be from a structured parking facility or surface     Density/Intensity: 0.3 to 1.5 FAR, up to 3 stories
parking lot. The Urban Village Place Type should be
served by frequent public transit, including local bus
and bus rapid transit services. Bus stops should be
strategically located to provide convenient access to
the land uses and attractively designed to provide
shelter, seating and protection from street traffic.
Sidewalks will be designed to comfortably handle the
anticipated pedestrian volumes with information sig-
nage and guide posts to identify popular destinations.
                                                                          Community Design Element 73

   Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: Primary pedes-
                                                              Main Street
   trian access will be from parking lots or public street
   sidewalks. Attention should be given to providing          Description: This designation is for areas that exhibit
   safe and attractive pedestrian facilities and to allowing  a small-scale, main street character and that contain
   pedestrians to walk safely from bus stops or, if arriving  mixed use buildings (with retail on the ground floor
   by automobile, to park once and walk between the           and office, medical uses, services or residential on
   different uses in the project. Single Use retail should be the upper floors) or a mix of uses on separate par-
   served by frequent public transit, including local bus     cels. The designation is characterized by ground floor
   and bus rapid transit services. Bus stops should be stra-  retail, buildings built to the edge of the sidewalk,
   tegically located to provide convenient access to the      little to no separation between buildings, and park-
   land uses and attractively designed to provide shelter,    ing located behind buildings accessed from an alley
   seating and protection from street traffic. Sidewalks      or in shared parking facilities. Office and residential
   will be designed to comfortably handle the anticipated     uses may be located on upper floors in mixed use
   pedestrian volumes with information signage and            buildings. Existing areas that exhibit this character are
   guide posts to identify popular destinations.              Tweedy Mile, the State Street retail area and Garfield
                                                              in Hollydale. A new Main Street area is allowed to be
   Building Placement and Frontage: Buildings may be
                                                              constructed along Paramount Boulevard and on Santa
   set back significantly from the street and separated
                                                              Fe Avenue in the South Gate College District.
   from the street by parking lots. Landscaping and oth-
   er pedestrian-oriented elements will be used to buffer     Land Use: Multi-family, retail/service, office, restau-
   the parking lots from the public street and sidewalk.      rant, parks/plazas/open space, education, public uses
   Pad buildings may be placed along the street to assist
                                                              Density/Intensity: 12-40 units/acre; 0.3 to 1.5 FAR;
   with the transition between the primary retail build-
                                                              up to 3 stories
   ings and the public realm. Drive-thru buildings are
   allowed in this Place Type designation.                    Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: Primary pedes-
                                                              trian to ground floor uses will be directly from the
   Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking should
                                                              main street sidewalk. Entrances to residential por-
   be located in surface parking lots or structures that are
                                                              tions of the project or upper-floor non-residential
   part of or adjacent to the primary retail buildings. Park-
                                                              uses will be through a lobby accessed from the main
   ing areas are encouraged to be provided to the rear or
                                                              street sidewalk or parking facility. Main Street areas
   side of buildings and include trees that reach mature
                                                              should be served by frequent public transit, includ-
   heights of at least 20 feet, whenever feasible. Services
                                                              ing local bus and bus rapid transit services. Bus stops
   such as loading docks should be out of view from the
                                                              should be strategically located to provide convenient
   primary public street and located away from adjacent
                                                              access to the land uses and attractively designed to
   residential areas so as not to cause adverse impacts.
                                                              provide shelter, seating and protection from street
   Service and storage areas will be screened by fencing
                                                              traffic. Pedestrian pathways and street sidewalks will
   and appropriate landscaping. Vehicular access may be
                                                              be designed to comfortably handle the anticipated
   allowed from secondary streets, as necessary.
                                                              pedestrian volumes with information signage and
                                                              guide posts to identify popular destinations.
74 South Gate General Plan 2035
Building Placement and Frontage: Buildings will be           Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: Primary pedes-
placed at the back of the sidewalk or pushed back            trian access will be directly from the main street with
minimally from the sidewalk with public uses, such as        secondary access from parking facilities.
plazas or outdoor seating, separating the building from
                                                             Building Placement and Frontage: Buildings will be
the sidewalk. The preferred frontage type is shopfront
                                                             placed at the back of the sidewalk or pushed back
and ground-floor retail is desired in all buildings except
                                                             minimally from the sidewalk with landscaping or public
education and Civic/Institutional uses.
                                                             uses separating the building from the sidewalks. The
Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking will be in an  frontage of buildings should be ground floor retail
underground garage, surface parking, tuck-under park-        space or office space with a high degree of transparen-
ing, above ground garage or any combination of these.        cy; excessive amounts of blank walls are not allowed.
Surface parking will be located behind the buildings. In     Office/R&D should be served by frequent public transit,
limited circumstances, parking lots may be located on the    including local bus and bus rapid transit services. Bus
side of buildings so long as the majority of street frontage stops should be strategically located to provide conve-
of the parcel contains storefront retail. Parking garages    nient access to the land uses and attractively designed
may not front the primary public street. Services and        to provide shelter, seating and protection from street
deliveries should be located at the rear of buildings and    traffic. Pedestrian pathways and street sidewalks will
accessed via a service driveway or alley. Vehicular access   be designed to comfortably handle the anticipated pe-
may be allowed from secondary streets, as necessary.         destrian volumes with information signage and guide
                                                             posts to identify popular destinations.
Office/R&D                                                   Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking will be
                                                             in an underground garage, surface parking, tuck-
Description: The purpose of this designation is to di-
                                                             under parking, above ground garage or any com-
versify the job and economic base of the City of South
                                                             bination of these. Surface parking will be located
Gate and to provide the opportunity for more residents
                                                             behind buildings. In limited circumstances, parking
to live and work in the City. Specific uses allowed in
                                                             lots may be located on the side of buildings. Parking
this designation include medium- and large-scale uses
                                                             garages should not front the public street. Services
such as office, high-tech, and research and develop-
                                                             and deliveries should be located on the rear or side
ment uses. This designation is applied to numerous
                                                             of buildings and accessed via a service driveway or al-
districts around the City such as the South Gate
                                                             ley. Vehicular access may be allowed from secondary
Triangle District, Rayo Industrial District and the South
                                                             streets, as necessary.
Gate College District – areas where the City desires to
transition into a higher-intensity use over time. Other
allowable uses include emerging green technology             Light Industrial/Flex
such as those proposed for the East Los Angeles Com-
                                                             Description: This designation allows for a wide variety
munity College adaptive reuse of the former Firestone
                                                             of industrial, office and retail uses in a single building
plant facilities in the South Gate College District.
                                                             or group of buildings. The designation is character-
Land Use: Office, retail/service, restaurant, R&D,           ized by small to medium footprint buildings that are
parks/plazas/open space, public assembly, education          often subdivided into small rental spaces or condo-
                                                             miniums, each with a separate use. The designation
Density/Intensity: 0.3 to 2.0 FAR; up to 5 stories
                                                             is intended to allow for the expansion of the existing
(with bonus of up to 3.0 FAR and up to 8 stories, as
                                                             “boutique” industrial development that currently ex-
described in Objective CD 2.7)
                                                                              Community Design Element 75

   ists in the City. The designation is allowed in many of
                                                             Manufacturing/Distribution
   the existing industrial areas of the City and is envi-
   sioned to serve as a transition between heavy indus-      Description: This designation provides for industrial
   trial uses and other uses such as retail or Office/R&D.   or manufacturing activities that may occur inside or
                                                             outside of an enclosed building. Large-scale ware-
   Land Use: Retail/service, office, R&D, light industrial,
                                                             house, distribution or logistics facilities are also al-
   restaurant, manufacturing, logistics/warehouse, edu-
                                                             lowed in this designation. The designation is char-
   cation, public assembly, parks/plazas/open space
                                                             acterized by a low employment density and a high
   Density/Intensity: 0.25 to 1.0 FAR, up to 3 stories       volume of truck traffic. Due to the heavy truck traffic
                                                             and other issues (such as noise and air pollution) that
   Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: Primary pedes-
                                                             occur as a result of these uses, the City desires to limit
   trian access will be from parking lots or public streets,
                                                             new Manufacturing/Distribution uses to a few areas
   depending on the design of the buildings. Regardless
                                                             of the City including the South Gate Triangle, Gate-
   of building placement and frontage, the site will be
                                                             way and Southwest Industrial districts.
   designed to provide clear, direct and safe pedestrian
   access from the public street to all building entrances.  Land Use: Manufacturing, logistics/warehouse,
   Light Industrial/Flex areas should be served by frequent  light industrial
   public transit, including local bus and bus rapid transit
                                                             Density/Intensity: 0.25 to 2.0 FAR, up to 4 stories
   services. Bus stops should be strategically located to
                                                             (with exceptions for special structures such as towers,
   provide convenient access to the land uses and attrac-
                                                             storage tanks, and similar structures.)
   tively designed to provide shelter, seating and protec-
   tion from street traffic. Pedestrian pathways and street  Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: Pedestrian ac-
   sidewalks will be designed to comfortably handle the      cess to the site will be from a public street sidewalk.
   anticipated pedestrian volumes with information sig-      Manufacturing/Distribution should be served by
   nage and guide posts to identify popular destinations.    frequent public transit, including local bus and bus
                                                             rapid transit services. Bus stops should be strategically
   Building Placement and Frontage: Buildings should be
                                                             located to provide convenient access to the land uses
   placed directly at the property line or set back from
                                                             and attractively designed to provide shelter, seating
   the street with a landscaped buffer. The majority of
                                                             and protection from street traffic. Pedestrian path-
   the street’s frontage should be developed with build-
                                                             ways and street sidewalks will be designed to com-
   ings and/or landscaping.
                                                             fortably handle the anticipated pedestrian volumes
   Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking will be     with information signage and guide posts to identify
   in surface parking, tuck-under parking, an above          popular destinations.
   ground garage or any combination of these. Park-
                                                             Building Placement and Frontage: Buildings and exteri-
   ing lots may be located on the side of buildings so
                                                             or manufacturing facilities may be set back from public
   long as the parking does not cover more than half
                                                             streets and separated by landscaping. Fences and/or
   of the street frontage. Vehicle access will be directly
                                                             walls may be used to provide security and protection.
   from the main street, from a secondary street or
                                                             Where used, landscaping should be located between
   from adjoining parcels. Services will be located on
                                                             the sidewalk and the fence or wall. Buildings and
   the side or back of buildings and will be buffered
                                                             activities should be placed on the site to minimize the
   from adjacent residential uses.
                                                             impact on adjacent residential uses, where they exist.
76 South Gate General Plan 2035

Figure CD 6     Parcels designated for Civic/Institutional Uses
Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking should            designation is applied to numerous areas of the City
be in surface parking lots with vehicular access from           including the South Gate College District and the Civic
a primary street. Parking areas are encouraged to               Center District. Figure CD-6 identifies the existing
be provided to the rear or side of buildings and to             parcels that are designated as Civic/Institutional. These
include trees that reach mature heights of at least             parcels may not be developed with any other uses with-
20 feet, whenever feasible. Outdoor storage areas,              out an amendment to the General Plan. In the future,
including storage of trucks and equipment, will be              other parcels may be designated as Civic/Institutional.
screened from view from adjacent streets and parcels
                                                                Land Use: Education, public assembly, parks/plazas/
by appropriate fencing and/or landscaping.
                                                                open space, cultural, public uses, office, retail/service,
                                                                restaurant, and housing
Civic/Institutional                                             Density/Intensity: 0 to 3.0 FAR; up to 8 stories (with a
Description: This designation provides for public and           bonus of up to 4.0 FAR and 10 stories, as described in
quasi-public uses such as government buildings, public          Objective CD 2.7.)
and private schools, colleges, community centers,
                                                                Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: Primary building en-
religious centers, parking structures, and utility stations.
                                                                trances will be from the street or streets with secondary
The Place Type also allows for a variety of support uses
                                                                access from parking facilities. Civic/Institutional should be
such as restaurants, housing and retail/service. The
                                                                                Community Design Element 77
   Figure CD 7     Parcels designated as Park/Plaza/Open Space.
   served by frequent public transit, including local bus and   between civic/institutional uses and adjacent residential
   bus rapid transit services. Bus stops should be strategical- areas. The massing of buildings and the visual organiza-
   ly located to provide convenient access to the land uses     tion of facades, including the proportion of window and
   and attractively designed to provide shelter, seating and    door openings to total wall surface, exterior materials
   protection from street traffic. Pedestrian pathways and      and colors, and architectural detailing and ornamentation
   street sidewalks will be designed to comfortably handle      should be designed to harmonize with adjacent uses.
   the anticipated pedestrian volumes with information
                                                                Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: On-site parking
   signage and guide posts to identify popular destinations.
                                                                will be in an underground garage, surface or struc-
   Building Placement and Frontage: Buildings will be placed    tured parking, or any combination of the above. On-
   on the lot with either a minimal building setbacks or set    site covered or uncovered parking should be set back
   back from the sidewalk to create a grand stair and/or        from the front property line. Parking and services will
   plaza. The use of walls and fences is discouraged in or-     be accessed from an alley or service driveway.
   der to create an attractive pedestrian environment. Long,
   uninterrupted expanses of wall or roof planes should be
                                                                Park/Plaza/Open Space
   avoided and architectural features which add interest
   and variation should be incorporated. Where necessary,       Description: This designation provides for public and
   appropriate buffers and screening (such as increased         private parks such as local, community and regional
   setbacks, fencing and landscaping) should be provided        parks; trails; golf courses; community gardens; and
78 South Gate General Plan 2035
other similar uses that provide open space resources         is designed to allow for the easier consolidation of
to surrounding neighborhoods, communities and                parcels to spur redevelopment along the corridors
the region. Commercial recreation facilities with an         while also providing a transition between the higher
emphasis on outdoor use are also allowed. This des-          density and mix of uses along the corridor and ad-
ignation is allowed and encouraged in all neighbor-          jacent lower density residential areas. Parcels in the
hoods, districts and corridors in the City. Figure CD 7      Corridor Transition Overlay have a base Place Type
identifies the existing parcels that are designated as       designation (such as Neighborhood Low or Neighbor-
Parks/Plazas/Open Space. These parcels may not be            hood Medium). If the Corridor Transition Overlay
developed with any other uses without an amend-              parcels are developed in conjunction with the parcels
ment to the General Plan. In the future, other parcels       along the Corridor then the designation for these
may be designated as Parks/Plazas/Open Space.                parcels is increased to the designation of the Corridor.
                                                             If development along the Corridor occurs without
Land Use: Parks/plazas/open space, cultural, public assembly
                                                             involving the Corridor Transition Overlay parcels, then
Density/Intensity: N/A                                       the parcels may be “upzoned” to the next higher
                                                             neighborhood density Place Type on their own. On
Pedestrian and Public Transit Access: Parks, plazas and
                                                             the other hand, if no development occurs along the
open spaces will be open to the public from all public
                                                             adjacent corridor then development in the Corridor
streets. Park/Plaza/Open Space should be served by
                                                             Transition Overlay may only occur at the existing
frequent public transit, including local bus and bus
                                                             “base” designation applied to the parcel. Three ex-
rapid transit services. Bus stops should be strategically
                                                             amples of different situations are as follows.
located to provide convenient access to the land uses
and attractively designed to provide shelter, seating and    •	 Example 1.  An owner of a parcel along a major corridor wants
                                                                to build a mixed use project. To do so, the owner purchases
protection from street traffic. Pedestrian pathways and         four parcels behind the parcel fronting the corridor.  These four
street sidewalks will be designed to comfortably handle         parcels would be upzoned to mixed use and the remaining
the anticipated pedestrian volumes with information             Corridor Transition Overlay parcels on the blocks where the
                                                                development occurs would be able to be upzoned to the next
signage and guide posts to identify popular destinations.
                                                                higher designation.
Building Placement and Frontage: Parks and open              •	 Example 2.  An owner of a parcel along a major corridor wants
spaces should provide a natural or landscaped frontage          to redevelop his parcel but does not need the extra land area in
                                                                the overlay zone.  Once the development is complete, the par-
on all streets. Plazas may be hardscape and serve as an
                                                                cels in the Corridor Transition Overlay may be upzoned to the
extension of the public sidewalk. The use of perme-             next higher land use designation (for example, from Neighbor-
able surfaces for hardscape is strongly encouraged.             hood Low to Neighborhood Medium).
                                                             •	 Example 3.  Parcels in the Corridor Transition Overlay are
Parking, Vehicle Access and Services: Parking will be
                                                                designated as Neighborhood Low.  An owner wants to increase
in surface lots or structured parking set back from             the density on the parcel to Neighborhood Medium to build
the primary roadways and buffered by landscaping to             a fourplex apartment building.  However, no new develop-
reduce the negative visual impact of parking facilities.        ment has occurred on the parcels fronting the corridor.  This
                                                                “upzoning” would not be allowed since the construction of
                                                                the fourplex would diminish the chances that a higher intensity
Corridor Transition Overlay                                     development could be built along the corridor.
                                                             Figure CD 3 identifies the parcels that are subject to
Description: The Corridor Transition Overlay presents
                                                             the Corridor Transition Overlay.
additional requirements to parcels adjacent to the
primary transportation corridors in South Gate (such
as Long Beach and Firestone Boulevards). The overlay
                                                                                Community Design Element 79

    Figure CD 8 Place Types
   Desired Character of Neighborhood Low Areas
   Neighborhood               Low
   Desired Character of Neighborhood Medium Areas
   Neighborhood Medium
   South Gate General Plan                        Community Design Element
   DRAFT—MAY 28, 2007
80 South Gate General Plan 2035

          Figure CD 8 Place Types
         Desired Character of Neighborhood Medium-High Areas
           Neighborhood
  Neighborhood                        Medium-High
                                  Medium-High
         Desired Character of Neighborhood High Areas
         Neighborhood
         Neighborhood High          High
Neighborhood
         South Gate General Plan High                             Community Design Element
         South Gate General
         DRAFT—MAY       28,Plan
                             2007                                 Community Design Element
         DRAFT—MAY 28, 2007
South Gate General Plan                                         Community Design Element
DRAFT—MAY 28, 2007                                           Community Design Element 81

    Figure CD 8 Place Types
   Desired Character of Neighborhood Center Areas
  Neighborhood
    NeighborhoodNode               Node
  Mixed
    Mixed
   Desired      Use
                  UseofCorridor
             Character      Corridor
                            Boulevard Medium-High Areas
  South
    South
        Gate
          Gate
             General
               General
                     Plan
                       Plan                             Community
                                                        Community Design
                                                                  Design Element
  DRAFT—MAY
    DRAFT—MAY     28,
                    28,
                      2007
                        2007
82 South Gate General Plan 2035

 Figure CD 8 Place Types
Mixed Use District
Office/R&D
Desired Character of Urban Village Areas
South Gate General Plan                                  Community Design E
DRAFT—MAY 28, 2007
                                         Community Design Element 83

    Figure CD 8 Place Types
                    Mixed Use District
                                            Mixed Use District
                    Office/R&D
                    South Gate General Plan                         Community Design Element
                    DRAFT—MAY 28, 2007
   Desired Character of Office/R&D Areas    Office/R&D
                                            South Gate General Plan
                                            DRAFT—MAY 28, 2007
84 South Gate General Plan 2035

 Figure CD 8 Place Types
Main Street
Single
Desired       Use
         Character       Retail
                      of Main Street Areas
South Gate General Plan                         Community Design Element
DRAFT—MAY 28, 2007
                                           Community Design Element 85

   Main
     Main      Street
                 Street
      Figure CD 8 Place Types
   Single
     Single
    Desired       Use
                    Use
              Character    ofRetail
                               Retail Retail Areas
                               Single-Use
   South
     South
         Gate
           Gate
              General
                General
                      Plan
                        Plan                         Community
                                                      CommunityDesign
                                                                DesignElement
                                                                        Element
   DRAFT—MAY
     DRAFT—MAY     28,28,
                       2007
                          2007
    Desired Character of Light Industrial/Flex Areas
Light Industrial/Flex
 86 South Gate General Plan 2035

Civic/Institutional
 Figure CD 8 Place Types
Desired Character of Park/Plaza/OpenSpace Areas
Parks/Plaza/Open Space
South Gate General Plan                              Community Design Element
DRAFT—MAY 28, 2007
Desired Character of Civic/Institutional
                                                Community Design Element 87

   Goals, Objectives                                                   Objective CD 1.2:
                                                                       Pursue new uses and projects that make
   and Policies                                                        South Gate a great place to live, work, so-
                                                                       cialize and do business.
   The goals, objectives and policies in the General Plan
   provide citywide policy guidance on topics such as                  Policies
   regional coordination, the preservation of the identity
                                                                       P.1	 The City will continue to actively pursue projects and activi-
   of the community, and the preservation of existing                       ties that promote the image and identity of South Gate.  
   neighborhood character. These goals, objectives and                      These projects include, but are not limited to:
   policies were developed through an extensive public                        xx The revitalization of Tweedy Mile to be a regional and
   participation and involvement process. They are de-                            local destination for shopping, dining and cultural
   signed to support the key community design con-                                activities [Note: See Goal CD 5 and the “Tweedy Mile”
                                                                                  Corridor section for more policies about Tweedy Mile].
   cepts outlined above and to both preserve the unique                       xx The proposal for the municipal courthouse complex
   aspects of the City and address the physical issues                            around the current site.
   identified during the update process.                                      xx A high speed, grade separated, environmentally friendly
                                                                                  transit system along the Union Pacific Railroad right-
                                                                                  of-way and the “South Gate Station” multi-modal
   Goal CD 1:                                                                     transportation center.
                                                                              xx The expanded availability and use of public transporta-
   An enhanced image and identity with-                                           tion and bicycle infrastructure to provide mobility within
                                                                                  the City and access to neighboring cities and the region.
   in the region                                                              xx The expansion of the East Los Angeles Community Col-
                                                                                  lege in the former Firestone Tire factory and the creation
                                                                                  of a vibrant college district on Firestone Boulevard west
   Objective CD 1.1:                                                              of Long Beach Boulevard.
   Enhance South Gate’s role, participation                                   xx The creation of a public/private partnership with East Los
                                                                                  Angeles Community College that will attract emerging
   and leadership in the region.                                                  green technology firms to locate in the  College’s proposed
                                                                                  adaptive reuse of the former Firestone plant facilities.
   Policies                                                                   xx The revitalization of the Los Angeles River and Rio
                                                                                  Hondo Channel.
   P.1	 The City should accommodate its share of regional hous-
                                                                              xx The creation of a major retail and entertainment corridor
        ing needs to help house the next generation of California
                                                                                  along Firestone Boulevard between San Miguel and the
        residents. [Note: additional policies about housing mix may
                                                                                  Rio Hondo Channel.  This corridor will include the El Portal
        be found in the Housing Element.]
                                                                                  regional retail and entertainment project on Firestone
   P.2	 The City should support the growth of the regional economy                Boulevard, just west of Atlantic Avenue.  The corridor will
        by making land use decisions that help keep the Los Angeles               also include other major retail and entertainment improve-
        region competitive in the worldwide marketplace.                          ments and significant streetscape beautification activities.
   P.3	 The City should develop strong relationships with its im-
        mediate neighbors and work together on projects of mutual
        interest and concern.
   P.4	 City sponsored or approved projects (including plans, public
        works projects and private development projects) should be
        reviewed for their environmental, public health, social and
        fiscal impact on the City.
   P.5	 The City should actively support regional transportation deci-
        sions that benefit the City and the region.
   P.6	 The City will play an active role in the Gateway Cities As-
        sociation of Governments.
88 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goal CD 2:                                                                Objective CD 2.3:
A complete, integrated and balanced                                       Provide a diversity of retail and entertain-
                                                                          ment opportunities in the City that support
mix of residential and non-residen-                                       the needs of local residents and create re-
tial uses that meets the needs of                                         gional retail and entertainment destinations.
existing and future residents                                             Policies
                                                                          P.1	 New large-scale retail and entertainment development will only
Objective CD 2.1:                                                              be located in areas with easy regional public transportation,
Establish a clearly defined urban form and                                     boulevard or freeway access.  Specific areas targeted for such uses
                                                                               are: the Gateway District, the El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center
structure to the City consisting of “Neighbor-                                 District, the Imperial District, the South Gate Triangle District, the
hoods,” “Districts,” and “Corridors” in order                                  Firestone Industrial District, and the Rayo Industrial District.
to enhance the area’s identity and livability.                            P.2	 The City will pursue a diversity of higher-end retail uses
                                                                               throughout the City.
Policies                                                                  P.3	 Neighborhood serving retail uses should be located within a
P.1	 New development will be organized around a series of                      ¼ mile walking distance of most homes in the City. Such uses
     Neighborhoods, Districts and Corridors.                                   include restaurants, food stores, dry cleaners, and cafés.
       xx Neighborhoods are residential areas with a common               P.4	 The City should encourage and promote retail and service-
          character or identity, such as a common history, similar             oriented uses that provide opportunities to bring community
          design style or common meeting place like a park,                    members together. Such uses include cafés, restaurants, farm-
          school or retail center.                                             ers markets, and theaters.
       xx Districts are areas of higher intensity land use, including     P.5	 The City should create a “Firestone Retail and Entertainment
          non-residential and mixed use development.                           Corridor” along Firestone Boulevard from the east side of San
       xx Corridors are linear areas located along major roadways              Miguel Avenue to the Rio Hondo Channel.
          that contain a mix of retail, office and residential uses.
P.1	 New development and redevelopment will be encouraged                 Objective CD 2.4:
     to advance a unified and coherent pattern of development,
     maximize the use of land and fill gaps in the urban environ-
                                                                          Provide land for a diversity of job-producing
     ment.                                                                uses throughout the City.
P.2	 The City will pursue a boundary adjustment to include the
                                                                          Policies
     VFW Hall and the park located at the northwest corner of
     Gardendale and Garfield Avenues. The park is currently on            P.1	 The City will seek to expand the number and diversity of jobs
     county land.                                                              in the City.
                                                                          P.2	 The City will pursue the creation of a significant Office/R&D
Objective CD 2.2:                                                              development in the City.  Specific locations that should be
                                                                               targeted for such uses include: Civic Center District, South
Maintain a jobs-housing balance in the City.                                   Gate College District, Gateway District, Imperial District, Rayo
                                                                               Industrial District and the Firestone Industrial District.
Policies
                                                                          P.3	 The City should not greatly expand the amount of land for
P.1	 The City will attempt to maintain a job to housing ratio of 1.5           Manufacturing/Distribution uses.  Existing manufacturing and
     jobs for every housing unit.                                              distribution uses may remain in their current locations and
                                                                               configurations and may expand their current operations.
P.2	 The City will strive for a match between the type of jobs in
     the City and the occupations of residents.                           P.4	 The City will pursue an expansion of the Light Industrial/Flex
                                                                               spaces throughout the City, especially building types that
P.3	 The conversion of non-residential land to residential uses, or mixed      facilitate the expansion of “boutique” manufacturing.
     use development that includes residential, will be balanced with
     the need for current and potential future job and retail growth.
                                                                          [Note: Additional policies on economic development
                                                                          may be found in the Economic Element.]
                                                                                               Community Design Element 89

   Objective CD 2.5:                                                       Objective CD 2.7:
   Ensure that public and institutional uses,                              Allow increased densities for projects that
   such as government and administrative of-                               provide public amenities and improve-
   fices, recreation facilities, senior and youth                          ments beyond those required by code.
   centers and educational uses adequately
                                                                           Policies
   support existing and future populations.
                                                                           P.1	 The City will provide a density bonus for residential and non-
   Policies                                                                     residential projects where public improvements are made in
                                                                                excess of those required by code.  The density bonuses will be
   P.1	 The continuation of existing public recreational, cultural, edu-        as follows:
        cational, institutional, and health-related uses in their current
        locations will be allowed.                                                xx Neighborhood Medium-High: A density bonus of up to 5
                                                                                     additional dwelling units per acre.
   P.2	 New public uses will be allowed and encouraged in identified              xx Neighborhood High: A density bonus of up to 10 ad-
        Neighborhood, Districts and Corridors. (See Tables CD 7 and CD 8.)           ditional dwelling units per acre.
                                                                                  xx Boulevard Medium-High. A density bonus of up to 5
   P.3	 The City should allow for the development of private recre-
                                                                                     additional dwelling units per acre and 0.25 FAR for non-
        ation, cultural, educational, institutional and health care uses
                                                                                     residential uses.
        along Corridors and in Districts, where they are compatible
                                                                                  xx Boulevard High: A density bonus of up to 10 additional
        with existing uses.
                                                                                     dwelling units per acre and 0.5 FAR for non-residential
   P.4	 Public buildings and sites will be designed to be compatible                 uses.
        in scale, mass, and character with the vision for the specific            xx Urban Village: A density bonus of up to 20 additional
        Neighborhood, District, or Corridor.                                         dwelling units per acre and 0.5 FAR.
                                                                                  xx Office/R&D: A density bonus of up to 1.0 FAR.
   P.5	 The City will pursue the expansion of the existing City Hall              xx Civic/Institutional: A density bonus of up to 1.0 FAR.
        site and complex into a large municipal complex that pro-
        vides space for County and State government activities.            P.2	 Public improvements that qualify for the density bonus will
                                                                                include, but not be limited to, the following:
   Objective CD 2.6:                                                              xx Significant transportation demand management pro-
                                                                                     grams, including public transit use incentives
   Ensure that existing and future develop-                                       xx Public parks and open spaces
   ment is adequately serviced by infrastruc-                                     xx Public meeting spaces
                                                                                  xx Off-site street landscaping
   ture and public services.                                                      xx Public art or cultural arts programs
                                                                                  xx Preservation of historic resources, either on site or
   Policies                                                                          elsewhere in the City.
                                                                                  xx Public facilities such as libraries
   P.1	 The approval of new development projects will be expedited
                                                                                  xx “Green” buildings certified by the US Green Building
        for projects that best meet General Plan goals and design
                                                                                     Council or another independent and nationally recog-
        guidelines, and that provide supporting infrastructure and
                                                                                     nized organization.
        public services that contribute to an overall improvement to
        the quality of life in the City.                                   P.3	 The density bonus for amenities will be in addition to the
   P.2	 New development should pay its fair share of required                   density bonus for affordable housing.
        improvements to public facilities and services.
   P.3	 Infrastructure should be in place or planned prior to approval
        of new development projects that requires such infrastructure.
90 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goal CD 3:                                                                Objective CD 3.2:
Integrated land use and transporta-                                       Minimize the impact of parking on the
                                                                          pedestrian environment and residential
tion development that encourages                                          neighborhoods.
walking, biking and the use of pub-
                                                                          Policies
lic transportation
                                                                          P.1	 Parking lots for new buildings should be located behind or on
                                                                                the side of buildings to reduce their visual impact.
Objective CD 3.1:
                                                                          P.2	 Large parking lots should be sited to avoid potential impacts to
Support transit-oriented development                                            adjacent residential areas or buffered from the residential uses.
(TOD) in the City                                                         P.3	 Parking lots for new buildings that front a sidewalk should
                                                                                include landscaping between the parking lot and the sidewalk.
Policies
                                                                          P.4	 Where parking lots front the street, The City will work with
P.1	 The City will encourage the use of transportation modes                    existing property owners to add landscaping between the
     including walking, bus and rail transit, bicycle and shared-ride           parking lot and the street.
     vehicles that reduce reliance on private vehicles and reduce
     overall  VMT in the City.                                            P.5	 Parking lots should be landscaped to create an attractive pe-
                                                                                destrian environment and reduce the impact of heat islands.
P.2	 The City will pursue the creation of a transit village at the inter-
     section of Firestone Boulevard and Atlantic Avenue.  This transit    P.6	 The number of curb cuts and other intrusions of vehicles
     village should be designed to take maximum advantage of                    across sidewalks should be minimized.
     the proposed “South Gate Station” multi-modal facility to be
                                                                          P.7	 Connections between parking lots on adjacent sites are
     served by the planned high speed, grade separated, environ-
                                                                                encouraged to reduce the number of curb cuts.
     mentally friendly transit on the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-
     way and increased local and regional public bus services. Areas      P.8	 Shared parking arrangements are encouraged to reduce the
     within the future transit village and extending ½ mile walk                total number of parking spaces.
     distance from South Gate Station will be developed with uses
     and at densities that support a very high level of transit service.  P.9	 Above-ground parking structures should be designed accord-
                                                                                ing to the same urban design principles as other buildings.
P.3	 The City should consider a bus terminal near the intersection
     of Atlantic Avenue and Firestone Boulevard.                          P.10	 Below-grade parking should be encouraged over at-grade or
                                                                                above-grade parking. Systems to increase parking lots’ ef-
P.4	 The City should consider the creation of a transit village in              ficiency, such as mechanical lift systems, should be explored.
     Hollydale between the Imperial Highway and I-105. Areas
     within ½ mile walk distance of this future transit station will
     be developed with uses and at densities that support a very
     high level of transit service.
P.5	 Higher intensity residential and commercial development will
     be encouraged within ¼ mile of existing and potential future
     high frequency bus transit corridors, especially in areas where
     two or more high frequency transit lines cross. These areas
     include the following intersections: Firestone Boulevard and
     Atlantic Avenue; Firestone Boulevard and California Street;
     Firestone Boulevard and Long Beach Boulevard; Long Beach
     Boulevard and Tweedy Boulevard; Tweedy Boulevard and
     Atlantic Avenue; Firestone Boulevard and Garfield Avenue;
     and Garfield Avenue and Imperial Boulevard.
P.6	 New buildings on high-frequency transit lines should be
     designed to orient toward the transit facility and/or the public     The strong single family neighborhoods are the
     street.  This includes providing safe and direct pedestrian          backbone of the City and will be preserved through
     access between the building and the transit stop.                    General Plan policies.
                                                                                              Community Design Element 91

   Goal CD 4:                                                                 dards are maintained.
                                                                        P.12	 Existing streetscapes in neighborhoods will be enhanced by
   Preservation and enhancement of                                            improving deficient sidewalks and by adding traditional ele-
   existing neighborhoods’ quality                                            ments such as pedestrian-oriented lighting and street trees.
                                                                        P.13	 The City and private developments will plant street trees that
   and character                                                              create an attractive pedestrian environment.  Street trees
                                                                              should be planted at regular intervals, should provide shade
   Objective CD 4.1:                                                          and protection for pedestrians and ultimately create tree
                                                                              canopies across roadways in residential areas. [Note: Additional
   Preserve the character of                                                  policy guidance can be found in the Street Tree Master Plan.]
   existing neighborhoods
                                                                        Objective CD 4.2:
   Policies
                                                                        Preserve the single family character of ar-
   P.1	 The ongoing conservation, maintenance and upgrading of
         existing neighborhoods is encouraged.
                                                                        eas with a Neighborhood Low designation.
   P.2	 Existing neighborhoods should be preserved and protected        Policies
         against potential impacts related to development, traffic,
         noise, air quality and encroachment of incompatible com-       P.1	 Neighborhood Low will be the primary Place Type designa-
         mercial and industrial activities.                                   tion for the majority of the City’s residential Neighborhoods.
   P.3	 The preservation or adaptive reuse of historic structures and   P.2	 Areas with a Place Type designation of Neighborhood Low
         older buildings should be encouraged and incentivized.               will contain predominantly single family homes.
   P.4	 New development projects or infrastructure projects should      P.3	 New infill development will have a complimentary building
         not physically divide established neighborhoods.                     frontage and character with nearby homes in the neighbor-
                                                                              hood.  The use of complimentary building materials, colors
   P.5	 New development or redevelopment should not result in                 and forms will be used while allowing for flexibility for
         the displacement of existing homes without providing for             unique designs.
         adequate replacement housing.
                                                                        P.4	 In most Neighborhood Low areas, second story additions
   P.6	 Home occupations in neighborhoods should be allowed so                to single family homes should be set back from the primary
         long as there is no significant impact on the surrounding            structure and located toward the rear of the lot.
         residential uses.
                                                                        P.5	 Second units on individual parcels will be allowed in accor-
   P.7	 The City should allow a diverse use of colors on homes. How-
                                                                              dance with the Zoning Code and state law.
         ever, the colors must blend in with the surrounding homes
         and should not be overbearing so as to draw attention to an
         individual structure.                                          Objective CD 4.3:
   P.8	 Existing residential densities that are greater than those al-  Create a diversity of housing types in
         lowed in this General Plan will be allowed to remain. Improve-
         ments will be allowed that enhance the quality and character
                                                                        areas with the Neighborhood Medium
         of the buildings and protect human health and safety.  In the  Place Type Designation.
         case of a man-made or natural disaster, property owners may
         rebuild their structures with the same number of units.        Policies
   P.9	 The paving of front yards will not be allowed.                  P.1	 Neighborhood Medium Place Types will have a diverse mix of
   P.10	 The City should support the formation of neighborhood as-            housing types including single family, duplex, triplex, fourplex,
         sociations and organizations to create specific neighborhood         townhouses/rowhouses and small-scale apartments.
         improvement strategies and sponsor neighborhood social
                                                                        P.2	 Multi-family housing design should be in scale with adjoining
         and safety events.
                                                                              and adjacent single family homes through the use of similar set-
   P.11	 The City will work collaboratively with neighborhood associa-        backs, complimentary building arrangements, and landscaping.
         tions and other community groups to address nuisances,
                                                                        P.3	 Multi-family housing design should generally be oriented
         eliminate blight and ensure that community aesthetic stan-
                                                                              toward the street.
92 South Gate General Plan 2035

Objective CD 4.4:                                                       Goal CD 5:
Improve residential parking in neighborhoods.                           Revitalize Tweedy Mile to become
Policies                                                                the social and cultural heart of
P.1	 New construction will provide adequate on-site parking            South Gate
     for residents.
P.2	 The City will encourage the use of garages for the storage of      Objective CD 5.1:
     vehicles and not for the storage of household items.
                                                                        Preserve and enhance the existing
P.3	 The conversion of parking garages into habitable space will
     not be allowed.                                                    character of Tweedy Mile.
P.4	 Commercial and institutional uses (such as schools, churches       Policies
     and public facilities) in or adjacent to residential neighbor-
     hoods should be encouraged to make their parking available to      P.1	 Existing buildings within sub-area 2 along Tweedy Mile,
     the general public with a priority given to residents of the area.      particularly those with no setback and with a retail storefront
                                                                             on the street, should be preserved, restored, rehabilitated,
                                                                             reused and maintained whenever possible.
Objective CD 4.5:
                                                                        P.2	 New buildings that are constructed should reflect and respect
Locate services and amenities within                                         the traditional scale of the Corridor.  New architectural styles
walking distance of neighborhoods.                                           and colors may be introduced so long as the character and
                                                                             scale are consistent with the existing corridor.
Policies                                                                P.3	 New and existing buildings should include human-scale
                                                                             details such as windows on the street, awnings and archi-
P.1	 The City will encourage the enhancement of neighborhood
                                                                             tectural features that create a visually interesting pedestrian
     services to achieve the goal of creating “complete” neighbor-
                                                                             environment.
     hoods.  Such services include parks, community gardens and
     attractive neighborhood-oriented retail areas that provide         P.4	 Signs should be architecturally compatible with the style,
     goods and services to support daily life within walking dis-            composition, materials, colors and details of the building
     tance of residential neighborhoods.                                     and with other signs on nearby buildings, while providing for
                                                                             adequate identification of businesses.
P.2	 Direct and safe pedestrian connections should be created
     between residential areas and nearby commercial areas.             P.5	 Utility areas and mechanical equipment should be designed so
                                                                             that they do not detract from the aesthetic appeal of the district.
P.3	 The creation of Neighborhood Centers will be pursued
     throughout the City.                                               P.6	 Rehabilitation or redevelopment projects should be constructed
                                                                             to be long lasting and use materials and detailing that main-
                                                                             tains the distinct character and harmony of the downtown.
                                                                        P.7	 The City will allow a diverse use of colors. However the colors
                                                                             must blend in with the surrounding buildings and will not be
                                                                             overbearing so as to draw attention to an individual structure.
                                                                        P.8	 Franchise architecture (that is, building design that is trade-
                                                                             marked or identified with a particular chain or corporation
                                                                             and is generic in nature) should be discouraged.
                                                                        P.9	 The City will work with the Tweedy Mile Association to
                                                                             pursue the creation of a business assessment district to assist
                                                                             with repairs, renovation and parking for the Corridor.
Small-scale mixed use centers that contain cafes, restau-
rants, convenience stores and community services should
be located within walking distance of all neighborhoods.
                                                                                            Community Design Element 93

   Objective CD 5.2:                                                           Objective CD 5.4:
   Target new uses that reinforce Tweedy Mile’s                                Maintain and enhance the pedestrian-
   role as the heart of the City.                                              oriented character of the area.
   Policies                                                                    Policies
   P.1	 Redevelopment efforts should focus on sub-area 2 (the core             P.1	 Require new development and encourage the remodeling of
        of the Tweedy Mile Corridor) and predominantly on the area                  existing buildings to provide the maximum window exposure
        between Otis and California streets.                                        and minimize “blank wall” exposure on the sidewalk.
   P.2	 Tweedy Mile should provide a distinctive shopping experience           P.2	 Outdoor dining and similar uses should be allowed so long
        with smaller stores, restaurants, entertainment uses, art and               as they do not significantly impede pedestrian circulation and
        cultural facilities, and public plazas and gathering spaces.                flow.
   P.3	 The development and retention of small businesses and                  P.3	 All new buildings should be built to the edge of the sidewalk,
        locally-owned stores and shops that are consistent with the                 except where setbacks are desired for public spaces or quasi-
        character will be a priority of the City.                                   public spaces such as plazas and outdoor dining areas.
   P.4	 Retail and service uses, such as cafes, restaurant, stores, hair       P.4	 Primary building entrances will be located directly on the
        salons and similar uses will be encouraged in ground floor                  sidewalk.  Side or rear entrances are permitted so long as
        spaces fronting Tweedy Boulevard.                                           they are secondary to the entrance from the sidewalk.
   P.5	 Office uses in ground-floor retail spaces should be discouraged        P.5	 Parking lots should be located behind or on the side of build-
        along the entire corridor and prohibited on key retail blocks               ings to reduce their visual impact.
        where the highest level of pedestrian activity is desired. Office
        and medical-related uses are strongly encouraged for the up-           P.6	 Where existing parking fronts a sidewalk, landscaping that
        per floors of the buildings along Tweedy Boulevard.                         screens parking from the street is encouraged and will be
                                                                                    required if the property is renovated or redeveloped.
   P.6	 The development of mixed use project with ground-floor retail and
        residential on the upper floors will be encouraged along the corridor. P.7	 New benches, bollards, street lights and signage that reflect
                                                                                    the desired unique character of the corridor should be installed.
   P.7	 New residential development will be encouraged along Tweedy
        Boulevard to increase the vitality and activity in the area.           P.8	 Signage for community promotion, for instance Adopt-A-
                                                                                    Block or Adopt-A-Street programs, should be encouraged.
   P.8	 The City should expand and maintain the existing presence of
        civic uses, especially the library, along the Tweedy Mile Corridor.
   Objective CD 5.3:
   Make parking for visitors easy and convenient.
   Policies
   P.1	 Parking in the downtown should adequately serve users with-
        out detracting from the compact design that makes Tweedy
        Mile a unique destination.
   P.2	 Shared parking arrangements are allowed and encouraged in
        order to reduce the total number of parking spaces.
   P.3	 The City will maintain on-street parking along Tweedy Mile
        during all hours of the day.
   P.4	 Direct and safe pedestrian connections between public and
        private parking lots and sidewalks should be provided.
   P.5	 The City should review funding options and existing parking            Tweedy Mile should remain a walkable, pedestrian-ori-
        districts, identify sources of recurring revenues, and explore         ented retail and shopping area that serves the needs
        development of an area-wide parking program for the                    of the City’s residents.
        Tweedy Mile Corridor.
94 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goal CD 6:                                                               P.7	 Iconic, high quality urban design and architecture should
                                                                              be pursued with new projects in all the Districts in order to
Revitalization, redevelopment and                                             improve the aesthetics of the City.
intensification of the City’s Districts
                                                                         Objective CD 6.2:
Objective CD 6.1:                                                        Design landscaping, buildings, and sites
Create a series of distinct Districts through-                           to enhance the pedestrian environment
out the City, each with its own character,                               and enhance the urban character of the
identity and mix of uses.                                                City’s Districts.
Policies                                                                 Policies
P.1	 The City will pursue the redevelopment and enhancement of           P.1	 New development in Districts will be designed and developed
     the identified Districts in the City in order to enhance economic        to achieve a high level of quality and distinctive character
     diversity, expand the tax base, provide a diversity of job op-           and architecture.
     portunities for City residents, contribute to housing diversity
                                                                         P.2	 Publicly-accessible parks and open space will be required in
     and provide residents with essential goods and services. (Note:
     specific visions and policies for each District are provided in the
                                                                              new projects of 5 acres or more in any District.
     “Districts” section of the Community Design Element.)               P.3	 With the possible exception of some manufacturing and
P.2	 The following Districts will focus on job-producing uses:                distribution uses, new buildings and substantial remodels in
                                                                              Districts will be sited and designed to enhance pedestrian
       xx  South Gate College                                                 activity along sidewalks, including but not limited to:
       xx  Southwest Industrial
       xx  Gateway (sub-areas 3 and 4)                                          xx Providing maximum window exposure and minimizing
       xx  Civic Center                                                             “blank wall” exposure to the sidewalk and street.
       xx  Rayo Industrial                                                      xx Integrating sidewalks, plazas and other amenities that
       xx  Firestone Industrial                                                     contribute to pedestrian-oriented activities.
       xx  Ardine Industrial                                                    xx Incorporating uses in the first floor along the street
       xx  South Gate Triangle                                                      frontage that stimulate pedestrian activity.
       xx  Imperial District (sub-area 3)                                       xx Siting the linear frontage of the building along or near
       xx  Hollydale Industrial                                                     the front property line and near the sidewalk to maintain
                                                                                    a no-setback or minimal-setback building that runs along
P.3	 The following Districts will contain a mix of uses with a sig-                 the sidewalk or property line in a “building wall” design,
     nificant amount of new multi-family residential development:                   which is more pleasant and accessible for pedestrians.
       xx  South Gate College                                                   xx Incorporating landscaping that visually distinguishes the
       xx  Gateway (sub-area 2)                                                     site or structure.
       xx  Imperial District (sub-areas 1 and 2)                                xx Incorporating building articulation of the façade and the
       xx  Firestone Industrial                                                     use of multiple building volumes and planes.
                                                                                xx Using rooflines and height variations to break up the
P.4	 The following Districts will focus on expanding regional retail                massing and provide visual interest.
     and entertainment opportunities in the City:                               xx Providing distinct treatment of building entrances.
                                                                                xx Limiting the street wall height to no more than 50 feet.  
       xx  Gateway (sub-area 1)
                                                                                    Floors above 50 feet should be set back from the street
       xx  El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center
                                                                                    wall to preserve light and air.
       xx  Firestone Industrial
       xx  South Gate Triangle                                           P.4	 Buildings adjacent to lower scale residential development
       xx  Rayo Industrial                                                    should step down toward the residential uses or provide
P.5	 The City shall pursue a variety of housing choices in Districts          other buffering techniques.
     including both rental and ownership housing.                        P.5	 The City and private developments in Districts will plant street
P.6	 A variety of housing types is encouraged, including live-                trees that create an attractive pedestrian environment.  Street
     work units, courtyard housing, and mixed use buildings with              trees should be planted at regular intervals and should provide
     residential above ground floor retail.                                   shade and protection for pedestrians. [Note: Additional policy
                                                                              guidance can be found in the Street Tree Master Plan.]
                                                                                             Community Design Element 95

   Goal CD 7:                                                             Objective CD 7.2:
   Revitalization of the City’s Corridors                                 Design landscaping, buildings, and sites to
                                                                          enhance the pedestrian environment.
   into beautiful and welcoming spaces.
                                                                          Policies
   Objective CD 7.1:                                                      P.1	 Signage will be designed to consider the scale and materials
   Create attractive Corridors with a mix of                                   of adjacent buildings, the desired character of each Corridor
                                                                               and pedestrian orientation.
   uses throughout the City of South Gate.
                                                                          P.2	 New buildings or substantial remodels along Corridors will
   Policies                                                                    be sited and designed to enhance pedestrian activity along
                                                                               sidewalks, including but not limited to:
   P.1	 The City will convert major thoroughfares from single-use
        commercial corridors into mixed use boulevards with retail,              xx Orienting buildings to the pedestrian environment.
        office and residential uses. [Note: Specific visions and policies        xx Providing human-scale details such as windows on the
        for each Corridor are provided in the “Corridors” section of                street, awnings, and architectural features that create a
        this Community Design Element.]                                             visually interesting pedestrian environment
                                                                                 xx Incorporating uses in the first floor along the street
   P.2	 New high-density residential development that includes                      frontage that stimulate pedestrian activity.
        a variety of housing types and affordability levels will be              xx Providing maximum window exposure and minimizing
        encouraged along the majority of the City’s Corridors.                      “blank wall” exposure to the sidewalk and street.
                                                                                 xx Siting the linear frontage of the building along the front
   P.3	 Redeveloping the Corridors will be a priority for the City.                 property line to maintain a minimal setback and active
                                                                                    building façade, except for areas used for outdoor dining
   P.4	 Corridors should be developed with a variety of architectural
                                                                                    or courtyards
        styles, building forms and building heights.                             xx Incorporating landscaping that visually distinguishes the
   P.5	 The assembly of parcels and projects involving multiple                     site or structure.
        parcels should be pursued to create larger and more easily               xx Incorporating building articulation of the façade and the
        developable areas.                                                          use of multiple building volumes and planes.
                                                                                 xx Using rooflines and height variations to break up the
   P.6	 Development projects may apply the Place Type identified for                massing and provide visual interest.
        the Corridor to the parcels in the Corridor Transition Overlay           xx Providing distinct treatment of building entrances.
        zone, immediately behind the parcels fronting the Corridor.              xx Ensuring consistent and high quality architecture on all pub-
                                                                                    lic building faces where buildings front on 2 or more streets.
   P.7	 Single-use Retail Place Types are discouraged except near                xx Limiting the street wall height to no more than 50 feet;
        freeway entrances and exits, near the intersections of bou-                 floors above 50 feet should be set back from the street
        levards with other major roads, and on large parcels on the                 wall to preserve light and air.
        north side of Firestone Boulevard between San Miguel and
        the Rio Hondo Channel and on the south side of Firestone          P.3	 Buildings adjacent to lower scale residential development will
        between Atlantic Avenue and the Rio Hondo Channel.                     step down toward the residential uses.
   P.8	 The City will pursue a variety of housing choices in Corridors    P.4	 The City and private developments along Corridors will plant
        including both rental and ownership housing.                           street trees that create an attractive pedestrian environment.  
                                                                               Street trees should be planted at regular intervals and should
                                                                               provide shade and protection for pedestrians. [Note: Additional
                                                                               policy guidance can be found in the Street Tree Master Plan.]
96 South Gate General Plan 2035

Objective CD 7.3:                                                 Goal CD 8:
Create a retail and entertainment corridor                        An improved visual appearance
along Firestone Boulevard.
                                                                  throughout the City
Policies
P.1	 The City will pursue the creation of a major retail and en-  Objective CD 8.1:
     tertainment corridor along Firestone Boulevard that extends  Ensure high quality architecture and urban
     from the east side of San Miguel to the Rio Hondo Channel.
                                                                  design throughout the City.
P.2	 The City will pursue major retail and entertainment uses for
     this area, including theaters, major shopping centers, and   Policies
     other uses that have a regional draw.
                                                                  P.1	 The City will encourage innovative and quality architecture in
P.3	 The City will pursue a series of entryway treatments along        the City with all new public and private projects.
     Firestone Boulevard to announce the arrival into South Gate
     and the Firestone Retail and Entertainment Corridor. The     P.2	 New buildings will be constructed to create attractive,
     gateway treatments should also be visible from the I-710          pedestrian-friendly places.
     freeway, where possible.
                                                                  P.3	 High-quality and long-lasting building materials will be required
                                                                       on all new non-residential and multi-family housing projects.
                                                                  P.4	 New non-residential and multi-family buildings will be designed
                                                                       with attractive and inviting frontage on all public streets.
                                                                  P.5	 The visual appearance of the City should be improved
                                                                       through programs and projects such as a “branding” pro-
                                                                       gram, citywide directional signage, and uniform streetscape
                                                                       characteristics.
The City’s major corridors – Firestone, Atlantic, Long Beach, and others – should be redeveloped with a diverse mix
of residential and retail uses.
                                                                                     Community Design Element 97

   Objective CD 8.2:                                                     Objective CD 8.3:
   Ensure that the City is attractive and free                           Improve the visual quality of
   of public nuisances.                                                  Corridors and Districts.
   Policies                                                              Policies
   P.1	 All housing and businesses should be adequately maintained       P.1	 In concert with redevelopment projects, the City will create
        and, where required, rehabilitated to protect health and              entryway treatments for the major access points to the City.
        safety and to improve the visual appearance of the City.              An entryway is a physical feature that announces arrival at
                                                                              a distinctive place and can include signage, landscaping,
   P.2	 The City should have sufficient inspection staff to achieve full      signature buildings, public art and other features.  Consider
        compliance with City codes.                                           entryway treatments for the following locations:
   P.3	 To the extent feasible, the City should continue existing               xx Firestone Boulevard at Atlantic Avenue
        programs that improve the visual appearance and quality of              xx Firestone Boulevard at Alameda Street
        the City – such as paint for businesses to cover graffiti on            xx Long Beach Boulevard at Tweedy Boulevard
        their buildings – and the City should explore new building              xx Atlantic Avenue at Salt Lake Avenue
        refurbishment and repair partnerships, litter control or other          xx Garfield Boulevard at I-105
        beautification programs.                                                xx Firestone Boulevard at the Rio Hondo River
   P.4	 The City will work collaboratively with residents, homeown-             xx Paramount at I-105
        ers associations, business associations, and other community            xx Garfield at I-105
        groups to abate nuisances, eliminate blight and ensure that             xx Imperial at I-105
        community aesthetic standards are maintained.
                                                                         P.2	 To the extent feasible, utilities should be undergrounded along
   P.5	 The City will actively encourage neighborhood character and har-      Corridors and in Districts during highway repair or widening
        mony through physical improvements or community programs.             projects, streetscape improvement projects, construction of
                                                                              new development projects or as funds become available.
   P.6	 As a condition of property transfer, the City will continue to
        require a building inspection and necessary repairs to meet      P.3	 Public art and other design features should be used to
        health and safety standards.                                          enliven the public realm.
   P.7	 The City should maintain graffiti removal and weed abate-        P.4	 The City will work with adjoining jurisdictions to improve the
        ment programs and respond quickly and effectively to citizen          visual quality and appearance along the City’s edges.
        complaints, wherever feasible.
                                                                         P.5	 Citywide graphics and signage standards for street signs and
   P.8	 The City will maintain and improve public property and buildings      other uses will be created that help provide a better sense of
        to promote and protect public health and to eliminate blight.         municipal boundaries.
                                                                         P.6	 The City will pursue the development of “signature” build-
                                                                              ings and monuments that provide visual landmarks and
                                                                              create a distinctive and positive impression of the City.
98 South Gate General Plan 2035

Objective CD 8.4:                                                        Goal CD 9:
Reduce the impact of Manufacturing/Distri-                               Preservation and protection of plac-
bution and Light Industrial/Flex businesses
on adjoining land uses.
                                                                         es, buildings, and objects that em-
                                                                         body the City’s social, commercial,
Policies
                                                                         architectural and agricultural history
P.1	 Neighborhoods should be protected from incompatible
     non-residential uses and disruptive traffic and other noise
     generating uses to the greatest extent feasible.                    Objective CD 9.1:
P.2	 The consideration and mitigation of noise, light, vehicular         Identify and preserve cultural
     and other impact on residential properties will be considered       and historic resources.
     when Manufacturing/Distribution or Light Industrial/Flex are
     proposed.
                                                                         Policies
P.3	 Existing, non-conforming industrial uses should be phased
     out during the course of the General Plan.                          P.1	 Historic or culturally significant buildings and other resources
                                                                              in South Gate should be preserved and enhanced to contrib-
P.4	 The City will not permit existing, non-conforming industrial uses        ute to the character of the community.
     to significantly expand their facilities except to rectify building
     code violations and maintain the appearance of the building.        P.2	 The City will support the creation and expansion of a perma-
                                                                              nent home for a South Gate history museum in the Seaborg
P.5	 Industrial uses should be regulated to minimize smoke, pol-              building in the City.
     lution, glare, excessive noise and other adverse impact on
     employees and on adjoining uses and areas.                          P.3	 Through its direct or indirect actions, the City will cause no
                                                                              substantial adverse change in the significance of a histori-
P.6	 Industrial uses should be adequately fenced and landscaped               cal or archaeological resource as defined in the California
     so as to minimize the potential impact on adjoining uses.                Environmental Quality Act.
P.7	 Truck and employee traffic generated by industrial uses             P.4	 Unique paleontological resources and sites will not be
     should be restricted to designated truck routes as specified in          directly or indirectly destroyed or significantly altered.
     the Mobility Element of the General Plan.
                                                                         P.5	 All new development should not disturb archeological sites.
P.8	 Truck parking on public streets in non-industrial areas 
     will be prohibited.
P.9	 The City will limit the development of industrial and other
     uses that use, store, produce or transport toxic substances,
     generate unacceptable levels of noise or air pollution, or
     produce other pollutants. The City will require adequate
     mitigation measures, confirmed by environmental review and
     monitoring, for all such uses that are developed.
Cultural and historic resources provide a source of identity and a connection to the past for residents. Such re-
sources should be preserved and protected.
                                                                                            Community Design Element 99

                                                                                          DISTRICTS
    The flexible structure of this                                                        This section outlines each District within the City of South Gate and
                                                                                          provides a description of existing conditions, a vision statement for
    organization of uses within the                                                       the area, and specific policy guidance. A map of each District is also
                                                                                          included. The allowable Place Types for each District are presented in
    City is intended to accommodate
                                                                                          Table CD-7. The information contained herein will be considered policy
    future changes in economic con-                                                       statements with the force of regulation. The flexible structure of this
                                                                                          organization of uses within the City is intended to accommodate future
    ditions and community visions.                                                        changes in economic conditions and community visions.
                                                            Santa Ana                      California
                                                        Liberty                   State
                                                      Independe
                                    1                 Ardmore
                                                                nce
                                                                                                        Otis
                                         2
                                    Southern
                                                                                                                           Firestone     1
                                                                                                                                                     2              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                               Alexander                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Garfiel
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                       Tweedy
                                                                                                                                                                            I-710
                                                                                                                                                 Atlantic
                                                    Century
                                                                        Long Be
                                                                           ach
                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                            Imperial                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
     Districts
           Ardine Industrial
           Civic Center
           South Gate College [2 Sub Areas]
           El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center [3 Sub Areas]                                                                                                                                                                           unt
                                                                                                                                                                                       Garfield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mo
           Firestone Industrial                                                                                                                                                                                                 Par a
           Gateway [4 Sub Areas]
           Hollydale Industrial
           Imperial [3 Sub Areas]
           Tweedy Educational District
           Rayo Industrial [2 Sub Areas]
           South Gate Triangle [2 Sub Area]
           Southwest Industrial
    Location of the Districts in South Gate. (Numbers indicate subareas in each District.)
100 South Gate General Plan 2035
        Civic Center District
        Existing Conditions
        The Civic Center District, located along California         In 2006, the Community Redevelopment Agency staff
        Street at the intersection of Firestone Boulevard,          made recommendations to move the Seaborg Family
        currently contains a mix of residential, commercial         Home, one of the City’s few remaining cultural land-
        and public uses. This district currently serves as the      marks, to the Civic Center District. The home was the
                                       California
        primary government center for the City. The South           residence of Nobel-prize winning chemist and nuclear
        Gate City Hall is located in this area, as are single       pioneer Glenn Seaborg from 1922 to 1934 and is a
        family residential uses, multi-family residential uses, a   typical small, single family residence of the period. In
        church, and strip commercial uses.                          2000, the City of South Gate designated the home
                                                                    on San Antonio Avenue as a significant cultural land-
        City Hall was relocated to its current location on
                                                                    mark and renamed a street in the Civic Center as Dr.
        California Avenue between Firestone and Ardmore
                                                                    Glenn Seaborg Way.
        Boulevards in 1942 and later rebuilt in 1964. The
State   original buildings were part of the Federal Works Proj-
        ect Act. Today, the Civic Center includes the City Hall,
        Police Department, City Hall Annex and Civic Center
        Community Building which includes the Museum and
        Art Association.
           Independe
                                nce
          Ardmore                                                   South Gate’s current courthouse.          Otis
                                       Firestone                    Allowable Place Types
                          California
                                                                    Highly Desired           Desired                 Discouraged   Firest
                                                                    Urban Village            Boulevard               n/a
                                                                                             Medium-High
                                                                    Civic/Institutional
                                                                    Open Space
                                                                    Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
        Civic Center District Boundaries.
                                                                                        Community Design Element 101

    Vision
    During the time horizon of the General Plan, this area         As envisioned, the Southwest Justice Center would
    will be transformed into a high-density, pedestrian-          be part of the larger Civic Center District, which could
    scale employment district that has at its center a            also feature an urban, mixed use village. In addition
    major State/County courthouse complex (called the             to the new justice center, the City proposes replacing
    Southwest Justice Center) or other municipal facility.        its existing City Hall, police facility and other related
    Supporting this complex will be a number of public            administrative buildings which are undersized, anti-
    and private office buildings including a new and ex-          quated and require updating. The District may also
    panded City Hall facility, retail and restaurants.            include the Glenn Seaborg Family Home.
    The City envisions the Southwest Justice Center as a          The City’s intent is to design a civic center to serve as
    keystone project that would revitalize the Civic Center       both a government employment center and as a civic
    District and create a public amenity that could serve         hub for residents’ enjoyment. The project’s overall de-
    as a hub to a much larger community renaissance.              sign features will be innovative and environmentally
                                                                  friendly but will also reflect the heritage of the City.
    The design strategy for the City of South Gate Civic Center District and Southeast Justice Center is to create a
    relaxed, casual and convenient destination built to high environmental standards.
102 South Gate General Plan 2035

The proposed Civic Center will be approximately 7           Policies
acres. The City envisions that the area will include a      1.	 Buildings with a mix of office, residential and ground-floor
State Courthouse and ancillary uses such as a pub-               retail uses will be located along the frontages of Firestone
lic defender’s office, sheriff’s space, holding cells, a         Boulevard and California Street.
district attorney’s office and restaurants as well as a     2.	 The street environment should be safe for pedestrians since
public plaza, a new City Hall, mixed use buildings,              a high-level of foot traffic is expected, especially during
                                                                 daytime hours.
open space and parking.
                                                            3.	 The City should explore alternative approaches for develop-
                                                                 ing safe pedestrian connections across California Street. This
                                                                 could include a pedestrian bridge connecting civic and office
                                                                 buildings located on both sides of the street.
                                                            4.	 Ground floor retail and restaurant uses should line Firestone
                                                                 Boulevard and parts of  California Street to create an active
                                                                 street environment.
                   These diagrams show proposed site design an layout for the Civic Center District.
                                                                               Community Design Element 103

    The new Civic Center will include a public plaza for civic events and casual gatherings.
    5.	 The architecture of the Civic Center area, particularly of the  8.	 While focused primarily on civic and related office uses,
        public buildings, should clearly set them apart as major public      the Civic Center District may also contain residential uses,
        facilities in Los Angeles County, and civic buildings should         especially on Firestone Boulevard and on the west side of
        have unique, distinctive architecture.                               California Avenue.
    6.	 The buildings will adhere to or exceed the green building       9.	 The City will explore incorporating the Seaborg house as
        practices for City buildings outlined in Green City Element.         part of the redevelopment project or moving it to the Tweedy
                                                                             Atlantic Education Center, the Community College District or
    7.	 Where possible, the development in the Civic Center District
                                                                             Tweedy Boulevard.
        should step down in height and intensity to the residential
        areas located around the District.                              10.	 The Civic Center District will contain usable public spaces
                                                                             such as parks or plazas that serve as an amenity to the
                                                                             residents of South Gate.
                                                                        11.	 New construction in the Civic Center District will respect and
                                                                             maintain as many of the major trees as possible.
104 South Gate General Plan 2035
South Gate College District
Existing Conditions                                            Vision
The South Gate College District is divided into two            The South Gate College District is proposed to be-
subareas. The existing environment contains a mix              come a diverse, dense and vibrant area that contains
of retail and industrial uses located primarily along          a wide array of facilities such as classrooms, a library,
Firestone Boulevard. The majority of the land area             public meeting spaces, parks and plazas, cultural
is on two parcels, one of which contains the former            facilities and a hub for emerging green technology
Firestone Tire factory, a sprawling 2 to 5 story industrial    firms. The City envisions that educational, cultural
building complex that covers around 1.5 million square         and recreational facilities will be open to and shared
feet. A variety of industrial and warehouse uses are           with the residents of South Gate. At buildout, the
located in these buildings including the Hon furniture         District could accommodate up to 30,000 full and
company, one of the largest employers in South Gate.           part time students. The primary college educational
Along Firestone Boulevard between Long Beach and               campus is proposed to be developed south of Fires-
Alameda are auto-oriented retail uses including a small        tone Boulevard bounded by Calden Avenue, South-
strip commercial development, auto repair shops and            ern Avenue, and Alameda Street in sub-area 2. The
drive-through restaurants. The area also currently con-        green technology center is proposed to be located in
tains a small satellite campus of the East Los Angeles         sub-area 1 in the former Firestone Tire factory, north
Community College and a self-storage facility, located         of Firestone Boulevard. The north and south college
on the southern side of Firestone Boulevard.                   components are envisioned to be connected by a sky
                                                                             Santa Ana
                                                                          Liberty                            State
                                                                         Independ
                                  1                                     Ardmore
                                                                                     ence
                                                      Firestone
                        Alameda        2
                                                    Santa Fe
                                                                        ch
                                                                            ea
                                  Southern                               gB
                                                                             Lon
South Gate College District Boundaries.
                                                                              Community Design Element 105
    bridge spanning Firestone Boulevard. Supporting                              P.5	 To the extent practicable, the East Los Angeles Community
    retail and services, including restaurants, are proposed                           College curriculum and research activities should include a
                                                                                       focus on green and sustainable industries in order to prepare
    along the Firestone Boulevard and Santa Fe frontages.                              local residents for 21st century jobs.
    The City encourages development that allies with the
                                                                                 P.6	 Industrial and manufacturing uses should remain in the area
    East Los Angeles Community College’s aim of build-                                 but could be phased out as the college district expands.
    ing a green and environmentally sustainable campus,
                                                                                 P.7	 New uses that serve, and are used by, both the community
    including adaptive reuse of existing buildings and                                 college and the residents of South Gate should be included
    integration of new architecture with old.                                          in the area.  This includes a library, community meeting space,
                                                                                       theaters, parks and plazas.
    Policies                                                                     P.8	 Retail uses should be located in the ground floor of all build-
                                                                                       ings along Firestone and Santa Fe; restaurants and cafés with
    P.1	 The former Firestone Tire factory should be rehabilitated and                 outdoor seating are also encouraged.
         adaptively reused for the creation of a public/private research
         and development hub specializing in emerging green                      P.9	 To the extent feasible, the existing Firestone Tire factory building
         technology that supports the East Los Angeles Community                       should be adaptively reused and the building façade preserved.
         College’s “green workforce” training programs.                          P.10	 Continuation of the current Single Use Retail uses is discour-
    P.2	 The City will work with the East Los Angeles Community Col-                   aged, but still allowed.
         lege and Los Angeles Community College District to develop              P.11	 College support facilities such as student housing, offices, park-
         a Specific Plan or Precise Plan for the South Gate College                    ing garages, bookstores, restaurants will be located primarily
         District.  The plan should identify specific information on the               along Firestone Boulevard‘s southern frontage between Alam-
         location of uses, the needs of the Community College District                 eda Street and Santa Fe Avenue and along Santa Fe Avenue
         and the needs of the City and the community.                                  between Firestone Boulevard and Independence Avenue.
    P.3	 The City will work with the East Los Angeles Community
         College, Los Angeles Community College District and others
         to pursue a public/private partnership for the creation of
         a green technology center that is associated with East Los
         Angeles Community College.
    P.4	 All of the East Los Angeles Community College facilities are
         encouraged to be constructed as green buildings.
    Allowable Place Types
                                     Highly Desired                      Desired                                Discouraged
                                     Civic/Institutional                 Office/R&D                             n/a
     Sub-area 1
                                     Open Space                          Light Industrial/Flex
                                     Civic/Institutional                 Office/R&D                             Single-Use Retail
                                     Open Space
     Sub-area 2
                                     Boulevard Medium-High
                                     Neighborhood Medium-High
     Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
106 South Gate General Plan 2035

Gateway District
Existing Conditions                                                   Vision
The Gateway District contains industrial and commercial               The Gateway District will be transformed from an indus-
parcels around the intersection of Firestone Boulevard and            trial area into a retail, entertainment and transit-oriented
Atlantic Avenue. Due to its location, it serves as the entry-         mixed use District that serves as the visual gateway to
way to the City from I-710 and from Cudahy along Atlantic             South Gate. The District will also support the City’s vision
Boulevard. The District is divided into sub-areas 1, 2, 3 and         of creating a destination retail and entertainment cor-
4. The current uses along Firestone Boulevard are predomi-            ridor on Firestone Boulevard between San Miguel and the
nantly commercial with a high percentage of retail uses               Rio Hondo Channel. Sub-area 1 will become a major
such as motels, used car dealers, retail stores and fast-food         regional retail destination with a distinct architectural
restaurants. The remainder of the District contains ware-             character. Sub-area 2, around the potential multimodal
house/distribution and manufacturing uses, including Shultz           station (“South Gate Station”), should become a dense
Steel and HUDD Transportation Services, on large parcels.             “transit village” that includes new residential and/or office
Sub-area 1 is predominantly vacant and a large regional re-           uses. This area should become a major destination of the
tail development is proposed in the area. A rail line dissects        City and be designed to support a high-level of pedestrian
the District; this line is the proposed route of a potential          activity. Light Industrial/Flex uses are envisioned to serve
high-speed, grade separated, environmentally friendly tran-           as a transition between the transit village and sub-area
sit line on the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way.                  3, which contains Shultz Steel. Sub-area 3 will remain a
                                                                      job-producing area but uses should transition from the
                                                                      current low-intensity employment uses to higher-intensity
                                                                      uses such as Office/R&D and Light Industrial/Flex. The
                                                                      vision for sub-area 4 is to become a mixed use area with
                                                                      ground floor retail uses below office and residential uses.
                                                                      Uses such as gas stations and fast food restaurants are
                                                                      allowed in this area, but not encouraged.
One vison for the multi-modal station
Source: http://tinyurl.com/cevg7r
Allowable Place Types
                                 Highly Desired               Desired                              Discouraged
                                 Single-Use Retail            Urban Village                        n/a
 Sub-area 1
                                 Open Space
                                 Neighborhood High            Single-Use Retail                    n/a
                                 Urban Village                Light Industrial/Flex
 Sub-area 2                      Office/R&D
                                 Civic/Institutional
                                 Open Space
                                 Office/R&D                   Single-Use Retail                    n/a
 Sub-area 3                      Light Industrial/Flex        Manufacturing/Distribution
                                 Open Space
                                 Boulevard Medium-High        n/a                                  Single-Use Retail
 Sub-area 4
                                 Open Space
 Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
                                                                                        Community Design Element 107

                   Policies
                   P.1	 Prepare a Specific Plan for sub-area 2. The Specific Plan        P.6	 The City should explore the creation of a parking district for
                        should identify uses, designs and densities that support              all or part of the Gateway District.  This may occur following
                        transit use.                                                          the development of a Specific Plan for the area.
                   P.2	 The City will work with regional transit agencies, including     P.7	 Light Industrial/Flex uses or parking garages should serve as
                        Metro, to pursue a multi-modal transportation facility in sub-        a buffer between the transit village in sub-area 2 and the
                        area 2. The multi-modal station should be pursued even if             heavy industrial uses, such as Shultz Steel in sub-area 3.
                        the high-speed, grade separated transit on the Union Pacific
                                                                                         P.8	 Existing industrial uses in sub-area 2 may continue in their
                        Railroad is not constructed.
                                                                                              current locations, but expansions are discouraged.
                   P.3	 The City should explore new street connections between
                                                                                         P.9	 The City should create entryways for the City at the intersec-
                        Firestone Boulevard and Atlantic Avenue.
                                                                                              tion of Firestone Boulevard and Atlantic Avenue and at the
                   P.4	 New local streets should be considered for the Gateway Dis-           intersection of Firestone Boulevard and I-710, especially for
                        trict. The City should make a  connection between Firestone           visitors to the Gateway shopping center and the future transit
                        Boulevard and Patata Street. The design of the streets should         center, and for other travelers entering the City from the east
                        reflect the desired character of the area, as stated in the           along Firestone Boulevard.
                        vision and policies. In particular, new streets in sub-area 2
                                                                                         P.10	 The City should pursue the development of an iconic building
                        should be focused on pedestrian circulation.
                                                                                               on the southwest corner of Firestone Boulevard and Atlantic
                   P.5	 The City should explore pedestrian connections between the             Avenue; new Single-Use Retail buildings such as gas stations
                        various sub-areas, especially between sub-areas 1 and 2,               or drive through restaurants will not be allowed on this visu-
                        across Atlantic Avenue and within sub-area 2 across Fires-             ally important parcel.
                        tone Boulevard.
                                                                                         P.11	 New buildings in sub-area 4 should be of a consistent char-
                                                                                               acter and style as other new uses along Firestone Boulevard.
Otis
                                                                       c
                                                                       Atlanti
                     Firestone                             1                                   Patata
                                                                                         2                       3
                                                                                                                                                  I-710
                                                                  4
                         Southern
                                                                                                            Rayo
       Alexander
                   Gateway District Boundaries
                                                                                                                                                                G
       108 South Gate General Plan
                               Twee2035                        dy
                                                                                                                                10
El Paseo/South Gate
Towne Center District
Existing Conditions                                                  Vision
The El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center District encom-                 This area should generally maintain the same mix of
passes the retail and commercial area east of I-710                  uses and continue to expand its role as a regional
and around the intersections of Garfield and Firestone               retail destination for the greater South Gate area.
Boulevards. This area also forms the eastern terminus                Existing structures should be improved over the life of
of the Firestone Retail and Entertainment Corridor.                  the General Plan and the area should continue to be
The area is divided into three sub-areas. Sub-area 1                 an exciting shopping and entertainment destination.
contains mostly retail uses in an auto-oriented environ-             Further, South Gate Towne Center and El Paseo could
ment. Predominant uses include the El Paseo Shopping                 add multi-family housing to create a livelier district.
Center and Sam’s Club. Sub-area 2 contains the petro-
leum storage tanks located northwest of the Firestone/
Garfield intersection. Sub-area 3 is the area on the
south side of Firestone Boulevard and contains the
Target store and new automobile dealers. Due to its
uses and design, this area contains some of the highest
volumes of traffic – particularly commercial truck traffic
– in the City and a low-quality pedestrian environment.
Allowable Place Types
                                 Highly Desired             Desired                           Discouraged
                                 Single-Use Retail          Urban Village                     n/a
 Sub-area 1
                                 Open Space                 Office/R&D
                                 Manufacturing/Distribution n/a                               n/a
 Sub-area 2
                                 Open Space
                                 Single-Use Retail          Office/R&D                        Light Industrial/Flex
                                                            Civic/Institutional
 Sub-area 3
                                                            Open Space
 Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
                                                                                      Community Design Element 109

    Policies
    P.1	 Housing may be built on the larger parcels in sub-area 1 only.      P.5	 The tanks in sub-area 2 will remain in place. Efforts should
                                                                                  be made to improve the visual appearance of the tanks from
    P.2	 While the area is predominantly auto-oriented, efforts should            I-710 and Firestone and Garfield Boulevards.
         be made to improve the quality of the pedestrian environ-
         ment and the visual appearance of the streetscape.                  P.6	 New uses for sub-area 3 should include major retail and
                                                                                  entertainment uses that contribute to the Firestone retail and
    P.3	 The City should explore ways of encouraging new automobile               entertainment corridor.  New housing will not be allowed in sub-
         dealerships to locate in this District.                                  area 3 in order to avoid conflicts with exiting industrial uses.
    P.4	 The City should explore opportunities for redeveloping              P.7	 To the extent practicable, new truck traffic should be man-
         the Target shopping center to become more of a regional                  aged to avoid negative impacts on traffic congestion and the
         retail destination.                                                      overall retail experience.
                                                   2
                                                                                           1
                                                                             Firestone
                                                             3           d
                                                                   Garfiel
                                      Southern
               I-710
    El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center District Boundaries
110 South Gate General Plan 2035
Imperial District
Existing Conditions                                                 Vision
The Imperial Industrial District is located east of the             This area should be transformed over the next 20 to
Los Angeles River and extends from the Rio Hondo                    30 years to provide more retail establishments that
south to Gardendale Street. The area, which contains                serve the needs of the community, expanded job op-
3 sub-areas, is bisected by Garfield Avenue and Impe-               portunities and a diversity of housing types. Sub-area
rial Boulevard. The majority of the District, especially            1 is envisioned to become a mixed use retail/residen-
sub-areas 2 and 3, contain a wide range of industrial               tial area that contains both multi-family residential
uses including heavy manufacturing, light industrial,               buildings and buildings with a vertical mix of uses.
warehousing and small “boutique” manufacturing/                     Ground floor retail uses and other non-residential
fabrication facilities. In addition, sub-area 3 contains            uses that cater to local residents and employees at
a horse stable and access to equestrian trails that are             the nearby county municipal campus in the City of
a regional resource. Sub-area 2, which also contains                Downey should be pursued. Sub-area 2 is envisioned
parcels around the intersection of Garfield Avenue                  to transform from a mix of auto-oriented retail and
and Imperial Boulevard, has a high percentage of                    industrial uses into an attractive mixed use corridor.
highway commercial uses, such as gas stations and                   Other uses that are allowed in this sub-area are new
fast food restaurants. Sub-area 1 contains mostly                   Single-Use Retail and Light Industrial/Flex uses. Retail
small retail parcels fronting Imperial Boulevard.                   and mixed use development is envisioned for the
Overall, the District has a disjointed urban fabric and             major roadways of Garfield Avenue and Imperial
many of the buildings may need replacement during                   Boulevard, while the Light Industrial/Flex uses would
the time horizon of the General Plan. Although it is                be allowed on the parcels off of these roadways.
outside of City limits, Los Angeles County has plans                Sub-area 3 should remain a job-producing District,
to develop a mixed use government and private office                but allowed uses will include Office/R&D to help to di-
complex off Imperial Boulevard, just east of the City               versify the City’s job base. Manufacturing/Distribution
limit in the City of Downey.                                        uses are explicitly allowed in this sub-area.
Allowable Place Types
                                 Highly Desired             Desired                          Discouraged
                                 Neighborhood Medium-High   n/a                              Single-Use Retail
 Sub-area 1                      Boulevard Medium-High
                                 Open Space
                                 Boulevard Medium-High      Neighborhood Medium-High         Light Industrial/Flex
 Sub-area 2
                                 Open Space                 Single-Use Retail
                                 Single-Use Retail          n/a                              n/a
                                 Office/R&D
 Sub-area 3                      Light Industrial/Flex
                                 Manufacturing/Distribution
                                 Open Space
 Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
                                                                                    Community Design Element 111

        Policies
        P.1	 New uses should capitalize on the District’s proximity to the              P.5	 The City should pursue the development of a supermarket
             county municipal campus in Downey. Potential uses could in-                     in the Imperial District.  Potential locations include the large
             clude retail, restaurants, cafés and offices.  These uses should                parcels fronting Imperial Boulevard in sub-area 3 and the flea
             also serve the needs of the existing residents.                                 market site on Garfield Avenue in sub-area 2.
        P.2	 New residential uses should include multi-family housing to
                                                                                                                       Garfiel
                                                                                        P.6	 As redevelopment occurs in sub-area 3, streets and
                                                                                                                               d
             help to diversify the housing types present on the eastern                      streetscapes should be improved to enhance the visual qual-
             side of the City.                                                               ity of the area.
        P.3	 Buildings facing Imperial Boulevard should be designed to                  P.7	 The City should encourage the continued operation and
             create an attractive pedestrian environment, with buildings                     potential expansion of the equestrian facilities in sub-area 3.
             set close together, minimal setbacks from the street and retail
                                                                                        P.8	 The employment areas in sub-area 3 should be beautified and
             uses on the ground floor.  Given the depth of the parcels,
weedy        particular attention must be paid to potential impacts on
                                                                                             a variety of new job-producing uses should be encouraged.
                                                                      I-710
             residential areas as properties are redeveloped.                           P.9	 If Los Angeles proceeds with plans to develop a mixed use
                                                                                             complex off Imperial Boulevard, the City should pursue a
        P.4	 The consolidation of small parcels for redevelopment is encouraged.
                      Atlantic
                                                                                             train station near Imperial Boulevard and, if a transit station
                                                                                             is located in the vicinity, the City should allow for a high-den-
                                                                                             sity transit village within a ½ mile radius of the transit facility.
                                                                                                      ld
                                              10                                                   Garfie
                                           I-7
                                                                     Imperial                                          1
                                                                             3
                                                                                                            2
        Imperial Industrial District Boundaries.
                                                                                                                                                                      unt
                                                                                   arfield
   112 South Gate General Plan 2035                                                                                                                                 mo
                                                                                                                                                                    ara

South Gate Triangle District
Existing Conditions                                                  Vision
This area is bounded by the Los Angeles River, the                   The vision for this District is to remain a job and
Rio Hondo Channel, and the El Paseo/South Gate                       economic development area for the City while also
Towne Center District. The District contains numerous                creating a dramatic entry to the City visible from the
large-scale industrial, warehouse and storage uses.                  I-710 freeway. The District should continue to capital-
The character of the area is heavy industrial with large             ize on the proximity to, and visibility from, the I-710
parcels containing large footprint buildings. Addi-                  freeway and the large parcel sizes. Thus, future uses
tionally, numerous properties have outdoor storage                   in this District may include a wide range of non-res-
spaces for trucks, machinery and other equipment.                    idential uses, including large-scale Single-Use Retail,
While this area contributes to the job diversity and tax             Manufacturing/Distribution, Light Industrial/Flex, and
base of South Gate, the parcels are generally under-                 Office/R&D uses. In addition, the area at the conflu-
utilized and some are in need of repair and upkeep.                  ence of the Los Angeles and Rio Hondo Rivers should
This area will also be negatively impacted by the                    contain a use or structure that enhances the image of
proposed widening of I-710. Access to this District is               South Gate, including a destination retail or entertain-
from Garfield but a proposed extension of Southern                   ment use. This area should contain a signature use
Avenue across I-710 and the Los Angeles River could                  or building with a unique architectural character that
provide direct access from the west side of the City.                draws attention to the City.
Allowable Place Types
                                 Highly Desired             Desired                           Discouraged
                                 Single-Use Retail          Civic/Institutional               n/a
                                 Office/R&D
 Sub-area 1                      Light Industrial/Flex
                                 Manufacturing/Distribution
                                 Open Space
                                 Single-Use Retail          n/a                               n/a
                                 Office/R&D
                                 Light Industrial/Flex
 Sub-area 2
                                 Manufacturing/Distribution
                                 Civic/Institutional
                                 Open Space
 Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
                                                                                      Community Design Element 113
         Policies
         P.1	 New uses should be allowed that take advantage of the
              frontage on and visibility from I-710.
         P.2	 Single-use Retail is allowed and encouraged in this District,
              especially when it enhances the visibility and identity of
              South Gate.
         P.3	 The confluence of the Los Angeles River and the Rio Hondo
              should be developed with an iconic building with dramatic
              architecture and/or a major destination that includes a highly
              visible use, such as a park, hotel, or sports/entertainment
              complex that will increase the visibility of South Gate to
              travelers on I-710 and will serve as a gateway to the City.
         P.4	 As part of improvements to the Los Angeles River and Rio
              Hondo Channel, the City should improve public access to the
              riverfront and ensure that new developments contribute to
              the enhanced riverfront experience.
                                                                                             Firestone
                                                                                     d
                                                                                   Garfiel
                                                                               1
Tweedy
                                                                I-710
                         Atlantic
                                                           2
         South Gate Triangle District Boundaries.              Imperial
114 South Gate General Plan 2035
Hollydale Industrial District
Existing Conditions
The Hollydale Industrial District is a two-block-wide
band of mostly manufacturing and distribution par-
cels located along Dakota Avenue between Century
Boulevard and Gardendale Street. The parcels are
bounded by single family homes on the east and west
sides. A rail line, which is used by the businesses,
runs parallel to Dakota Avenue.
                                                                                                          Ga
                                                                                                               rde
Vision                                                                                                                nda
                                                                                                                            le
This area should remain an employment center but
over time uses should transform from Manufacturing/
                                                                Garfield
Distribution uses to Light Industrial/Flex uses that are
more visually attractive and will have less of an impact
of adjacent neighborhoods.
Policies
                                                                               Main                                          Ma
P.1	 Small scale “boutique” Light Industrial/Flex uses should be                                                                 in
     pursued for this District.
                                                                                                      Dakota
P.2	 Existing Manufacturing/Distribution uses will be allowed to re-
     main but expansions or major alternations will not be permitted.
                                                                                                               Industrial
P.3	 Existing property owners will mitigate negative impacts on
                                                                                             Center
     residential areas from truck traffic and business operations
     and will improve the visual appearance of their property.
P.4	 Long-term truck parking will not be allowed on Center Street
                                                                                 Cen
                                                                                      tur
     or Industrial Avenue.                                                               y
                                                                               I-105
Allowable Place Types
Highly Desired           Desired                 Discouraged
Light Industrial/        n/a                     Manufacturing/
Flex                                             Distribution
Open Space
Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
                                                                           Hollydale Industrial District Boundaries.
                                                                                       Community Design Element 115

Otis   Tweedy Educational District
       Existing Conditions                                             Policies
                                                                       P.1	 The residential neighborhoods to the north and south of the
       This District is located at the terminus of Tweedy Bou-              District should be buffered from new non-residential uses in
       levard east of Atlantic Avenue. The area is a former in-             the Tweedy Educational District.
       dustrial area that currently has a large amount of vacant       P.2	 New residential uses, such as townhomes and small scale
       land and abandoned buildings. Single family residential              apartments, may be located on the north and/or south side of
                                                                            the Tweedy Educational District to serve as a buffer between
       areas border this District to the north and south. The
                      Firestone
       Los Angeles River is the eastern boundary of the District.
                                                                            the educational uses and the residential neighborhoods.
                                                                       P.3	 Retail development or mixed use development with ground
       The Los Angeles Unified School District owns the major-
                                                                            floor retail should be located along Atlantic Avenue.
       ity of parcels in this area and is currently in the process
                                                                       P.4	 The redevelopment of the District should provide direct and
       of developing a school complex that may include a
                                                                            safe public access to the Los Angeles River through the site.
       middle school, a high school and other support uses.
                                                                       P.5	 The redevelopment of the District should improve the ap-
                                                                            pearance of the public edge of the river and could include
       Vision                                                               landscaping and other beautification activities.
                                                                       P.6	 A new public park, joint use athletic facilities, and open space
       The vision for the Tweedy Educational District is to create          should be included in the redevelopment of the District. This
        Alexander
       a new, 21st century educational complex that is sup-                 facility (or facilities) should be open to the public on week-
       ported by complimentary uses that contribute to the bet-             ends and during non-school hours.
       terment of South Gate. The District should include new          P.7	 The City should work closely with the Los Angeles Unified
       public educational facilities and other uses such as parks,          School District on plans for the property.
       cultural facilities, and retail uses. Given its location, the   P.8	 The District should be designed to be highly publicly acces-
       design of the District should interact with the Los Angeles          sible and not isolated from the community.
       River and facilitate the revitalization of, and increased
       public access to, the riverfront.
       Allowable Place Types
                                                                                                            Adella
       Highly Desired           Desired                 Discouraged
       Boulevard                Neighborhood            n/a   Tweedy
                                                                                                                                               I-710
       Medium-High              Medium-High
       Civic/Institutional
                                                                                         Atlantic
       Open Space
       Other Place Types are not allowed in this area                                                      Tweedy
                                                                                           Wright
                                                                       Tweedy Industrial District Boundaries.
116 South Gate General Plan 2035
         Rayo Industrial District
         Existing Conditions                                                       Vision
         The Rayo Industrial District is located south of the Gate-                In the future, the Rayo Industrial District should re-
         way District and between Atlantic Avenue and the Los                      main a job-producing area for the City of South Gate.
         Angeles River. The area currently contains a variety of                   Mixed use residential development will be allowed
         industrial, warehouse and distribution uses. The parcels                  along Atlantic Avenue. The focus of the employment
         are relatively large and there is frontage on Atlantic                    uses should shift from Manufacturing/Distribution uses
         Avenue and the Los Angeles River. Access to the Los                       to uses with a higher-job density, such as Office/R&D
         Angeles River multi-use trail is also through this District.              and small-scale fabrication uses. The parcels fronting
         The District is divided into 2 sub-areas. Sub-area 1 is                   Atlantic Avenue in sub-area 2 are envisioned to have
         located generally east of Rayo Avenue and west of                         either a vertical mix of uses with ground floor retail or
         the Los Angeles River. Sub-area 2 is the area generally                   Single-Use Retail establishments. A revitalized Los An-
         between Rayo Avenue and Atlantic Boulevard.                               geles River corridor along the eastern edge of sub-area
                                                                                   1 will contribute to the vibrancy and beauty of the Rayo
                                                                                   Industrial District, and buildings constructed on the
                                                          Fireston
                                                                   e               parcels fronting the Los Angeles River should contribute
                                                                                   to the enhancement of both the river and the multi-use
                                               yo                                  regional trail that runs along the river.
                                 2           Ra
                                                                                   Policies
                                            1
                                                                                                   d
                                     Southern                                                    Garfiel
                                                                                   P.1	 The existing logistics, warehouse and distribution uses will
                                                                                        be allowed to continue in their current operations and make
                                                                                        minor property improvements, but major expansion should
                                                                                        not be allowed.
                                                                                   P.2	 New job-producing uses should help to diversify the City’s tax
Tweedy                                                                                  and employment base.
                                                                 I-710             P.3	 The Boulevard Medium-High and Single Use Retail Place
                      Atlantic
                                                                                        Types are allowed and encouraged along Atlantic Avenue.
                                                                                        These uses are not desired in other areas of the District.
                                                                                   P.4	 New uses adjacent to the Los Angeles River should be designed
                                                                                        and located to capitalize on the proximity and access to the river.
                                                                                   P.5	 New buildings should provide enhanced public connection to
                                                                                        the regional trail system along the Los Angeles River.
         Allowable Place Types
                                         Highly Desired                    Desired                               Discouraged
                                         Office/R&D                        Civic/Institutional                   Manufacturing/Distribution
         Sub-area 1                      Light Industrial/Flex
                                         Open Space
                                         Boulevard Medium-High             Single-Use Retail                     n/a
         Sub-area 2                      Civic / Institutional             Office/R&D
                                                                           Light Industrial/Flex
         Other Place Types are not allowed in this area         Imperial
                                                                                                           Community Design Element 117

    Southwest Industrial District
    Existing Conditions                  Southern              Vision
    This small District, which is the location of the former   The vision for this District is to maintain existing uses
    General Motors plant, is located in the southwest          and encourage new Light Industrial/Flex uses when
    corner of the City and contains approximately 1 million    redevelopment occurs. The parcels along Delores
    square feet of warehouse and logistics uses. The par-      Street should be improved with new Light Industrial/
    cel sizes are large, with most over two acres, and the     Flex uses in the next 20 years.
    block structure has superblocks with only one cul-de-
    sac serving the area. The majority of buildings in this    Policies
    area are relatively new and thus not likely to redevelop
                                                               P.1	 Light Industrial/Flex uses are strongly desired and Manufac-
    over the time horizon of the General Plan. However,             turing/Distribution uses are allowed in this District.
    there are several parcels, including the smaller parcels
                                                               P.2	 The consolidation of small parcels along Delores Street for
    on Delores Street, that are visually blighted and impact        redevelopment is encouraged.
    adjoining residential neighborhoods.
                                                               Allowable Place Types
                                                               Highly Desired           Desired                 Discouraged
                                                               Light Industrial/        Manufacturing/          n/a
                                                               Flex                     Distribution
                                                               Open Space
                                                               Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
                                                                                                           Sequoia
                                                Alameda
                                                                                          Stanford
                                                                            Delores
    Southwest Industrial District Boundaries.
                                                                                                          Century
118 South Gate General Plan 2035
             Firestone Industrial District                                     Policies
                                                                               P.1	 Existing Manufacturing/Distribution uses may continue, but
                                                                                    their expansion is discouraged.
             Existing Conditions                                               P.2	 Place Types along Otis and internal to large parcels should be
                                                                                    Light Industrial/Flex, Office/R&D or Single-Use Retail.
             The Firestone Industrial District contains a mix of manu-
             facturing and light industrial/flex spaces on the north           P.3	 New buildings along Otis Street for 200 feet on either side of
                                                                                    Firestone Boulevard should be mixed use buildings with retail
             side of Firestone Boulevard. The business uses in the
                                                                                    on the ground floor and residential or office on the upper
             District, including the Sealy Mattress facility, are very es-          floors.  This will enable the creation of a more consistent
             tablished and contribute to the City’s employment base.                street environment along Firestone Boulevard.
             The parcels are relatively large in size and thus make            P.4	 Single-Use Retail uses with a focus on destination retail and
             redevelopment more feasible. The buildings are indus-                  entertainment may be considered on the eastern side of the
             trial in character and do not contribute to a pedestrian-              District, in the area adjacent to the El Portal retail center. These
                                                                                    uses should contribute to the overall vision of the City for an
             oriented streetscape along Firestone Boulevard.                        entertainment and retail district along Firestone Boulevard.
California
                                                                               P.5	 Office/R&D and Light Industrial/Flex uses should be located in
             Vision                                                                 the northern portion of the District.
                                                                               P.6	 Auto-related businesses, such as repair and sales, are dis-
             The vision for this District is to maintain and expand
                                                                                    couraged in this District.
             the overall job base while also letting the district
                                                                               P.7	 New buildings along Firestone Boulevard should support the
             evolve to contain more Light Industrial/Flex, office,
                                                                                    pedestrian environment, with buildings having minimal set-
             and retail and entertainment uses that support the                     backs from the sidewalk and ground floor uses that support
             vision of a major, destination entertainment corri-                    pedestrian activity.
             dor along Firestone Boulevard. Uses along Firestone               Allowable Place Types
             Boulevard are envisioned to be mixed use buildings                 Highly Desired           Desired                 Discouraged
             of 3 to 6 stories with ground floor retail and office              Boulevard High           Single-Use Retail       Manufacturing/
             or residential on the upper floors. This will help to                                                               Distribution
                                                                                Office/R&D
             create an attractive streetscape that is consistent with           Light Industrial/
             the vision for the entire Firestone corridor.                      Flex
                                                                                Civic/Institutional
                                                                                Open Space
                                                  Otis                          Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
                         Ardmore                                                           Independe
                                                                                                                       nce
                                              Otis
                                                                             Firestone
             Firestone Industrial District Boundaries.
                                                                                                    Community Design Element 119
                                                                 r

    Ardine Industrial District
    Existing Conditions                                             Vision
    The Ardine Industrial District is located just north of         Transform the Ardine Industrial District over time from
    the Gateway and Firestone Industrial Districts and              manufacturing and distribution uses into a higher-
    contains a mix of heavy industrial and warehouse                density employment center with an emphasis on flex/
    uses. The area is served by active rail spurs and bor-          light industrial buildings that cater to small manufac-
    ders the industrial land in the Cities of Huntington            turing businesses.
    Park and Cudahy. While the area is actively used,
    there are issues with truck access and the impact of            Policies
    industry on nearby neighborhoods.                               P.1	 While manufacturing and distribution uses are desired, these
                                                                         uses should not expand significantly in their present location.
                                                                    P.2	 New development will create adequate physical buffers next
                                                                         to residential areas in order to mitigate the negative noise, air
    Allowable Place Types                                                pollution and other impacts.  These buffers may include land-
                                                                         scaping, setbacks, and fencing.  The buffers will be located on
     Highly Desired           Desired                 Discouraged
                                                                         property within the Ardine Industrial District, not on property
     Light Industrial/        Manufacturing/          n/a                within surrounding Neighborhoods, Districts or Corridors.
     Flex                     Distribution
     Open Space                                                     P.3	 The use of the rail spur to move goods and products is pre-
     Other Place Types are not allowed in this area                      ferred over trucks in order to reduce the volume of trucks
                                                                         on City streets.
                             Otis
                                                             Independe
                                                                       nce
                                                       Firestone
    Ardine Industrial District Boundaries.
120 South Gate General Plan 2035
                                               r
CORRIDORS
This section provides specific information on each of the Corridors
located in the City of South Gate. As with the Districts, the descrip-
tion of each Corridor includes a description of the existing conditions,                                                                                                               This section provides specific
a vision statement for the area, and specific policy guidance. A map
of each Corridor is also included. The allowable Place Types for each                                                                                                                  information on each of the
Corridor are presented in Table CD 8. The information contained here
will be considered policy statements with the force of regulation. They                                                                                                                Corridors located in the City of
are developed to provide a vision of the organization of uses within
the City in the future and a flexible structure to allow for changes in
                                                                                                                                                                                       South Gate.
economic conditions and community visions.
                                                               Santa Ana                                   California
                                                    1        Liberty             1     State
                                                                                                       1
                                                           Independe
                                                                       nce
                                                          Ardmore
                                                                                                                        2
                                                2                                                                               Otis
                                                                                               2
                                 Southern
                                                                                                                                                   Firestone
                                                                         3
                                                                                                   3
                                                         3
                                            1
                                                                                       4                                               Alexander
                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d
                                                                                                                            6                                                                                         Garfiel
                                                                             2
                                                                                           4                                                                   Tweedy
                                                                                                                5                                                                          I-710
                                                                                                                                   3                           4        Atlantic
                                                                                           5
                                                        Century
                                                                             Long Be
                                                                                 ach                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                           Imperial
Corridors
      Atlantic [2 Sub Areas]                                                                                                                                                                       1
      California [5 Sub Areas]                                                                                                                                                                                                    mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Garfield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    unt
      Century                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Par a
      Firestone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
      Garfield [3 Sub Areas]
      Imperial West
                                                                                                                                                                                                   3
      Long Beach [3 Sub Areas]
      Paramount
      State [4 Sub Areas]
      Tweedy [6 Sub Areas]
South Gate’s Corridors (Numbers indicate subareas in each Corridor.)
                                                                                                                                                                                   Community Design Element 121

    Firestone Corridor
    Existing Conditions                                                    Policies
                                                                           P.1	 Neighborhood High and Boulevard High uses are strongly
    Firestone Boulevard is the primary arterial roadway                         encouraged along the length of the Corridor.
    through the City and helps to connect South Gate                       P.2	 Single-Use Retail is allowed but should not detract from the
    with the wider region. The Firestone Corridor contains                      overall desired character of the Corridor.  
    parcels along Firestone Boulevard that are not included                P.3	 The assembly of parcels to allow for greater redevelopment
    in other Districts. The Firestone Corridor contains pre-                    opportunities should be encouraged and facilitated by the
    dominantly auto-oriented retail and commercial uses,                        City, to the greatest extent possible.
    including a large number of used car dealers, auto                     P.4	 Office/R&D uses as part of mixed use projects should be tar-
                                                                                geted to the area in close proximity to the Civic Center District.
    repair shops and automobile parts stores. The urban
    fabric of the Corridor is inconsistent, with varied set-               P.5	 New development should step down in height to the existing
                                                                                single family neighborhoods, or employ other techniques to
    backs, building heights, lot sizes and lot area coverage.                   buffer Corridor uses from adjacent residential areas.
    In addition, the Corridor has conditions of economic
                                                                           P.6	 Over time, the Firestone Boulevard right-of-way (including
    and physical blight. Many of the buildings are old and                      the sidewalks) should be widened to accommodate increased
    in need of significant renovation, there are numerous                       traffic and to improve the pedestrian environment.
    vacant buildings, the street and sidewalks are in need                 P.7	 The City should undertake a streetscape improvement program
    of repair, and the area is visually unattractive.                           that includes street trees, wider sidewalks, pedestrian facilities
                                                                                such as benches and bollards, and improved crossings.
                                                                           P.8	 Existing civic and public uses, such as the South Gate High
    Vision                                                                      School and the post office, should be preserved as significant
                                                                                community assets.
    Firestone Corridor should be transformed from a blight-
                                                                           P.9	 A new mixed use project or a supermarket should be located
    ed arterial roadway into a beautiful boulevard, with a di-                  on the large retail site at the intersection of Firestone Bou-
    verse mix of uses, including retail, office and high-density                levard with State Street.  The new design should bring the
    housing. The Snumber
                     anta Anof                                                  building to the street to enhance the Firestone Corridor.
                              a auto dealers and other related
    uses should be minimized, and the streetscape should
                                                                           Allowable Place Types
    be beautified with trees, pedestrian facilities or medians.
                                                                           Highly Desired                  Desired                      Discouraged
    The uses along
                 Libethe
                      rty corridor should capitalize on the high           Boulevard High                  Single-Use Retail            n/a
    traffic volume and new uses being developed, includ-                   Neighborhood High               Civic/Institutional
    ing the El Portal retail project, the proposed courthouse              Open Space
    complex and Indthe
                   epeexpanded
                        nde        community college facility.             Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
                          nce
               Ardmore
                                                              California
               h
         B eac                        State
                                                                                                               Otis
       g                                                                                                                                Firestone
            Lon
    Firestone Corridor Boundaries.
                                                                                                                            Alexander
122 South Gate General Plan 2035
Tweedy Mile Corridor
Existing Conditions
The Tweedy Mile Corridor encompasses the retail, ser-                            shopping center. Sub-area 3 extends from Otis to just
vice commercial and residential parcels fronting Tweedy                          west of Alexander. This area includes many one and
Boulevard from Alameda east to South Gate Park.                                  two story commercial buildings that contain retail and
The Corridor contains the area commonly known as                                 office uses. Sub-area 4 extends east to Atlantic Av-
Tweedy Mile, which is the historic downtown of South                             enue and has mostly single family buildings on large
Gate but currently does not serve in this capacity.                              lots. Some of these structures are used for offices
                                                                                 and other non-residential uses.
The Tweedy Mile Corridor is divided into six sub-
areas. Sub-area 1 runs from Alameda to Long Beach                                Overall, the Tweedy Mile Corridor has a relatively
Boulevard and includes a mix of retail, residential and                          “worn-down” feel. Buildings need repairs and fresh
public uses, including the Southeast High School and                             paint and there are blighted buildings along the north
Southeast Middle School. Sub-area 2 extends from                                 side of the street, street furniture is nearing the end
Long Beach west to Otis. The environment is very                                 of its useful life, streets and sidewalks are dirty, and
walkable with relatively wide sidewalks and pedestri-                            there is no coherent design character or theme to the
                              Santa Ana                                     California
                                                                                 street. Most parcels are relatively small, with many
an facilities such as benches, textured  crosswalks and
bulbouts. A high percentage of the parcels are built                             between 7,000 and 15,000 square feet and some
                                                       State                     as small as 3,000 square feet. Parking is generally
to the edge of the sidewalkLiband
                               erty have retail storefront
on the street, thus creating a more pedestrian-friendly                          on-street or in parking lots behind buildings and, with
                           Independ
environment. Two large auto-orientedence  shopping cen-                          a few exceptions, does not meet parking standards
                           Ardmore                                               for the number of parking spaces identified in the
ters are located along the Corridor; they are sub-area
                                                                                                        Otis
                                                                                 municipal code. While the Tweedy Mile Corridor has
5, which is the shopping center that contains Miller’s
Outpost, and sub-area 6, which is the Albertson’s                                numerous issues, the Corridor presents a tremendous
                                                                                 asset and opportunity for the community.
     Southern
                                                                                                                           Firestone
                1                       State                  California
                                                                                                 Otis          Alexander
                                                                                             6
                                         2
                                                                                                                                       Tweedy
                                                                                5
                                                                                                           3                           4        Atlantic
                         Century
                                           Long B
                                                each
Tweedy Mile Corridor Boundaries.
                                                                                                 Community Design Element 123

    Vision                                                             Policies
                                                                       [Note: Policies for the Tweedy Mile Corridor may be found
    Tweedy Mile should be restored to be the heart and
                                                                       in Goal 5 in the Goals, Objectives, and Policies section].
    soul of South Gate, and become a place where all
    of the City’s residents can shop, eat and meet their
    neighbors. The core area (which encompasses the
    majority of sub-areas 2, 5, 6) should maintain the
    same “main street” character with small storefront
    retail but add new uses such as restaurants, boutique
    stores, and specialty food stores such as bakeries,
    coffee shops and produce stores. Sub-areas 5 and 6
    should be redeveloped with mixed use buildings that
    contribute to the overall fabric of the Corridor and
    help to breathe new life into the area. To support
    the revitalization of the area, residential uses should
    be allowed throughout the Corridor with a particular
    emphasis on adding mixed use developments, apart-
    ments or townhomes in sub-areas 1, 3 and 4. Add-
    ing these residential uses at the edges of the Corridor
    will help bring life and vitality to the area.
    Allowable Place Types
                                     Highly Desired           Desired                             Discouraged
                                     Neighborhood Medium      Civic/Institutional                 Single-Use Retail
     Sub-area 1                      Neighborhood Center
                                     Open Space
                                     Main Street              n/a                                 Single-Use Retail
     Sub-area 2
                                     Open Space
                                     Neighborhood Medium-High n/a                                 Single-Use Retail
                                     Boulevard Medium-High
     Sub-area 3
                                     Main Street
                                     Open Space
                                     Neighborhood Medium      Civic/Institutional                 n/a
     Sub-area 4
                                     Open Space
                                     Boulevard Medium-High    Single-Use Retail                   n/a
     Sub-area 5                      Main Street
                                     Open Space
                                     Boulevard Medium-High    Single-Use Retail                   n/a
     Sub-area 6                      Main Street
                                     Open Space
     Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
124 South Gate General Plan 2035

Long Beach Corridor
Existing Conditions                                                Vision
Long Beach Boulevard runs in a north-south direction               The vision for the Long Beach Corridor is to transform
and connects South Gate with Huntington Park and                   the Corridor into an attractive urban environment
Walnut Park to the north and Lynwood to the south.                 with a diverse mix of uses in buildings that are 3 to
The Corridor, which includes all the parcels fronting              6 stories in height. Retail uses that support the daily
Long Beach Boulevard through the City, contains                    needs of residents will be located on the ground floor,
a mix of mostly commercial uses including drive-                   with residential or office uses on the upper floors. The
through restaurants, motels, nightclubs, used car lots             street should be attractive and inviting to pedestrians.
and stand-alone commercial buildings with minimal
                                                                   The Long Beach Corridor is divided into three sub-
setbacks. Many buildings are older and in need of
                                                                   areas. The vision for sub-area 1 is primarily for resi-
repair or replacement. The streetscape is generally
                                                                   dential mixed use buildings (residential over retail) or
unattractive due to the quality of the buildings, a lack
                                                                   multi-family buildings. Sub-area 2 should capitalize
of street trees, inconsistent signage, numerous lower-
                                                                   on its proximity to the proposed Los Angeles Com-
end retail business, overhead wires and sidewalks
                                                                   munity College District expansion and contain uses
in need of repair. The Long Beach Corridor is also a
                                                                   that help to create a vibrant urban college campus.
heavily used transportation corridor, thus contributing
                                                                   Uses could include offices that support the college’s
to an unwelcoming pedestrian environment.
                                                                   activities and housing for students and employees.
                                                                   Stores, restaurants and café’s are also desired for
                                                                   ground-floor retail spaces in mixed use buildings.
                                                                   The vision for sub-area 3 is to create a highly urban
                                                                   Corridor with vertical mixed use development or
                                                                   residential-only buildings.
Allowable Place Types
                                 Highly Desired           Desired                           Discouraged
                                 Neighborhood Medium-High Single-Use Retail                 n/a
 Sub-area 1                      Boulevard Medium-High    Civic/Institutional
                                 Open Space
                                 Boulevard Medium-High    Neighborhood Medium-High          Single-Use Retail
 Sub-area 2
                                 Open Space               Civic/Institutional
                                 Neighborhood Medium-High Civic/Institutional               Single-Use Retail
 Sub-area 3                      Boulevard Medium-High
                                 Open Space
 Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
                                                                                   Community Design Element 125

    Policies
    P.1	 The City should undertake a significant streetscape improve-
         ment program that includes street trees, wider sidewalks, pe-
         destrian facilities such as benches and bollards, and improved
         street crossings.
    P.2	 The City should work with the City of Lynwood to the south                                            Santa Ana
         and Los Angeles County (for the Walnut Park area) to the
         south on a corridor plan to ensure consistency of uses and
         streetscape character.
    P.3	 Sub-area 2 should be included in any planning efforts that
         occurs for the South Gate College District.
                                                                                               1             Liberty                 St
    P.4	 The intersections of Long Beach Boulevard with Tweedy Bou-
         levard and Firestone Boulevard should include higher-density
         uses than the rest of the Corridor. Redevelopment efforts for
         the Corridor should focus on these areas first as they may                                      Independ
         catalyze change in other areas along the Corridor.                                                            ence
    P.5	 In sub-area 3, Neighborhood Medium-High and Boulevard                                          Ardmore
         Medium-High uses are strongly encouraged. Single-Use Retail
         uses are discouraged.                                                       2
                                                                                                               Firestone
                                                                      Southern
                                                                                                       3
                                                                                   Tweedy
                                                                           Long Beach Corridor Boundaries.
126 South Gate General Plan 2035                                                                    Century
                                                                                                                              Long
Atlantic Corridor
              Alexander
                                                                                yo
                                                                                Ra
Existing Conditions
Atlantic Avenue runs in a north-south direction
                                                                                1
through the City and connects South Gate with Cu-
dahy to the north and Lynwood to the south. While
Atlantic Boulevard traverses the City form north to
south, the policies for the Atlantic Corridor only ap-
                                                   Twe
ply to the portion to the south of Southern Avenue. edy
                                                                                           I-710
                                                          Tweedy
The area north of Southern Avenue is included in
                                                                     Atlantic
the Gateway District and the Rayo Industrial District.
The Corridor is divided into 2 sub-areas. The portion
between Southern Avenue and Tweedy Boulevard is a
combination of commercial uses on the west side of
the street and industrial uses on the east side of the
street. The portion of the Corridor south of Tweedy
Boulevard until the City limit at Imperial Highway has
mostly commercial uses with a school, single- and
multi-family residential and a few industrial parcels.
Overall, there is visual blight and shallow parcel
                                                                          2
depths on the southern portion, an incoherent urban
fabric, an unwelcoming pedestrian environment and
buildings that are in disrepair.
                                                          Atlantic Corridor Boundaries.
                                                                                           Imperial
                                                                                                      Garfield
                                                                         Community Design Element 127
    Vision                                                             Policies
                                                                       P.1	 The City should work with the City of Lynwood to create a
    The Atlantic Corridor should be transformed into a                      Specific Plan for Atlantic Avenue in both cities.
    mixed use corridor with multi-family housing and retail
                                                                       P.2	 Single Use Retail is specifically allowed for the parcels in sub-
    uses that support the surrounding neighborhoods. Sub-                   area 2 near to Imperial Boulevard.
    area 1 should have a strong focus on retail and office
                                                                       P.3	 Ground-floor retail uses will be encouraged in mixed use
    development. However, multi-family residential uses                     buildings in sub-area 1.
    are allowed on the upper floors of mixed use buildings,
                                                                       P.4	 Along with mixed use buildings, the area south of Michigan
    particularly near the Tweedy Educational District. Single-              Avenue in sub-area 2 should favor housing types such as
    use retail uses are allowed in this sub-area. Sub-area 2                townhomes, rowhouses, and small scale apartment buildings.
    should be predominantly residential in nature with a mix
    of townhomes and multi-family housing. Mixed use
    buildings are also encouraged in this area.
    Allowable Place Types
                                     Highly Desired           Desired                                Discouraged
                                     Boulevard High           Neighborhood High                      n/a
     Sub-area 1                      Open Space               Single-Use Retail
                                                              Civic Institutional
                                     Neighborhood Medium-High Civic/Institutional                    n/a
                                     Boulevard Medium-High
     Sub-area 2
                                     Single-Use Retail
                                     Open Space
     Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
128 South Gate General Plan 2035
                                         Santa Ana                                      California
California CorridorLib                                             State
                                          erty                                    1
Existing Conditions
California Avenue traverses the City inIndaenorth-south
                                            pendence
                                       A
direction and contains a range of retail,rdm
                                           residential
                                             ore                                                     2
and public uses. The California Corridor includes                    Firestone                           Otis
the entirety of the Avenue except the area covered
by the Civic Center District. The northern portion of
                                                                   Southern
the Corridor (sub-areas 1 and 2) contains a higher
percentage
        Southofern
                 retail and commercial uses, including
a large supermarket center at the intersection with                                                                         Fir
Santa Ana. The central portion of the California Cor-
ridor (sub-area 3), which is located between Firestone
Boulevard and Tweedy Boulevard, contains both
                                                                           3
                                                                                      California
stand-alone retail and residential uses. The southern
portion of the California Corridor (sub-areas 4 and 5)
                                                                                                                Alexander
is more residential in character and also has a more
pleasant street environment due to the presence
of mature street trees. The Civic Center District is
located between sub-areas 2 and 3.
                                                                                            Tweedy
Many of the uses are located on small, shallow
parcels of less than ¼ of an acre in size and just over
100-feet deep. There are a variety of different front-                 4
age types that vary from parcel to parcel, ranging
from front yards in single family areas to parking lots
and storefronts for retail uses. Thus, there is not a
consistent character to the Corridor. Additionally,                  5
many of the non-residential uses are in disrepair and
                                   CenCity.
                                       tury
                                                          Long B
detract from the visual quality of the
                                                               California Corridor Boundaries.
                                                            each
                                                                                 Community Design Element 129

    Vision                                                        Policies
                                                                  P.1	 Townhomes, rowhouses, and multi-family apartments are
    In the future, the California Corridor will be trans-              strongly encouraged along the entirety of the California Cor-
    formed into a predominantly residential corridor                   ridor.
    with retail and commercial uses focused at the major          P.2	 New residential buildings should shape an attractive
    intersections. At key intervals along the Corridor, the            pedestrian environment that encourages interaction among
                                                                       residents.
    Neighborhood Center Place Type should be applied,
    in order to provide many of the daily shopping needs          P.3	 Parking lots and garages should be located behind or to the
                                                                       side of buildings and should not detract from the pedestrian
    for residents along the Corridor and in surround-
                                                                       experience.
    ing residential areas. Some existing strip-commercial
                                                                  P.4	 Neighborhood Centers should be encouraged at the intersec-
    developments may remain but are not desired. The
                                                                       tion of California Avenue with the following roadways: Santa
    Corridor will be tied together visually with an attrac-            Ana, Southern Avenue, Tenaya Avenue and Michigan Avenue.
    tive streetscape that balances the needs of pedestri-
                                                                  P.5	 Single use retail uses are allowed in sub-areas 1 and 2 but
    ans and motor vehicles.                                            not encouraged.
                                                                  P.6	 Development of the California Corridor should be coordi-
                                                                       nated with the redevelopment of the Civic Center District to
                                                                       ensure a compatible design and character for the Corridor.
     Allowable Place Types
                                      Highly Desired        Desired                              Discouraged
                                      Neighborhood Medium   n/a                                  Single-Use Retail
      Sub-area 1                      Neighborhood Center
                                      Open Space
                                      Neighborhood Medium   Neighborhood Center                  Single-Use Retail
      Sub-area 2
                                      Open Space
                                      Neighborhood Medium   n/a                                  n/a
      Sub-area 3                      Neighborhood Center
                                      Open Space
                                      Neighborhood Medium   n/a                                  Civic/Institutional
      Sub-area 4                      Neighborhood Center
                                      Open Space
                                      Neighborhood Medium   n/a                                  Civic/Institutional
      Sub-area 5                      Neighborhood Center
                                      Open Space
      Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
130 South Gate General Plan 2035
State Corridor
Existing Conditions                                                Vision
The State Corridor traverses the City in a north-south             The vision for the Corridor is to transform it into a
direction and contains a range of retail, residential              residential corridor with pockets of retail uses. The
and public uses. The Corridor contains a small,                    existing retail uses in sub-area 1 should be revital-
two-block retail area, which is located between                    ized and upgraded with new uses in existing shops,
Independence and Santa Ana Streets (in sub-area                    an attractive and walkable pedestrian environment,
1). This area has a main street character with small,              and the redevelopment of parcels that have surface
single-story retail spaces that have a minimal setback             parking lots into buildings that contribute to the main
from the sidewalk, thus creating a relatively continu-             street character. The remainder of the Corridor should
ous street wall of storefronts. There are some parcels             be transformed into an attractive residential area with
that have surface parking in front of the building,                townhomes, rowhouses and small apartments lining
which detracts from the urban fabric of the area.                  the street. A new Neighborhood Center that contains
                                                                   neighborhood-serving retail uses should be created in
Sub-areas 2, 3 and 4 contain a diverse mix of retail
                                                                   sub-area 4.
and residential uses. The Corridor has a run-down
and somewhat blighted character with numerous
underutilized properties and some properties that
are in disrepair.
Allowable Place Types
                                 Highly Desired           Desired                            Discouraged
                                 Neighborhood Medium-High n/a                                n/a
 Sub-area 1                      Main Street
                                 Open Space
                                 Neighborhood Medium      Civic/Institutional                Single-Use Retail
 Sub-area 2
                                 Open Space
                                 Neighborhood Medium      Civic/Institutional                Single-Use Retail
 Sub-area 3
                                 Open Space
                                 Neighborhood Medium      Civic/Institutional                Single-Use Retail
 Sub-area 4                      Neighborhood Center
                                 Open Space
 Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
                                                                                    Community Design Element 131
    Policies
    P.1	 Townhomes, rowhouses, and multi-family apartments are             Santa Ana                            California
         strongly encouraged in sub-area 1 of the State Corridor.
    P.2	 New residential buildings should shape an attractive pedestrian
         environment that encourages interaction among residents.
                                                                      Liberty               1       State
    P.3	 Parking lots and garages should be located behind or to the
         side of buildings and should not detract from the pedestrian
         experience.
                                                                      Independ
                                                                                 ence
    P.4	 The existing main street area in sub-area 1 should be
         improved and expanded with new retail uses such as
                                                                    Ardmore
         restaurants, cafes and durable goods stores and the
         streetscape should be improved with new paving, cross-
         walks, street trees and pedestrian facilities, such as benches
         and pedestrian-scaled lighting.
                                                                                                            2
    P.5	 A new Neighborhood Center should be encouraged at the
         intersection of StateSStreet
                               outheand   Southern Avenue near Cesar
         Chavez Park and Community    rnCenter.
    P.6	 Single use retail uses are allowed but discouraged in sub-
         areas 2, 3 and 4.
                                                                                     3
                                                                                                    4
                                                                                State Corridor Boundaries.
                                                                Century
                                                                                           Long B
                                                                                             each
132 South Gate General Plan 2035
Garfield Corridor
Existing Conditions                                             Vision
The Garfield Corridor extends from Gardendale                   The Garfield Corridor should evolve into a beautiful
Avenue south to the edge of the City limits near the            corridor that is centered on a revitalized main street
I-105 freeway and includes an area one parcel deep              that is supported by a variety of new residential uses
on either side of the roadway. The area is divided              to the north and south. Sub-area 2, the heart of the
into three distinct sub-areas. Sub-area 1 is pre-               Corridor, should be improved and expanded so that it
dominantly single family residential with some non-             will continue to be a meeting and shopping place for
residential uses located in single family structures.           residents of Hollydale and Downey. The area should
Sub-area 2 is a small, walkable retail area that extends        be beautified through streetscape improvements and
along Garfield Avenue from Roosevelt Avenue to                  improvements to the existing buildings. New higher-
Century Boulevard. The uses include a range of retail           end retail uses, such as restaurants and cafes should
establishments such as restaurants, furniture stores            be developed and new mixed use buildings should be
and banks. The character of the area is set by build-           constructed to complete and enhance the pedestrian-
ings with small shopfronts, which form an attractive,           oriented character of the street. This plan allows the
pedestrian-oriented retail district. The area is gener-         potential for the main street retail area to expand to
ally attractive but could be improved with new uses             the south, and thus Main Street is an allowable Place
and physical improvements to beautify the buildings             Type in sub-area 3. The addition of Neighborhood
and the streetscape. Sub-area 3 extends from Century            Medium Place Types in sub-areas 1 and 3 will increase
Boulevard south to the City limits. This area contains          the range of housing options, such as townhomes
a mix of residential, retail and industrial uses and has        and small apartments in the area, and support the
an inconsistent urban fabric.                                   creation of a more vibrant retail area.
Allowable Place Types
                                 Highly Desired          Desired                        Discouraged
                                 Neighborhood Medium     n/a                            n/a
 Sub-area 1
                                 Open Space
                                 Main Street             n/a                            Single-Use Retail
 Sub-area 2
                                 Open Space
                                 Neighborhood Medium     n/a                            n/a
                                 Single-Use Retail
 Sub-area 3
                                 Main Street
                                 Open Space
 Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
                                                                                Community Design Element 133
                                           I-710
            Policies
            P.1	 The City will complete the mixed use project at the intersec-
 Atlantic        tion of Garfield and Harding Avenue.
            P.2	 The City should work with business owners to pursue the
                 creation of a business assessment district to assist with
                 streetscape beautification projects.
            P.3	 Single-Use Retail will be allowed near the intersection of
                 Garfield and I-105.
            P.4	 New residential development should be designed to form an
                 attractive and walkable environment that respects the single
                 family character of the Hollydale area and buffers the single
                 family neighborhoods from traffic on Garfield Avenue.
            P.5	 With the exception of the Hollydale Plaza development, the
                 height of buildings in sub-area 2 should not exceed three
                 stories in order to respect the existing character of the area.
            P.6	 Residential uses may be added on upper floors above shop-
                 front retail in sub-area 2.Impe
                                                 rial
                                                   1
                                                                                       unt
                                                        Garfield
                                                                                   Par
                                                                                       am
                                                                                          o
                                                                        Main
                                                                      2
                                                   3
                                                                       I-105
            Garfield Corridor Boundaries.
134 South Gate General Plan 2035
I-
       Paramount Corridor
                                                                      Policies
       Existing Conditions                                            P.1	 Redevelopment along the Corridor should take advantage
       Paramount Boulevard is a major north-south arterial                 of the Corridor’s proximity to the potential expansion of the
                                                                           County Municipal Complex in Downey.
       roadway that crosses through a small portion of South
       Gate. Approximately 8 blocks are within South Gate             P.2	 The City should coordinate with the Cities of Downey and
                                                                           Paramount to coordinate uses and streetscape improvements
       and seven parcels are located on the south side of the
                                                                           along Paramount Boulevard.
       I-105 freeway. The Corridor contains a range of com-
                                                                      P.3	 Uses should capitalize on the area’s proximity to I-105
       mercial and retail uses in one- and two-story buildings
                                                                           by providing services for the needs of commuters passing
Imperiaand
         l
           includes the Los Angeles Harley Davidson dealer,                through the area.
       which  draws shoppers from across the region.
                                                                      P.4	 The City should support the continued operation and expan-
                                                                           sion of the Los Angeles Harley Davidson dealer.
       Vision
       The vision is to transform the Corridor over the life          Allowable Place Types
       of the plan from an auto-oriented area into an urban            Highly Desired           Desired                 Discouraged
       boulevard with a high-density mix of residential and            Boulevard                Single-Use Retail       n/a
                                                                       Medium-High
       non-residential office and retail uses. The area should                                  Civic/Institutional
                                                                       Main Street
       be very walkable and create a destination for employ-
                                                                       Open Space
       ees of the County Municipal Complex in Downey and               Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
       the nearby residential neighborhoods.
                                                                 unt
         Garfield
                                                                 mo
                                                            Par a
                                               Ma
                                                  in
                                                                      I-105
       Paramount Corridor Boundaries.
                                                                                           Community Design Element 135

                Tweedy
    Imperial West Corridor
                                                                            Atlantic
    Existing Conditions                                                   Vision
    The Imperial West Corridor is a small collection of                   The vision for this area is to allow Single-Use Retail
    parcels located on the north side of Imperial Boule-                  Place Types along Imperial Boulevard to capitalize on
    vard, just west of the I-710 interchange. These parcels               the area’s proximity to I-710. Parcels not on Imperial
    are highway commercial uses fronting Imperial with                    Boulevard should be Neighborhood Medium to allow
    single- and multi-family parcels located behind the                   for a diversity of housing types in the City.
    commercial parcels. These parcels are relatively iso-
    lated from the rest of South Gate and relate more to                  Policies
    uses and activities in Lynwood.
                                                                          P.1	 The City should coordinate development activity in this Cor-
                                                                               ridor with the City of Lynwood.
    Allowable Place Types                                                 P.2	 The City should allow for a diversity of auto-oriented retail
     Highly Desired           Desired                 Discouraged              and highway commercial uses for this Corridor, including gas
     Neighborhood             n/a                     n/a                      stations, convenience stores and drive-through restaurants.
     Medium
     Single-Use Retail
     Open Space
     Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
                                                       tic
                                                      Atlan
                                                                    Imperial
    Imperial West Corridor Boundaries.
136 South Gate General Plan 2035

                                          Independ
                                                         ence
      Century CorridorArdmore                                       Policies
                                                                    P.1	 Townhouses, rowhouses and multi-family housing are
                                                                         strongly encouraged along this Corridor.
      Existing Conditions                                           P.2	 The existing commercial uses can and should be rehabilitated
                                                                         to provide local shopping for area residents.
      The Century Corridor is located on the north side of
      Century Boulevard (called Martin Luther King Boulevard        P.3	 The City should work with the City of Lynwood to develop a
                                                                         coordinated vision for the Century Corridor.  Issues to address
      in Lynwood) and is bordered by Long Beach Boulevard
                                                                         include compatible uses, street width, and improving the
      to the east and Stanford Avenue to the west. Century               quality of the streetscape.
Southern
      Boulevard is the boundary between the City of South
      Gate and the City of Lynwood, and parcels on the
      south side of the Corridor are located in the City of
      Lynwood. The parcels in this Corridor are mostly single-
      story commercial uses with some residential uses.
      Vision
      The vision for this area is to allow the existing non-resi-
                                                                    Allowable Place Types
      dential uses to continue but, in the long term, to trans-
                                                                    Highly Desired              Desired              Discouraged
      form the area to accommodate a range of residential
                                                                    Neighborhood                n/a                  Single-Use Retail
      densities allowed in the Neighborhood Medium-High             Medium-High
      Place Types. Appropriate building types include town-         Neighborhood
      house, rowhouses and low-scale multi-family residen-          Center
      tial buildings. The streetscape should also be improved       Open Space
                                                                    Other Place Types are not allowed in this area
      to enhance the visual appearance of the area.
                                     Century
                                                                           each
                                                                     Long B
      Century Corridor Boundaries.
                                                                                        Community Design Element 137
    IMPLEMENTATION
    ACTIONS
    The following actions implement the Community Design Element of
    the General Plan. For each, a brief description is provided.
    Action CD 1:	
    Revise the Zoning Code.
    Following the adoption of the General Plan, revise the Zoning Code
    to reflect the vision, goals, objective, and policies and development
    intensities established within this and other chapters of the General
    Plan. Specific activities that should be examined during the revision to
    the Zoning Code are as follows:
    •	 Amend or revise the Zoning Code to be consistent with the General Plan.
    •	 Consider the development of a form-based code for all or part of the City, especially
       areas that are expected to see significant change over the life of the General Plan.
    •	 Develop incentives to ensure that the “Highly Desired” Place Types occur in each
       area and/or a disincentive to limit the “Discouraged” Place Types.  This includes
       identifying specific parcels where each Place Type is allowed.
    •	 Allow existing uses to remain even though they are inconsistent with the City’s long-
       term vision for a particular Neighborhood, District or Corridor.
    •	 Address development review regulations for different types of projects.
    Action CD 2:	
    Create citywide design guidelines and/or streetscape plans.
    Develop citywide design guidelines and/or streetscape plans for all
    or significant parts of the City. The product may be a citywide docu-
    ment or specific design guidelines and streetscape plans that apply to
    residential areas or individual Districts or Corridors. Specific actions
    include but are not limited to:
    •	 Creating neighborhood design guidelines to ensure that new, infill development or the re-
       habilitation of existing homes is consistent with the overall character of the neighborhood.
    •	 Developing a color control ordinance to ensure a consistent look and feel for residen-
       tial neighborhoods.
    •	 Creating detailed streetscape plans for the Corridors in the City.  These plans should
       address features such as street trees, lighting, benches, crosswalks, and the location
       and design of transit facilities.
    •	 Developing a citywide directional sign program with coordinated graphic design
       elements and placing such signs along major roadways.  Directional signs should be
138 South Gate General Plan 2035

   used to both orient travelers and to provide a sense of continu- sary. Include a formal permit expediting program that
   ity within the City.                                             includes both planning and building.
•	 Initiating Public Street Advertising or Adopt-a-Street programs.
•	 Creating design guidelines for Tweedy Mile that will ensure a    Action CD 6:	
   consistent and high design quality and create a visual identity  Prepare specific plans.
   for the area.
                                                                    Prepare Specific Plans to implement the vision of this
•	 Identifying streetscape improvements that address pedestrian     General Plan. State law authorizes cities to adopt
   facilities, street trees and landscaping, right-of-way improve-
   ments, crosswalks, traffic calming features, public art, and     Specific Plans as a means of implementing their
   public plazas and meeting spaces.                                General Plan in designated areas. Specific Plans are
                                                                    intended to provide more detail on the types of uses
Action CD 3:	                                                       permitted, development standards, and circulation
Create a density bonus program; explore                             and infrastructure improvements. A private or public
                                                                    party can initiate Specific Plans. Costs of city-initiated
a TDR program.
                                                                    Specific Plans are, most often, reimbursed by pro-rata
Develop and adopt an ordinance detailing procedures
                                                                    allocation of fees to developers, business owners or
for implementing the density bonus program identi-
                                                                    property owners applying for development permits in
fied in Goal CD 2. As part of this process, explore the
                                                                    the Specific Plan area. Costs for developer-initiated
potential of a transfer of development rights (TDR)
                                                                    plans are usually borne by the developer.
program where sponsors of projects in Districts and
along Corridors may increase their project density by               As a result of the General Plan update process,
purchasing the development rights from sites in other               numerous Specific Plans should be developed for
locations in the City. This action may occur as part of             the identified Districts and Corridors within the City.
the update to the Zoning Code.                                      More specifically, Specific Plans should be developed
                                                                    for the following areas within the first five years after
Action CD 4:	                                                       adopting this General Plan:
Review and revise the Building Code.                                •	 Tweedy Mile
Upon adoption of this General Plan and the adop-
                                                                    •	 All or part of the Gateway District
tion of the revised Zoning Code, review and revise
                                                                    •	 Civic Center District
the Building Code to reflect changes in the Uniform
Building Code and State legislation, and changes                    •	 South Gate College District
required to implement this General Plan and the as-
                                                                    These areas are considered priority areas because
sociated Zoning Code. After revision, the Building
                                                                    redevelopment will serve as a catalyst for a larger area
Code should continue to be periodically reviewed and
                                                                    of the City than just the Specific Plan area. In some
updated as necessary.
                                                                    instances, the City may not be responsible for devel-
                                                                    oping the Specific Plan.
Action CD 5:
Review and revise the planning intake process.                      Action CD 7:	
Upon adoption of this General Plan and the adoption
                                                                    Create an architectural design
of the revised Zoning Code and Building Code, review
                                                                    review process.
and revise all discretionary permit, subdivision, and
                                                                    The South Gate Planning Commission and staff
environmental review procedures, protocols and ap-
                                                                    conduct architectural design review of develop-
plications. Continue to review and update as neces-
                                                                    ment applications. The City should conduct a study,
                                                                                        Community Design Element 139

    which may be part of the Zoning Code update, to                          Action CD 10:
    determine the most effective and efficient method to                     Develop a sign ordinance.
    assure high quality architecture that reflects the City’s                Review and amend the existing sign ordinance for
    desired character. Potential options include: main-                      its compatibility with the General Plan Community
    taining the current process; hiring a “City Architect”                   Design Element and Zoning Code updates.
    to review applications; or creating an Architectural
    Design Review Board.
                                                                             Action CD 11:
                                                                             Pursue an annexation/boundary line
    Action CD 8:	
                                                                             adjustment with Downey.
    Undertake a citywide parking                                             Pursue a boundary line adjustment to include the
    management study.                                                        private park and the VFW Hall to be within the City
    Undertake a citywide parking management study to                         of South Gate. Presently these parcels, which are
    address the parking issue across the City. The park-                     located at the corner of Garfield Avenue and Garden-
    ing management study should address a variety of                         dale Avenue, are located within the City of Downey.
    topics related to parking in the City including, but not
    limited to, the following:
                                                                             Action CD 12:
    •	 Parking standards for additions to single family homes or new         Commission an historic resources survey.
       single family homes in areas designed with the Neighborhood
       Low or Neighborhood Medium Place Type Designations.                   Conduct an historic resources inventory of the City
                                                                             upon adoption of the General Plan and, based on these
    •	 Parking standards for new multi-family housing in Districts 
       and Corridors.                                                        results, consider programs to preserve significant histor-
                                                                             ic resources, including an historic resources ordinance.
    •	 Reductions in the parking standards for affordable housing
       (for-sale and rental).
    •	 A parking management district for the Tweedy Mile area.  The
                                                                             Action CD 13:
       district should explore one or more central public parking facilities Establish a fee ordinance for
       (such as structured parking), parking pricing, and shared parking.
                                                                             General Plan Updates.
    •	 Standards for shared parking or parking districts in all Districts    Take the necessary steps to establish fee ordinances
       and Corridors.
                                                                             to recover the costs of the General Plan update and
                                                                             to prepare for future periodic updates of the General
    Action CD 9:	                                                            Plan and Zoning Code.
    Review and revise the Redevelopment
    Project Area.                                                            Action CD 14:
    Based on the desired outcomes of this General Plan,                      Conduct an impact fee study
    the City, working with the Redevelopment Agency,                         for new development.
    should review the current boundaries of the Redevel-                     Prepare a study that explores the feasibility of an
    opment Project Areas and determine if the boundar-                       impact fee on new development to cover the costs
    ies should be modified.                                                  to provide services and infrastructure associated with
                                                                             new development.
140 South Gate General Plan 2035

Action CD 15:                                                       Action CD 17:
Implement the General Plan monitoring                               Create a Riverfront Enhancement Plan.
and update.                                                         Create a riverfront enhancement plan for the parts
Periodically review, revise and update the General                  of the Los Angeles and Rio Hondo Rivers that run
Plan and the Zoning Code. Specifically, the City will               through South Gate. The plan should address a
complete the following activities:                                  variety of public improvements including enhancing
                                                                    access from all areas of the City. The plan should
•	 Prepare annual reports appraising the Planning Commission
   and the City Council of the status of the General Plan.          also address the design of buildings to support the
                                                                    revitalization of the riverfront. As part of the project,
•	 Review the General Plan and the Zoning Code regularly to
   ensure internal consistency, consistency with federal, state and conduct a study on the land at the confluence of the
   local regulations and policies and to ensure that the documents  Los Angeles River and Rio Hondo Channel to deter-
   meet the vision of the City.
                                                                    mine an appropriate use for the area that results in a
•	 Conduct a detailed review of the Neighborhood, District and      regional destination or a significant visual landmark.
   Corridor maps and the Place Types every five years to ensure
   that the land uses, density and character reflect the commu-
   nity’s vision for these areas.                                   Action CD 18:
                                                                    Create a branding and signage program.
Action CD 16:                                                       In order to improve the identity and visual appearance
Hold bi-annual public workshops on                                  of the City, a citywide branding program should be
General Plan implementation.                                        completed. The branding program should develop a
Approximately every other year, the City should spon-               new “look” for South Gate including a logo, docu-
sor a public workshop to update the community on                    ment template and other similar activities. Once the
the status of the General Plan and other planning and               “brand” is established, the City should create a city-
physical development projects in the City.                          wide signage program to update the street signs and
                                                                    other way-finding in the City with the new identity.
                                                                                    Community Design Element 141

4
  Mobility Element
    INTRODUCTION
    The Mobility Element sets forth the plan for mobility and circulation
    within the City. It is based on the overall vision and guiding principles
    identified in the General Plan. The Mobility Element supports the
    vision of the City to put people first by calming traffic, improving con-
    nections, and encouraging walking, biking, and use of public transit.
                                                                              The transportation system
    The City’s transportation system therefore needs to provide for a bal-
    anced integration of all transportation modes. Traffic should flow        should be compatible with walk-
    smoothly, but at appropriate, low, and safe speeds. Alternative trans-
    portation modes should be available and convenient such as transit,
                                                                              able and livable neighborhoods.
    bicycling and walking. The transportation system should be compat-
    ible with walkable and livable neighborhoods. The impacts of traffic
    should be minimized in residential neighborhoods and in commercial
    and recreational areas.
144 South Gate General Plan 2035

                              VISION
                              The General Plan identifies the overall vision for the City of South Gate,
                              and eleven Guiding Principles that support the vision (See Vision State-
                              ment and Guiding Principles Section of the General Plan). The Guid-
We will enhance mobility by
                              ing Principle for mobility and circulation in the City is as follows:
creating a balanced transpor-          “Transportation Choices: We will enhance mobility
                                       by creating a balanced transportation system that cre-
tation system that creates             ates safe and attractive streets and promotes walking,
                                       bicycling and transit use.”
safe and attractive streets
                              Community input to the General Plan process identified the following
and promotes walking, bicy-   key goals to improve mobility in the City: slow traffic in neighbor-
                              hoods, build a walkable city, reduce traffic congestion, improve transit,
cling and transit use.        and expand the bicycle network.
                                                                               Mobility Element 145

    PURPOSE AND
    STATUTORY
    REQUIREMENTS
    The purpose of the Mobility Element is to provide a safe, efficient, and
                                                                                 The Mobility Element meets all
    adequate circulation system in the City. The Mobility Element is one
    of the General Plan components required by state law (State of Cali-
                                                                                 of the requirements of state law,
    fornia’s General Plan Guidelines (Government Code Section 65300-
    65307). These guidelines require that a circulation element “...consist      and provides a comprehensive
    of the general location and extent of existing and proposed major
    thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other public utili-     approach to local transportation
    ties and facilities, all correlated with the land use element of the plan.”
                                                                                 by providing specific goals, poli-
    The Mobility Element meets all of the requirements of state law, and
    provides a comprehensive approach to local transportation by providing
                                                                                 cies and plans for multi-modal
    specific goals, policies and plans for multi-modal transportation in the
    City. Public utilities and facilities are addressed separately in the Public transportation in the City.
    Facilities and Services Element of the General Plan.
146 South Gate General Plan 2035

  EXISTING
  CONDITIONS
  Regional Access
  The City of South Gate is served by significant regional transportation
  facilities, including freeways, regional arterial roadways, and regional
  buses. While these provide regional transportation access to and from
  the City, these facilities can also negatively impact the City.
  The City is served by two freeways – the I-710 Long Beach Freeway,
  and the I-105 Glen Anderson Freeway. The principal regional access
  to the City is provided by the I-710 Freeway which runs north-south
  through the City. This freeway generally has four general purpose
  lanes in each direction within the City. There are two full access inter-
  changes (all directions) on I-710 within the City at Firestone Boulevard
  and Imperial Highway.
  The I-105 Freeway runs in the east-west direction south of the City
  through the City of Lynwood. Interchanges are located at Long Beach
  Boulevard (in the City of Lynwood), Garfield Avenue (in the City of
  Paramount) and Paramount Boulevard (in the City of South Gate).
  The Los Angeles River, which runs north-south through the City and the
  parallel I-710 freeway, are barriers to mobility.
                                                     Mobility Element 147

    City Streets                                                Traffic conditions are rated using the concept of Level
                                                                of Service (LOS), which describes a range of roadway
    The existing street system is shown in Figure ME 1.         operating conditions from LOS A (excellent conditions)
    While the City generally has an adequate street grid        to LOS F (very poor conditions), as shown in Table ME
    system in the west and the central portions, the grid is    1. The vast majority of City streets operate at Level
    not as prominent in the eastern part of the City, due to    of Service D or better. Only 9% of all roadway seg-
    the I-710 Freeway and the Los Angeles River. Cer-           ments (Primary Arterials, Minor Arterials, and Collector
    tain east-west streets, such as Southern Avenue and         Streets) are currently operating at LOS E or LOS F in the
    Tweedy Boulevard are discontinuous in the eastern part      A.M peak hours and only 14% in the PM peak hours.
    of the City and do not cross the Los Angeles Rivers or
                                                                However, for many of the east-west streets, including
    the I-710 Freeway. Firestone Boulevard is the only east-
                                                                parts of Santa Ana Avenue, Firestone Boulevard, South-
    west street that spans the entire City in the east-west
                                                                ern Avenue, Tweedy Boulevard, and Imperial Highway,
    direction, and is also the only street within the City that
                                                                levels of service of LOS D, LOS E and LOS F are occur-
    connects to other cities in an east-west direction.
                                                                ring, particularly in the eastern part of the City.
    The closely spaced streets in the street network across
                                                                There is heavy truck traffic in some areas, particularly
    much of the City are a key benefit to local circulation.
                                                                in the eastern part of the City due to the industrial
    Traffic is able to use many of the local roadways and so
                                                                land uses located there and the proximity to the I-710
    is less concentrated on any particular roadway.
                                                                Freeway interchanges at Firestone Boulevard and
    The City’s arterial roadway system connects in all          Imperial Highway.
    directions to arterial roadways in adjacent jurisdic-
    tions. Firestone Boulevard, Imperial Highway, Long
    Beach Boulevard, Atlantic Avenue, Garfield Avenue,          Railroads
    and Paramount Boulevard are all major arterials in Los      The Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR) currently operates
    Angeles County that run through numerous cities and         two railroad lines through the City. The line that runs
    provide regional circulation. These arterials connect       in the northwest to southeast direction in the eastern
    to adjacent cities and the surrounding region, and          portion of the City is the San Pedro Sub-division. A
    also provide routes for regional traffic through the        second line (Spur Line) runs in an east-west direc-
    City of South Gate. The streets that carry the most         tion, north of Firestone Boulevard (and in the western
    regional traffic in the City are Boulevard and Imperial     half of the City between Independence Avenue and
    Highway in the east-west direction, and Long Beach
    Boulevard, Atlantic Avenue, Garfield Avenue, and
    Paramount Boulevard in the north-south direction.
    Traffic Conditions
                                                                Some industrial uses are served by the railroad spurs.
148 South Gate General Plan 2035

Figure ME 1                             Freeway and Roadway System
                                                                                   View Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Florence Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e.
                                                                                                                                                          e.
                  Santa Fe Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tic
                                                                                                            State St.                                                                                                                          Atlan
                                                                                                                                                      California Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                St.                                                                                                                                        e.
                                                                                 Mountain
    Nadeau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Eastern Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd.
      St.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Clara St.     Ave.                                                                           ia
                                                                                                                                                                                               Otis                                                                                                                                                   Ja
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                        UP                                          Ave.                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Wilcox
                                                     Lo                                                                                                               Santa Ana Av                            RR
                                                                                                                                                                                          e.
                                                        ng
                                                                a                                                                                                                                                            Sa
                                                             Be                                                                                                       Liberty Blvd                                              lt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     La
                                                              ch                                                                                                                      .                                                   ke                                                                                                                        Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Av                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                                                             Independenc                                                                          e  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gar
                                                                     Blv                                                                                                         e Ave.                                                                                                                                                                     fie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ld
                                                                         d.                                                                                       Ardmore Av                                                   UP RR
                                                                                                                                                                                 e.
                                                                                                                                                                Firestone Blv
                                                                                                                                                                                  d.
        92nd St.
                                                                                                                                                              Southern Av
                           d
                      Alame                     Truba Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                 e.
                                                                                                                           e.                                                                                                                                                      Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RIVER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e.
                                                                                                                        Elizabeth Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                       e.
                             a St. (W
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Alexander Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LOS ANGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Southern
                                  )
                                               da St.
                                                                                                                                                        Tweedy B                                                                                                                                                                              Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                          lvd.
                                          Alame
         103rd St.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         710
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ND
                                                 (E)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                lR
      Sa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O
          nta                                                           Century Blvd                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RI                                                                oo
                                                                                                    . (W)
     Sa       A                                                    San
        nta na B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UP                   Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rS
                    lv
                                                 UP RR
            An
                                                                    ta Fe Ave.
               a B d. N                                                                                                                                                                                                 Abbott Rd.                                                                                                                                  ive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RR
                  lvd       .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              field                               dR
                      . S
                          .                                                                                                                                                                                         Imperial Hwy.                                                                                         G ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ol
                                                             Fe
                                                                  rn w
                                                                      oo
                                                                            d
                                                                                       Av
                                                                                          e.
                                                                                                                                                                                          M
                                                                                                                                                                                               ar                            echwood Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                 tin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Be                                    e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lu
                                                                                                                                                                                                            th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   er
                                    Mona                                                                                                                                                                                Ki
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bl                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   vd
                                        Blvd.
                                                                                                                                                                             Fe                                                                                      t Rd                                                                              Ga
                                                                                                                                                                                  rnw                                                 .                                                                                                                   rd
                                                                                                                                                                                     ood                                                                                                                                                                       en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wrig                                                                                             da
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         le
                                                                                                                                   Long Beach Blvd.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Av                                                  h                                                                                                     St.
                                                                                                                                                                                               105                    e.
                                                                                               Santa F
                                                                                                                                                                 d.                                                                                                                                       Ce                                             Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ntu                                         in
       El Segundo Blvd.                                                                                                                                      is R                                                                                                                                                    ry                                             St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Blv
                                                                                                 e Ave.
                                                                                                                                                          Bull                                                                 e.                                                                                                          d.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (E)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             c Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Atlan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Garfield Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Paramount
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Blvd.
                                  Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N
                   City Boundary
    Figure 1
    Freeway and Roadway System                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        The Mobility Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transportation Strategies & Solutions
    City of South Gate Circulation Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mobility Element 149
    Ardmore Avenue). Both lines provide local switching
    service, with each line typically handling about 4 to 6                          Non-Motorized
    trains per day. There are no grade separated cross-
    ings in the City of South Gate, except for the grade
                                                                                     Transportation
    separation of the railroad line and the I-710 Freeway.                           The City does not currently have any established plan
                                                                                     or system of bicycle routes, either physically existing
    The “Alameda Corridor” runs north-south immedi-                                  or in the existing General Plan. There are, however,
    ately to the west of the City. The Alameda Corridor                              several bicycle routes in the City. Bicycle paths are
    links the ports of Long Beach and Los Angeles to the                             located on the east side of the Rio Hondo channel,
    transcontinental rail network near downtown Los                                  on the west and east side of the Los Angeles River
    Angeles. This rail freight corridor, primarily along and                         (north of Imperial Highway), and on the north side
    adjacent to Alameda Street, is comprised of a series                             of Southern Avenue between Long Beach Boulevard
    of underpasses and bridges that separate freight                                 and Atlantic Avenue in the Department of Water and
    trains from street traffic and passenger trains. Adja-                           Power right-of-way. The bicycle paths located next to
    cent to South Gate the corridor is fully grade sepa-                             the Rio Hondo channel and the Los Angeles River are
    rated and has no interaction with any of the compo-                              part of the regional system established and main-
    nents of the circulation system in the City.                                     tained by the County of Los Angeles. A bicycle lane
                                                                                     also exists on the south side of Southern Avenue from
                                                                                     Southern Place to the Los Angeles River.
     Table ME 1 – Level of Service Definitions for Signalized Intersections
     Level of                                                        Description                                                            Volume to
     Service                                                                                                                              Capacity Ratio
     A            Excellent operation. All approaches to the intersection appear quite open, turning move-                                   <0.600
                  ments are easily made, and nearly all drivers find freedom of operation.
     B            Very good operation. Many drivers begin to feel somewhat restricted within platoons of                                  0.601 –0.700
                  vehicles. This represents stable flow. An approach to an intersection may occasionally be
                  fully utilized and traffic queues start to form.
     C            Good operation. Occasionally drivers may have to wait for more than 60 seconds, and back-                               0.701 – 0.800
                  ups may develop behind turning vehicles. Most drivers feel somewhat restricted.
     D            Fair operation. Cars are sometimes required to wait for more than 60 seconds during short                               0.801 – 0.900
                  peaks. There is no long-standing traffic queues. This level is typically associated with design
                  practice for peak periods.
     E            Poor operation. Some long-standing vehicular queues develop on critical approaches to                                   0.901 – 1.000
                  intersections. Delays may be up to several minutes.
     F            Forced flow. Represents jammed conditions. Backups from locations downstream or on the                                    Over 1.001
                  cross street may restrict or prevent movement of vehicles out of the intersections approach
                  lanes; therefore, volumes carried are not predictable. Potential for stop-and-go type traffic
                  flow.
     Source: Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C., 1985 and Interim Materials on Highway Capacity,
     NCHRP Circular 212, 1982.
150 South Gate General Plan 2035

In general, sidewalks are provided on all streets in the  the general public and the senior/disabled.
City of South Gate. Other than sidewalks, there is no
                                                          The City of South Gate is not served by rail transit
identified pedestrian trail system in the existing Gen-
                                                          within its city limits. South of the City, the Metro
eral Plan that provides connections between differ-
                                                          Green Line light rail line runs in the median of the
ent areas in the City or to major destinations/activity
                                                          I-105 Freeway connecting the cities of Norwalk and
centers. Pedestrian amenities are generally good in
                                                          Redondo Beach. A Metro Green Line station is lo-
the City’s residential neighborhoods (with sidewalks,
                                                          cated on Long Beach Boulevard at the I-105 Freeway,
shaded tree cover, and pleasant walking environ-
                                                          just south of the City limits. The Metro Green Line
ments), and along certain streets such as Tweedy
                                                          also provides connections to the Metro Blue Line at
Boulevard (with shade cover, benches, and wider
                                                          the Imperial/Wilmington Station.
sidewalks at intersections and mid-block locations).
However, pedestrian amenities to encourage walking        The City of South Gate is served by eleven Metro
(such as benches, shaded walkways, etc.) are gener-       Transit Lines which operate to a variety of destina-
ally very limited along the major arterial corridors in   tions in Los Angeles County. City streets primarily
the City, and pedestrian conditions on these arterials    used by these Metro transit lines include Firestone
are often poor due to narrow sidewalks, fast mov-         Boulevard, Imperial Highway, Long Beach Boulevard,
ing traffic, and streets that are sometimes difficult to  and Atlantic Avenue. Single bus routes also serve
cross because of the wide street widths and the long      Santa Ana Avenue, Tweedy Boulevard, Truba Avenue,
distances between signalized intersections.               State Street, California Avenue, Otis Street, Garfield
                                                          Avenue, and Paramount Boulevard. These regional
                                                          bus lines provide service on major east-west and
                                                          north-south arterials in the City of South Gate.
                                                          The highest passenger volume bus stops in the City are
                                                          located primarily along Firestone Boulevard, as well as
                                                          on Long Beach Boulevard and Atlantic Avenue.
An existing multi-use trail runs along the Los Angeles
River and the Rio Hondo Channel and connects South
Gate with the larger region.
Transit
The City of South Gate is served by the Los Angeles
County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (Metro)
which operates various bus routes through the City
connecting with major trip generators throughout Los
Angeles County. The City does not have any other re-      While not served directly by rail, a Metro Blue Line sta-
gional transit carriers providing service within the City tion is located on Firestone Boulevard approximately
limits. The City also provides Phone-A-Ride service for   one mile west of South Gate.
                                                                                          Mobility Element 151

    KEY ISSUES AND
    CHALLENGES
    The General Plan Update process began with the City staff and consul-
    tant team engaging the community to understand the City’s perceived
    strengths and challenges. The following key issues and challenges
    were identified through this process, and provided the basis for the
    update of the City’s Mobility Element.
    Good Transportation Access in the City
    The City is well served by transportation facilities – due to its central
    location in Los Angeles County – with two freeways, numerous re-
    gional arterials, and numerous bus transit routes. While these facilities
    provide good access for South Gate residents to other destinations in
    the region, they also provide routes for regional traffic to pass through
    the City and impact its streets.
    Through Traffic
    Numerous major regional arterials pass through the City, which serves
    local City destinations, but also facilitates passage through the City for
    primary destinations elsewhere. Regional through traffic uses roadway
    capacity but does not benefit the City. Such traffic is not generated by
    City residents and these motorists may not do business or visit com-
    mercial destinations in the City.
    Traffic flows on major arterials must be effectively managed so that mul-
    timodal operations provide for efficient traffic flow while enabling other
    transportation modes (transit, bicycles, and pedestrians) to also use the
    street right-of-way in a convenient manner. This may include measures
    to manage and/or calm traffic where appropriate and feasible.
    Barrier Effect of the I-710 Freeway and the
    Los Angeles River
    The I-710 Freeway and the Los Angeles River both create a major bar-
    rier to east-west movement in the City. Only two east-west roadways,
    Firestone Boulevard and Imperial Highway, cross these facilities. Key
    east-west roadways that do not cross are Southern Avenue and Tweedy
    Boulevard. Similarly at the west end of the City, the Alameda Corridor
    railroad provides another barrier to east-west travel movement. While
152 South Gate General Plan 2035

the railroad is in an open subterranean trench, the       and add to traffic congestion. They contribute to
only major streets crossing the corridor and Alameda      roadway deterioration, and sometimes require wider
Street in the City are Firestone Boulevard and South-     lanes, curb returns and wider intersection configura-
ern Avenue (though Tweedy Boulevard and MLK Jr.           tions.
Blvd both cross the railroad tracks and connect to
Alameda Street (West).                                    Public Transit Service
                                                          Metro transit service provides numerous routes
As part of the I-710 Major Corridor Improvement Pro-
                                                          through the City and covers the major roadway cor-
gram, Southern Avenue is anticipated to be extended
                                                          ridors, but does not typically provide coverage at the
easterly across the Los Angeles River and the I-710
                                                          local neighborhood level.
Freeway to Garfield Avenue.
                                                          Areas identified by residents as lacking in transit
I-710 Corridor                                            service include:
In June 2006, Metro authorized initiation of the en-      •	 The Garfield Avenue corridor.
vironmental study phase (EIR/EIS) of the I-710 South
                                                          •	 The Tweedy Boulevard corridor.
Project, pursuant to the Major Corridor Study’s Locally
Preferred Strategy (LPS). This LPS would provide ten      •	 The Southern Avenue corridor.
mixed flow lanes and four dedicated truck lanes on        •	 The area around California Avenue at Liberty Boulevard.
I-710 through South Gate, and would implement             •	 The area bounded by Firestone Boulevard, Atlantic Avenue,
improvements to the Imperial Highway interchange             Tweedy Boulevard, and Otis Street.
(in the City of Lynnwood), Firestone Boulevard in-        •	 Residential areas west of Long Beach Boulevard.
terchange (in the City of South Gate), the Florence
Avenue interchange and the Atlantic/Bandini inter-        Public transit service can be improved in the City, for
change (in the Cities of Vernon and Bell) and add a       example with better geographic coverage, increased
new interchange at Slauson Avenue (in the Cities of       service frequency, and better local City service.
Bell and Commerce).                                       Future transit plans include the possibility of a high
These improvements to freeway capacity should be          speed, grade separated, environmentally friendly
beneficial to local city streets in that regional traffic transit line on the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way.
should remain on the freeway rather than using sur-       This could be part of a regional line between down-
face streets. Currently, an excessive number of trucks    town Los Angeles and Anaheim in Central Orange
access the freeway at Firestone Boulevard due to the      County (and perhaps ultimately between the City of
lack of poor quality of interchanges with other arteri-   Palmdale and the City of Irvine), on the Union Pacific
als. The improvements to I-710 interchanges in the        railroad right-of-way, with the possibility of a station
vicinity of South Gate should reduce the number of        at Atlantic Avenue and Firestone Boulevard. This
trucks accessing the freeway at Firestone Boulevard.      could provide for the possibility of a multi-modal
                                                          transit station with bus transit service and associated
                                                          transit-oriented development.
High Volume of Truck Traffic
Due to the City’s industrial land uses and the proxim-
ity to the I-710 Freeway, there is a high volume of
truck traffic in the City, particularly in the northeast-
ern part. Trucks generally travel at slower speeds,
                                                                                             Mobility Element 153

    Parking                                                    Lack of Bicycle Facilities
    The large number of cars parked on residential streets is  With the exception of the bike path on the north side
    a problem in most areas of the City. This is the result of of Southern Avenue in the Department of Water and
    a large population and multiple drivers in households,     Power right-of-way, and the bike paths adjacent to
    and some illegal garage conversions to dwelling units.     the Los Angeles River and the Rio Hondo Channel,
                                                               there are virtually no local bicycle routes, paths or
    Residential Street Widths                                  lanes in the City. There is a key need to provide for
    Some residents complain that residential streets are       a bicycle network in the City, which could connect to
    too narrow, because cars are parked on both sides          the regional bike paths running through South Gate
    of the street. Most residential streets are about          along the Los Angeles River and the Rio Hondo Chan-
    30-feet in width, and are often appropriately sized        nel, as well as connecting neighborhoods to schools,
    for residential neighborhoods – where traffic should       parks, commercial, and civic activity centers.
    appropriately travel at low speeds (e.g. 25 miles per
    hour or lower). Wider streets generally encourage          Pedestrian Circulation
    faster travel speeds and therefore less safe environ-      Pedestrian circulation facilities are rather inconsistent
    ments. Localized street widening may be necessary          throughout the City. Many neighborhoods have
    around neighborhood schools and other locations as         adequate sidewalks that are often landscaped or have
    necessary to mitigate traffic congestion and improve       parkway strips. Pedestrian conditions in the Tweedy
    vehicular and pedestrian safety.                           Mile and the Hollydale Business District are generally
                                                               good, with wider sidewalks, and in certain locations
                                                               with intersection and/or mid-block bulbouts, which
    The Alameda Corridor, shown above, is the western
    edge of the City.
                                                               Many neighborhood streets have good pedestrian facili-
                                                               ties with sidewalks and attractively landscaped areas.
154 South Gate General Plan 2035

enhance pedestrian circulation. On the other hand,
pedestrian conditions on many arterial streets are
relatively poor, with narrow sidewalks, fast moving
traffic, and streets that are sometimes difficult to
cross because the streets are wide and because of the
long distance between signalized intersections.
Pedestrian circulation should be enhanced through ap-
propriate consideration of sidewalk widths in an update
of the street design standards, and include the provi-
sion of good pedestrian facilities and amenities, to pro-
vide options for alternate modes of travel in the City.
Future Land Use
Development Projects
There is currently significant interest in the revitaliza-
tion of old buildings and the developments of new
land uses for all types of developments across the City.
While this growth will provide economic benefits to
the City it will also create challenges on how to accom-
modate increases in traffic and parking demand.
The Mobility Element Update provides an opportunity
to consider a multi-modal circulation plan for the City,
and provide alternative choices of travel, which would
enable people to circulate in the City by using alterna-
tives to the car such as transit, bicycle, and walking.
                                                          Mobility Element 155
    KEY CONCEPTS OF
    THE MOBILITY
    ELEMENT
    The Mobility Element is designed to provide a forward-looking vision for
    the future of transportation in South Gate, based on the inputs from the
    community and a consideration of the future needs of the City. The Mobil-
    ity Element is based on the following key concepts that reflect these inputs.
    Mobility in a Livable and Walkable Community
    The Mobility Element promotes a balanced transportation system in the
    City, which encourages the use of all transportation modes as alterna-
    tives to the automobile. This fundamental concept supports other
    General Plan goals that strive toward making South Gate a livable and
    walkable City.
    A Complete Street Grid in the City
    The fundamental basis of mobility within the City is the roadway sys-
    tem which provides the basis for many modes of travel including autos,
    buses, bicycles, and pedestrians. To this extent, the deficiencies in the
    geographic coverage of the existing street grid in the northeast part of
    the City should be remedied. Key streets should be extended and/or
    added to provide for improved street circulation and improved access
    to the I-710 Freeway.
    Streets that are Context Sensitive
    The design and operation of streets should relate not only to their
    transportation function, but should also be sensitive to the desired na-
    ture and scale of adjacent land uses and the districts they pass through.
    Improve Certain Key Streets
    The key traffic corridors in South Gate are Firestone Boulevard, Imperial High-
    way, Garfield Avenue, Atlantic Avenue, and Long Beach Boulevard. These
    streets carry the highest volumes of local traffic, and also serve traffic passing
    through the City. The Mobility Element anticipates widening and improving
    certain sections of these corridors to accommodate future travel demand. It
    also defines street characteristics to allow these roadways to conveniently
    serve all modes of travel while being pedestrian-friendly and sensitive to the
156 South Gate General Plan 2035
context of adjacent land uses.                           Improve Transit Service
                                                         Transit provides an alternative to use of the automobile.
Manage Traffic on City Streets                           In addition to recommending improvements to regional
It will be increasingly important to effectively man-    transit (including additional bus routes and increased
age traffic operations on key City streets with a        service frequencies) a key component of the Mobility
focus to maximize the effective capacity and utiliza-    Element is the introduction and operation of a local bus
tion of the existing street system. This could entail    transit service with convenient bus transfer points that
the implementation of traffic operations procedures      would circulate around the City connecting residential
such as traffic monitoring, signal coordination, traffic neighborhoods to key commercial, institutional, and
signal synchronization, bus priority schemes, dynamic    recreational destinations.
electronic signage, and smart pedestrian crossings.
Vehicular capacity improvements and reductions in        Improve Bicycle and Pedestrian Facilities and
traffic delay could also be realized by providing bus    Encourage the Use of these Travel Modes
pull-outs at major boarding points on arterial road-     Providing alternatives to the automobile requires en-
ways. The City needs to make every effort to use         hanced bicycle and pedestrian facilities and to encourage
the latest available technologies in traffic detection   use of these modes. The Mobility Element identifies
and operational management. Traffic management           measures to implement bicycle and pedestrian networks
should also ensure that the needs of transit, bicycles,  in the City which will allow residents to travel from neigh-
and pedestrians are also accommodated. This will be      borhoods to key destinations by bicycle or by walking.
particularly important on commercial streets such as
Tweedy Boulevard, and on residential corridors such
                                                         Protect Residential Neighborhoods
as California Street and State Street, where traffic
                                                         from Traffic Intrusion
volumes and speeds will need to be managed to be
                                                         The first and key strategy for keeping through traf-
consistent with the type and intensity of adjacent
                                                         fic out of residential neighborhoods is to effectively
land uses.
                                                         manage traffic on the arterial roadway system, and to
                                                         limit incentives for traffic to divert through neighbor-
                                                         hoods. However, it is also important that programs
                                                         are developed to manage traffic volumes and speeds
                                                         to appropriate levels in the neighborhoods, including
                                                         the use of appropriate traffic calming techniques. So-
                                                         lutions for these problems should involve techniques
                                                         that reflect specific local neighborhood circum-
                                                         stances, not generic solutions. The Mobility Element
                                                         therefore identifies actions for developing a process
                                                         and procedures for neighborhood traffic manage-
                                                         ment programs, where appropriate.
Transit services throughout the City should be im-
proved so that residents can reach key destinations
without driving.
                                                                                          Mobility Element 157
    Manage Parking Demand and Supply
    Parking is an integral component of travel, and as
    such needs to be fully integrated into the City’s
    transportation policies in this Mobility Element.
    Parking policies should be supportive of the overall
    multi-modal goals of the Mobility Element. While
    it is important that sufficient parking is provided for
    land uses, it is equally important that there is not an
    oversupply of parking which would discourage use of
    alternate modes to the automobile.
    Coordinate Land Use Development and the
    Transportation System
    The transportation system does not function in isola-   Traffic on residential streets should be managed to
    tion and travel in the City is generated by land uses.  protect the quality and character of neighborhoods.
    It is therefore important that mobility policies and
    land use policies are consistent and synchronized.
    Development policies and procedures and building
    design requirements should be transit-friendly and
    pedestrian-friendly, and include elements to support
    transit, bicycles, and pedestrians. Development den-
    sities should be focused along major transportation
    and transit corridors and around transit station/nodes.
158 South Gate General Plan 2035

  KEY CIRCULATION
  COMPONENTS
  The key provisions of the Mobility Element with respect to street clas-
  sifications and functions, and provisions for trucks, transit, bicycles, and
  pedestrians are summarized in this section.
  Street Types
  The Mobility Element identifies four key types of streets in the City.
  Boulevard
  Boulevards are major streets that carry both local and through traf-
  fic and are expected to carry the highest volumes of traffic in the
  City. They provide limited access to adjacent land uses. Boulevards
  are multi-modal streets that serve as key transit corridors, emergency
  response routes, and may also serve as truck routes. Boulevards are
  functionally equivalent to a Primary Arterial.
  Firestone Boulevard is an example of a “Boulevard” in South Gate
                                                   Mobility Element 159

    Avenue                                                    Street Classifications/
    Avenues are secondary streets. They carry primarily
    local traffic and also some through traffic. They serve   Designations
    shorter trips and provide access to adjacent land uses.   The street classifications in the Mobility Element ac-
    They are local transit corridors, and are the primary bi- cording to the street types identified above are shown
    cycle routes and pedestrian routes in the City. Avenues   in Figure ME 2.
    are functionally equivalent to a Secondary Arterial.
                                                              The following streets are designated as Boulevards
                                                              (Primary Arterials), with the specified maximum num-
    Street                                                    ber of lanes (excluding turn lanes):
    Streets connect neighborhoods to each other and             Firestone Boulevard
    to commercial and other districts. They also con-           	    (six lanes)
                                                                	    (eight lanes between Atlantic Avenue
    nect arterials to local roads. Streets are functionally
                                                                	    and Garfield Avenue)
    equivalent to Collector Streets.
                                                                Imperial Highway
                                                                	    (six lanes)
    Local Road                                                  	
                                                                	
                                                                     (eight lanes between Atlantic Avenue
                                                                     and Garfield Avenue)
    Local roads are exactly that – they serve local land        Long Beach Boulevard
    uses, typically residential but can also serve industrial   	    (six lanes) – south of Firestone Boulevard
                                                                	    (four lanes) – north of Firestone Boulevard
    and/or commercial uses. They carry low traffic vol-
                                                                Atlantic Avenue
    umes that are exclusively oriented to local traffic.
                                                                	    (six lanes)
                                                                Garfield Avenue
                                                                	    (six lanes)
                                                                Paramount Boulevard
                                                                	    (four lanes)
                                                              The following streets are designated as Avenues (Sec-
                                                              ondary Arterials) with the specified maximum number
                                                              of lanes (excluding turn lanes):
                                                                Tweedy Boulevard
                                                                	    (four lanes)
                                                                Southern Avenue Extension
                                                                	    (four lanes)
                                                                California Avenue
                                                                	    (four lanes)
                                                                State Street
    State Street, shown above, is an example of an              	    (four lanes)
    “Avenue” in South Gate.                                     Century Boulevard (West)
                                                                	    (four lanes)
160 South Gate General Plan 2035

Figure ME 2 Street Classifications
                                  Mobility Element 161
    The following roadways are designated as Streets
    (Collector Streets) with the specified maximum num-        Truck Routes
    ber of lanes (excluding turn lanes):                       A network of truck routes in the City will keep trucks
                                                               on designated key arterial streets and minimize the
      Santa Ana Avenue                                         negative impacts of truck traffic on the remaining
      	    (two lanes)
                                                               City Streets. The designated truck route streets,
      Independence/Ardmore
                                                               shown in Figure ME 3, are:
      	    (two lanes each)
      Southern Avenue                                          •	 Firestone Boulevard
      	    (two lanes)                                         •	 Imperial Highway
      Gardendale Street
      	    (four lanes)                                        •	 Atlantic Avenue
      Main Street                                              •	 Rayo Avenue
      	    (two lanes)
                                                               •	 Southern Avenue Extension
      Truba Avenue                                                 (between Atlantic Avenue and Garfield Avenue)
      	    (two lanes)
                                                               •	 Garfield Avenue
      Otis Street
      	    (four lanes)	                                       •	 Patata Street (between Atlantic Avenue and Wilcox Avenue)
      Alexander Street                                         •	 Wilcox Avenue (new connection between Patata Street and
      	    (two lanes)                                             Firestone Boulevard)
      Wilcox Avenue New Extension                              •	 New Road (on east side of UPRR between Firestone Boulevard
      	    (two lanes) – from Patata Street to Southern Avenue     and Southern Avenue)
      Rayo Avenue
      	    (two lanes)                                         These streets have been selected because of their prox-
      Borwick Avenue	                                          imity to the key industrial areas in the City, proximity to
      	    (two lanes) – east of Garfield Avenue               the I-710 Freeway, and their connection to truck routes
                                                               in adjacent cities. These are the only streets in the City
                                                               that should be used for truck traffic, except for local
                                                               deliveries. To the extent possible they are designed to
                                                               keep trucks away from high intensity commercial areas
                                                               and high density residential areas.
                                                               Transit Routes
                                                               The City’s street system provides the circulation
                                                               system for automobiles and for other transportation
                                                               modes providing alternatives for residents to travel
                                                               without using their car. One of these key alternative
    Alexander Street, shown above, is an example of a          modes of transportation is transit.
    “Street” in South Gate.
                                                               A key goal of the Mobility Element is that existing tran-
                                                               sit services operating in the City should be expanded
                                                               and enhanced to be more accessible and convenient to
                                                               residents. This should include expanded route cover-
                                                               age, increased service frequencies, extended operating
162 South Gate General Plan 2035

Figure ME 3 Truck Routes
                        Mobility Element 163
    Figure ME 4 Transit Corridors
164 South Gate General Plan 2035
hours, and the provision of transit-related amenities, as   Streets. Each type of facility is described below, fol-
the availability of funding allows.                         lowed by the action items identified in the Mobility El-
                                                            ement for each class of facility. The Mobility Element
The Mobility Element also anticipates that many arterial
                                                            Bicycle Network is shown in Figure ME 5.
and collector streets within the City will also function
as transit corridors which would be served by either lo-
cal or regional transit service, as shown in Figure ME 4.   Class I - Bike Path or Bike Trail
A Primary Transit Street is a street which is expected      This is a separate right-of-way designated for the
to carry the highest levels of transit service, particu-    exclusive use of bicycles and pedestrians. Cross-flows
larly regional service, with the most bus routes and        with motorized vehicles are minimized. While a bike	
the highest frequency of service. A Secondary Transit       path/trail may be located adjacent to a City street, it
Street is a street that is expected to carry lower but      will typically be located away from City streets in a
still significant levels of transit service, and probably   separate right-of-way. A bike path is paved while a
with a greater orientation to local rather than region-     bike trail is usually an unpaved surface.
al bus routes. In both cases, the design and opera-
                                                            Class I Bike Paths are defined in the following locations:
tion of the streets need to reflect and accommodate
                                                            •	 Independence/Ardmore Avenues from City limit to City limit
the use of transit vehicles.
                                                            •	 Extended Independence/Ardmore Avenues from Otis Street east
These should include increased regional transit service        to Rio Hondo Channel
as well as the initiation of local transit service within
                                                            •	 Southern Avenue
the City. A key component of the transit strategy
                                                            •	 Los Angeles River
should be the planning and implementation of high
speed, grade separated, environmentally friendly tran-      •	 Rio Hondo Channel
sit on the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way.
Bicycle Facilities
The Mobility Element defines a city-wide network of
bicycle facilities that connects residential neighbor-
hoods to schools, parks, and activity centers.
Three different classes of bicycle routes are identified
in the Mobility Element. These are Class I - Bike Paths
or Bike Trails, Class II – Bike Lanes, and Class III – Bike
                                                            Class II bicycle facilities, also known as bike lanes, are
                                                            dedicated spaces for cyclists.
Class I bicycle facilities have separate right-of-way for
pedestrians and cyclists.
                                                                                              Mobility Element 165

    Figure ME 5 Bicycle Plan
166 South Gate General Plan 2035
Class II - Bike Lane                                                •	 Tweedy Boulevard between Pinehurst Avenue and just west 
                                                                       of Adella Avenue
This is a restricted area at the edge of a street des-              •	 New street connections from Tweedy Boulevard just east of 
ignated for the exclusive or semi-exclusive use of                     Atlantic Avenue to the Los Angeles River
bicycles where through travel by motorized vehicles                 •	 Gardendale Street between the Los Angeles River and 
is prohibited. Cross-flows by motorized vehicles and                   Paramount Boulevard
pedestrians are permitted.                                          •	 Main Street between  the Los Angeles River and Paramount Boulevard
Class II Bike Lanes are defined in the following locations:         •	 Wright Road from Imperial Highway to Atlantic Avenue
•	 Southern Avenue Extension east of Vossler Avenue to Garfield
   Avenue and to the Rio Hondo Channel.
•	 Alexander Avenue between Abbott Road and Southern Avenue,
   and on the Alexander Avenue Extension between Firestone
   Boulevard and the Ardmore Avenue Extension.
•	 Santa Fe Avenue between Independence/Ardmore Avenues and
   Southern Avenue.
Class III – Bike Street
This is a signed street providing for shared use of a
street by motor vehicles and bicyclists. While bicyclists
have no exclusive use or priority, the signage (both by
the side of the street and stenciled on the roadway sur-
face) warns motorists of bicyclists sharing the roadway
space. These streets are called “Bike Streets.”	
Class III “Bike Streets” are defined at the following
locations:
•	 Stanford Avenue between Southern Avenue and Sequoia Drive
•	 Madison Avenue between Santa Ana Avenue and Tweedy Boulevard
•	 California Avenue between Santa Ana Avenue and just north 
   of Abbot Road
•	 Alexander Avenue between Southern Avenue and Firestone Boulevard
•	 Hildreth Avenue between Southern Avenue and just north 
   of Abbot Road
•	 Missouri  Avenue between Stanford Avenue and Hildreth Avenue     Class III bicycle facilities are roadways that are signed
                                                                    for cyclists.
•	 Sequoia Drive between Stanford Avenue and Elizabeth Avenue
•	 Michigan Avenue between Elizabeth Avenue and Atlantic Avenue
•	 Pinehurst Avenue between Michigan Avenue and Tweedy Boulevard
                                                                                                           Mobility Element 167

    STREET STANDARDS
    Street Standards - Background
    The City of South Gate is an older City that is completely built out. The
    application of “new” roadway standards is therefore often not feasible,
    as there are few opportunities for roadway widening without taking
    property or accepting right-of-way dedication for roadway right-of-
    way.
                                                                              Instead of focusing the design
    In addition, the “past” philosophy of requiring wider traffic lanes and
    roadway widenings is beginning to give way to a more comprehensive        features of roadways purely on
    approach to roadways that is “context sensitive.” Instead of focus-
    ing the design features of roadways purely on accommodating the
                                                                              accommodating the automobile,
    automobile, cities are increasingly considering the operational needs of
                                                                              cities are increasingly consider-
    other travel modes (transit, bicycles, and pedestrians) in roadway de-
    sign, and are also considering the types and functions of adjacent land
                                                                              ing the operational needs of
    uses. Roadway design and standards thus become a balancing act of
    considering all these needs, and ensuring that the roadway design and     other travel modes (transit,
    operation is consistent not only with the function of the street but with
    the function of the adjacent land uses.                                   bicycles, and pedestrians) in
    While there is a desire to widen certain key streets in South Gate, there
                                                                              roadway design, and are also
    are also many instances where streets cannot or should not be wid-
    ened, and the existing street widths will remain.                         considering the types and func-
    The Mobility Element street standards are therefore flexible in that
    they accommodate existing street widths and also allow for roadway        tions of adjacent land uses.
    widenings in very limited areas and only where feasible. In many cases,
    ranges are provided for lane widths, roadway widths, and right-of-way
    widths, to provide this flexibility, and to allow the characteristics of
    different roadways to be tailored to their unique circumstances rather
    than be ruled by one standard.
    Street Standards - Details
    The street standards for each street type are shown in Table ME 2,
    which details the operating and physical characteristics. Figures ME 6,
    ME 7b, ME 8, and ME 9, illustrate the typical cross section standards
    for the different street types.
168 South Gate General Plan 2035

Standard Intersection                                           The geometrics of any intersection may also be modi-
                                                                fied for various reasons, on a case-by-case basis, as
Roadway cross sections at a standard intersection               shown in the footnotes to Figures ME 6 to ME 8, and
configuration are shown in Figures ME 6a, ME 6c,                in order to respond to local circumstances
ME 7b, ME 8a, and ME 8b, and fit within the stan-
dard street sections shown. This allows for a single
left turn lane, but does not allow for exclusive right
                                                                Street Standards
turn lanes unless accommodated within the standard              The standards described in this section are the gen-
roadway cross section (i.e. in lieu of a through lane).         eral citywide standards and should be applied wher-
                                                                ever feasible. They may, however, be modified at the
Enhanced Intersection                                           City’s discretions on a case-by-case basis in response
                                                                to specific circumstances. They represent the general
An enhanced intersection is one where the roadway               City standards for each roadway type.
width may exceed the regular standards shown in
Figures ME 6 to ME 8. Typically this would allow for
dual left-turn lanes as shown in Figure ME 6b. The
dual left turn lanes may be installed on any approach,
but are not necessary to install on all approaches. If
dual left turn lanes are not installed on both ap-
proaches on the same street, then a suitable transi-
tion will be necessary on the approach where they
are not installed. The enhanced intersection does
not necessarily include additional exclusive right turn
lanes. Enhanced intersection locations are shown
in Figure ME 2 (Roadway Classifications), and are
located as follows:
•	 Firestone Boulevard and Long Beach Boulevard
•	 Firestone Boulevard and California Avenue
•	 Firestone Boulevard and Atlantic Avenue
•	 Firestone Boulevard and Rayo Avenue
•	 Firestone Boulevard and I-710 Southbound Ramps
•	 Firestone Boulevard and I-710 Northbound Ramps
•	 Firestone Boulevard and Garfield Avenue
•	 Atlantic Avenue and Southern Avenue
•	 Atlantic Avenue and Tweedy Boulevard
•	 Garfield Avenue and Southern Avenue
•	 Garfield Avenue and Imperial Highway
(see Figure ME 2 for further details of enhanced intersections)
                                                                                               Mobility Element 169

                                    Table ME 2 – Mobility Element - Roadway Guidelines                           	
                                    A. Thoroughfare Characteristics
                                    Proposed Thor-    Equivalent       Purpose                                       Number of   Median             Parking        Driveway   Transit Service Truck             Bicycle
                                    oughfare Type     Functional                                                     Through     (Raised, or Cen-                  Access     Emphasis        Movement          Facilities
                                                      Classification                                                 Lanes       tral Turn Lane)
                                    Boulevard         Primary Arte-    Carries through and local traffic.            4-6         Yes                Yes.           Limited    Regional        Optional. May     No
                                                      rial             Serves longer trips.                                      Raised Median      May be Certain            Express Local   be part of Re-
                                                                       Limited access to land.                                                      Restrictions                              gional Route
                                                                       Key transit corridor.
                                                                       Primary truck movement corridor.
                                                                       Primary emergency response route.
170 South Gate General Plan 2035
                                    Avenue            Secondary        Carries local traffic.                        4           Optional Raised    Optional       Yes        Regional Local Optional. Local Optional
                                                      Arterial         Serves shorter trips.                                     Median or CLT                                               Route only
                                                                       Provides access to land.
                                                                       Primary pedestrian and bicycle routes.
                                                                       Local transit corridors.
                                    Street            Collector        Connects neighborhoods to each                2-4         Optional CLT in    Optional       Yes        Local           Deliveries Only   Optional
                                                                       other, and to commercial and other                        two-lane layout
                                                                       districts.
                                                                       Connects local streets to arterial streets.
                                    Local Residential Local            Local, typically residential street.          2           No                 Optional       Yes        None            Deliveries Only   Optional
                                    Local Commercial/ Local            Local, typically industrial and/or com-       2-4         No                 Optional       Yes        None            Deliveries Only   No
                                    Industrial                         mercial.

                      B. Dimension Guidelines
                         Proposed Thor-     Equivalent Functional                  Location            Roadway Right-of-Way         Curb Lane    Travel Lane    Median      Left Turn   Parkway        Notes
                         oughfare Type          Classification                                          Width     Width              Width          Width       Width         Lane
                                                                                                                                                                             Width
                                            Primary Arterial        Midblock & Typical Intersection      80 - 86     104 - 116       12 - 13        11 - 12     12 - 14     10 - 12     12 - 15   1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10
                                            6 Lane                  Enhanced Intersection                90 - 96     114 - 126        12 -13        11 -12        NA        11 - 12     12 - 15     2, 3, 6, 10
                       Boulevard
                                            Primary Arterial        Midblock                               76        100 - 106          20            12          12           12       12 - 15     1, 2, 5, 10
                                            4 Lane                  Intersection                           76        100 - 106          11          10-11         NA           12       12 - 15       2, 3, 6
                                            Secondary Arterial      Midblock w/ Parking                  60 - 64       84 - 94       19 - 20        11 -12        NA          NA        12 - 15    2 ,5, 8, 9, 10
                       Avenue                                       Intersection, or Midblock w/
                                            4 Lane                                                       60 - 64       84 - 94       13 - 14        11 - 12       12        11 - 12     12 - 15     2, 5, 6, 10
                                                                    Turn Lane
                                                                    Midblock w/ Parking or
                                            Collector                                                   56 – 60        80 - 84       18 - 19        10 -11        NA          NA          12           9, 10
                                                                    Intersection w/o Turn Lane
                                            4 Lane                  Intersection, or Midblock
                                                                                                         56 - 60       80 - 84       11 - 12        11 - 12       12           12         12             10
                                                                    w/ Turn Lane
                       Street
                                                                                                                                     20 ft, includes parking
                                            Collector               With Center Turn Lane                  52            72                                       12           12         10           9, 10
                                                                                                                                         and travel lane
                                            2 Lane                                                                                   20 ft, includes parking
                                                                    Without Center Turn Lane               40            60                                       NA          NA          10           9, 10
                                                                                                                                         and travel lane
                       Local                Local                                                                                    15 ft, includes parking
                                                                                                           30            50                                       NA          NA         7 - 10          10
                       Residential          2 Lane                                                                                       and travel lane
                       Local
                                            Local                                                                                    20 ft, includes parking
                       Commercial/                                                                         40            60                                       NA          NA         7 - 10          10
                                            2 Lane                                                                                       and travel lane
                       Industrial
                       Notes to Roadway Guidelines
                       1.	   Median width may be reduced to 10’ minimum and difference allocated to travel lanes, on arterial streets with high truck volumes.
                       2.	   Lane widths may be modified within overall roadway width to accommodate trucks as necessary.
                       3.	   A median nose should be provided where roadway width allows.
                       4. 	 Parking may be restricted in peak periods.
                       5. 	 Width may be increased for: bus pullout (max. 10 - 12 ft); major development project driveway right-turn lane (max. 12 ft); additional sidewalk width (easement on private prop-
                            erty with building setbacks).
                       6. 	 Width may be increased for: right-turn lane (max. 12 ft); intersection skew of offsets; bus pullout (max. 10 - 12 ft); additional sidewalk width (easement on private property with
                            building setbacks).
                       7. 	 Includes dual left turn lanes.
                       8. 	 Parking in wide curb lane at midblock locations. Roadway layout may transition to include left turn lane at intersections in lieu of parking.
                       9. 	 Bike lane may be substituted for parking.
                       10. 	 Roadway widths and geometrics may be modified on case-by-case basis in response to specific local circumstances.
Mobility Element 171

       Figure ME 6a     Street Standard Section for Boulevard (Primary Arterial) - 6 Lane
                12-15'       12-13'        11'       11-12'      12-14'       11-12'        11'      12-13'        12-15'
              Sidewalk       Travel      Travel      Travel      Median       Travel      Travel      Travel     Sidewalk
                              Lane/      Lane        Lane        or Left       Lane        Lane       Lane/
                             Parking                              Turn                               Parking
                                                                  Lane
                                                            80-86' Roadway
                                                         104-116' Right-of-Way
           Notes
           1. Median width may be reduced to 10' minimum and difference allocated to travel lanes, on arterial streets with
              high truck volumes
           2. Lane widths may be modified within overall roadway width to accommodate trucks as necessary.
           3. A median nose should be provided where roadway width allows.
           4. Parking may be restricted in peak periods.
           5. Width may be increased for: bus pullout (10'-12 ' max); major development project driveway right-turn lane
              (max 12'); additional sidewalk width (easement on private property with building setbacks).
Figure 6a
Street Standard Section for Boulevard (Primary Arterial) - 6 Lane                                      The Mobility Group
                                                                                                       Transportation Strategies & Solutions
City of South Gate Circulation Plan
172 South Gate General Plan 2035
                          Boulevard (Primary Arterial) 6 Lane - Enhanced Intersection
   Figure ME 6b        Street Standard Section for Boulevard (Primary Arterial) - 6 Lane Enhanced Intersection
           12-15'         12-13'        11'        11-12'    11-12'         11-12'     11-12'        11'       12-13'        12-15'
          Sidewalk        Travel      Travel      Travel    Left-Turn     Left-Turn     Travel     Travel      Travel      Sidewalk
                           Lane       Lane         Lane        lane          lane        Lane       Lane        Lane
                                                                90-96' Roadway
                                                            114-126' Right-of-Way
       Notes
       1. A median nose should be provided where roadway width allows.
       2. Lane widths may be modified within overall roadway width to accommodate trucks as necessary.
       3. Width may be increased for: right-turn lane (max 12'); intersection skew of offsets (as necessary); bus pullout (max 10'-12');
          additional sidewalk width (easement on private property with building setbacks).
Figure 6b
Street Standard Section for Boulevard (Primary Arterial) - 6 Lane Enhanced Intersection                  The Mobility Group
                                                                                                         Transportation Strategies & Solutions
City of South Gate Circulation Plan
                                                                                                             Mobility Element 173
           Figure ME 6c         Boulevard
                            Street               (Primary
                                   Standard Section           Arterial)
                                                     for Boulevard (Primary4Arterial)
                                                                             Lane- -4 Mid-Block
                                                                                       Lane - Mid-Block
                  12'-15'             20'               12'          12'         12'              20'            12'-15'
                 Sidewalk           Travel            Travel      Median        Travel          Travel          Sidewalk
                                     Lane/            Lane        or Left-      Lane             Lane/
                                    Parking                     Turn Lane                       Parking
                                                               76' Roadway
                                                          100'-106' Right-of-Way
              Notes
              1. Primary Arterial classification requires center median. Four- lane streets without center medians are
                 classified as Secondary or Collector roadways.
              2. Width may be increased for: bus pullout (max. 10 - 12 ft); major development project driveway right-
                 turn lane (max.12 ft); additional sidewalk width (easement on private property with building setbacks).
              3. Lane and median widths may be modified within overall roadway width to accommodate trucks as
                 necessary.
 gure 6c
treet Standard Section for Boulevard (Primary Arterial) - 4 Lane - Mid-Block                          The Mobility Group
                                                                                                       Transportation Strategies & Solutions
ity of South Gate Circulation Plan
     174 South Gate General Plan 2035
           Figure ME 6d          Boulevard
                             Street                (Primary
                                    Standard Section           Arterial)
                                                      for Boulevard         4Arterial)
                                                                     (Primary Lane -- 4Intersection
                                                                                         Lane - Intersection
                    12'-15'        11'         10'       11'           12'         11'       10'         11'        12'-15'
                   Sidewalk      Travel      Travel    Travel      Left-Turn     Travel     Travel     Travel     Sidewalk
                                  Lane        Lane     Lane           Lane        Lane      Lane        Lane
                                                                 76' Roadway
                                                            100'-106' Right-of-Way
                Notes
                1. A median nose should be provided where roadway width allows.
                2. Lane and median widths may be modified within overall roadway width to accommodate trucks as
                   necessary.
                3. Width may be increased for: right-turn lane (max. 12 ft); intersection skew of offsets; bus pullout (max.
                   10 - 12 ft); additional sidewalk width (easement on private property with building setbacks).
                                                                                                                                        10/29/08
Figure 6d
Street Standard Section for Boulevard (Primary Arterial) - 4 Lane - Intersection                        The Mobility Group
                                                                                                         Transportation Strategies & Solutions
City of South Gate Circulation Plan
                                                                                                        Mobility Element 175
                  Avenue (Secondary Arterial) 4 Lane - Mid-Block
    Figure ME 7a   Street Standard Section for Avenue (Secondary Arterial) - 4 Lane - Mid-Block
            12'-15'           19-20'             11-12'       11-12'              19-20'         12'-15'
           Sidewalk            Travel            Travel       Travel               Travel       Sidewalk
                               Lane/             Lane          Lane                 Lane/
                              Parking                                             Parking
                                                  60-64' Roadway
                                                84-94' Right-of-Way
        Notes
        1. Width may be increased for: bus pullout (10'-12' max); major development project
           driveway right-turn lane (max 12'); additional sidewalk width (easement on private
           property with building setbacks).
        2. Lane and median widths may be modified within overall roadway width to
           accommodate trucks as necessary.
        3. Parking in wide curb lane at midblock locations. Roadway layout may transition to
           include left turn lane at intersections in lieu of parking.
        4. Bike lane may be substituted for parking.
176 South Gate General Plan 2035
             Avenue (Secondary Arterial) 4 Lane - Intersection
Figure ME 7b   Street Standard Section for Avenue (Secondary Arterial) - 4 Lane - Intersection
        12'-15'         13-14'         11-12'           12'         11-12'          13-14'       12'-15'
       Sidewalk         Travel        Travel           Left         Travel           Travel    Sidewalk
                         Lane           Lane           Turn          Lane             Lane
                                                      Lane
                                                60-64' Roadway
                                              84-94' Right-of-Way
    Notes
    1. Lane and median widths may be modified within overall roadway width to
       accommodate trucks as necessary.
    2. Width may be increased for: right-turn lane (max 12'); intersection skew of offsets
       (as necessary); bus pullout (max 10'-12'); additional sidewalk width (easement on
       private property with building setbacks).
    3. This cross-section also applies to mid-block with center turn lane.
                                                                                          Mobility Element 177
      Figure ME 8a   Street Standard Section for Street (Collector) - 4 Lane
                 Street (Collector)
       Street (Collector)     4 Lane - 4Mid-Block
                                        Lane - Mid-Blockwithwith    ParkingororAt
                                                               Parking            at Intersection
                                                                                     Intersection without
                                                                                                       WithoutLeft-Turn  Lane Lane
                                                                                                                   Left-Turn
        Street (Collector) 4 Lane Mid-Block with Parking or At Intersection Without Left-Turn Lane
                               12'           18-19'          10-11'       10-11'          18-19'            12'
                               12'
                           Sidewalk          18-19'
                                             Travel          10-11'
                                                            Travel        10-11'
                                                                          Travel          18-19'
                                                                                          Travel            12'
                                                                                                         Sidewalk
                            Sidewalk         Lane/
                                             Travel          Lane
                                                            Travel         Lane
                                                                          Travel           Lane/
                                                                                           Travel        Sidewalk
                                            Parking
                                             Lane/           Lane          Lane           Parking
                                                                                           Lane/
                                            Parking                                       Parking
                                                             56-60' Roadway
                                                              56-60' Roadway
                                                           80-84'' Right-of-Way
                                                           80-84'' Right-of-Way
                         Note
                          Note
                         1. Bike lane may be substituted for parking.
                          1. Bike lane may be substituted for parking.
         Street (Collector) 4 Lane With Center Turn Lane, or At Intersection With Left Turn Lane
                    Street (Collector)
          Street (Collector)     4 Lane - 4With
                                            Lane with
                                                  CenterCenter
                                                             TurnTurnLane,
                                                                       Lane, ororatAtIntersection
                                                                                        Intersection with With
                                                                                                          Left-Turn
                                                                                                                 LeftLane
                                                                                                                        Turn Lane
                               12'       11-12'       11-12'          12'        11-12'       11-12'        12'
                               12'       11-12'       11-12'          12'        11-12'       11-12'        12'
                            Sidewalk     Travel       Travel         Left        Travel       Travel     Sidewalk
                            Sidewalk      Lane
                                         Travel       Lane
                                                      Travel         Turn
                                                                     Left         Lane
                                                                                 Travel        Lane
                                                                                              Travel     Sidewalk
                                          Lane         Lane        Lane
                                                                     Turnor       Lane         Lane
                                                                   Median
                                                                   Lane or
                                                                   Median
                                                             56-60' Roadway
                                                              56-60' Roadway
                                                           80-84' Right-of-Way
                                                           80-84' Right-of-Way
   Figure 8a
   FigureStandard
           8a
   Street           Section for Street (Collector) - 4 Lane                                               The Mobility Group
   Street Standard Section for Street (Collector) - 4 Lane                                                The     Mobility
                                                                                                           Transportation            Group
                                                                                                                          Strategies & Solutions
   City of South Gate Circulation Plan                                                                     Transportation Strategies & Solutions
   City of South Gate Circulation Plan
178 South Gate General Plan 2035
Figure ME 8b   Street Standard Section for Street (Collector) - 2 Lane
                                   Street(Collector)
                               Street       (Collector) - 22 Lane
                                                               Lanewith     Center-Turn
                                                                         with   Center TurnLane Lane
                               Street (Collector) 2 Lane with Center Turn Lane
                                 10'             20'                12'              20'             10'
                             Sidewalk           Travel              Left            Travel        Sidewalk
                                 10'             20'
                                                Lane/               12'
                                                                   Turn              20'
                                                                                    Lane/           10'
                                               Parking             Lane            Parking
                              Sidewalk          Travel             Left            Travel        Sidewalk
                                                Lane/              Turn             Lane/
                                               Parking         52' Lane
                                                                   Roadway         Parking
                                                            72' Right-of-Way
                                                              52' Roadway
                           Note
                                                            72' Right-of-Way
                           1. Bike lane may be substituted for parking.
                           Note
                          Street      (Collector)
                           1. Bike lane                2 Lane
                                        may be substituted           - without Center Turn Lane
                                                           for parking.
                                 Street (Collector) - 2 Lane without Center-Turn Lane
                          Street (Collector) 2 Lane - without Center Turn Lane
                                        10'             20'                    20'             10'
                                     Sidewalk          Travel                Travel         Sidewalk
                                        10'             20'
                                                       Lane/                  20'
                                                                             Lane/             10'
                                     Sidewalk         Parking
                                                      Travel                Parking
                                                                            Travel         Sidewalk
                                                       Lane/                 Lane/
                                                      Parking40' RoadwayParking
                                                           60'
                                                             40'Right-of-Way
                                                                  Roadway
                                  Note                     60' Right-of-Way
                                  1. Bike lane may be substituted for parking.
                                  Note
Figure 8b                         1. Bike lane may be substituted for parking.
Street Standard Section for Street (Collector) - 2 Lane
 Figure 8b                                                                                               The Mobility Group
                                                                                                          Transportation Strategies & Solutions
 Street Standard Section for Street (Collector) - 2 Lane
City of South Gate Circulation Plan                                                                      The Mobility Group
                                                                                                         Transportation Strategies & Solutions
 City of South Gate Circulation Plan
                                                                                                           Mobility Element 179
      Figure ME 9  Street Standard Section for Local Streets - 2 Lane
                                                LocalLocalResidential
                                                 Local      Residential Street
                                                           Residential        Street
                                         7'-10'
                                         7'-10'           15'
                                                          15'              15'
                                                                           15'        7'-10'
                                                                                       7'-10'
                                      Sidewalk
                                       Sidewalk         Travel
                                                        Travel            Travel
                                                                          Travel    Sidewalk
                                                                                     Sidewalk
                                                        Lane/
                                                        Lane/             Lane/
                                                                          Lane/
                                                       Parking
                                                       Parking           Parking
                                                                         Parking
                                                             30'
                                                              30' Roadway
                                                                  Roadway
                                                        44'-50'
                                                         44'-50' Right-of-Way
                                                                  Right-of-Way
                                       Local   Local Commercial/Industrial Street
                                                 Commercial/Industrial             Street
                                       Local     Commercial/Industrial
                                    7'-10'
                                     7'-10'            20'
                                                        20'                  20'
                                                                             20'           7'-10'
                                                                                           7'-10'
                                   Sidewalk
                                   Sidewalk           Travel
                                                      Travel               Travel
                                                                            Travel       Sidewalk
                                                                                         Sidewalk
                                                      Lane/
                                                      Lane/                 Lane/
                                                                            Lane/
                                                     Parking
                                                     Parking               Parking
                                                                           Parking
                                                             40'
                                                             40' Roadway
                                                                  Roadway
                                                        54'-60'
                                                         54'-60' Right-of-Way
                                                                  Right-of-Way
 Figure
 Figure 99
 Street
 Street Standard
        Standard Section
                  Section for
                          for Local
                              Local Streets
                                     Streets -- 22 Lane
                                                   Lane                                           The Mobility Group
                                                                                                  Transportation
                                                                                                  Transportation Strategies
                                                                                                                 Strategies &
                                                                                                                            & Solutions
                                                                                                                              Solutions
180
 City South
 City of
      of SouthGate
          South      General
                  Gate
                  Gate          Plan Plan
                       Circulation
                        Circulation     2035
                                       Plan
                                  KEY CITY STREETS:
                                  CORRIDOR
                                  CHARACTERISTICS
                                  AND CONTEXT
                                  It is important that roadway design not only responds to the functional
                                  needs of the roadway itself, but also contextually to the environment
It is important that roadway      through which the roadway passes. This is called context-sensitive
                                  design, and coordinates the configuration and layout of the roadway
design not only responds to the   with adjacent land uses and the characteristics of the districts through
                                  which the roadway passes.
functional needs of the road-
                                  For example, while a particular boulevard may need to carry significant
way itself, but also contextually amounts of traffic it may also serve bus transit routes and if the adja-
                                  cent land uses include local commercial and retail uses there may also
to the environment through        be a significant number of pedestrians on the sidewalks. The street
                                  design should also be both transit-friendly and pedestrian-friendly (for
which the roadway passes.         example, wider sidewalks and enhanced pedestrian crossing oppor-
                                  tunities) rather than only serving the needs of the automobile. Or if
                                  a street passes through a shopping district, then traffic flow needs
                                  should be balanced with the needs for convenient on-street parking
                                  and a walkable pedestrian environment.
                                  The Community Design Element provides the vision and specific
                                  policy guidance on the key roadway corridors in the City – and it is
                                  important that the street standards in the Mobility Element reflect
                                  those visions and policies.
                                  This section provides information on the characteristics and context for
                                  each of the key street corridors in the City. It describes their transpor-
                                  tation function and key design characteristics and identifies for each
                                  corridor either the appropriate typical cross-section from the standards
                                  or the specific cross-section developed for that corridor.
                                                                                   Mobility Element 181

    Street standards for these key roadways are tailored
    to the specific circumstances of that roadway, appro-
    priate to the transportation function of all modes and
    the function and character of the adjacent land uses
    along the corridor.
    Along the key corridors (shown in Figure ME 10)
    these specific street standards override the general
    citywide roadway standards. The standards de-
    scribed in this section should be applied wherever
    feasible. They may, however, be modified at the
    City’s discretion on a case-by-case basis in response
    to specific circumstances.
182 South Gate General Plan 2035

Figure ME 10                                Key City Streets/Corridors with Specific Street Standards
                                                                                   View Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Florence Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e.
                                                                                                                                                              e.
                  Santa Fe Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tic
                                                                                                               State St.                                                                                                                               Atlan
                                                                                                                                                          California Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                       St.                                                                                                                                         e.
                                                                                 Mountain
    Nadeau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Eastern Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd.
      St.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Clara St.     Ave.                                                                           ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Otis                                                                                                                                                    Ja
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                               UP                                           Ave.                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wilcox
                                                     Lo                                                                                                                    Santa Ana Av                                RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                 e.
                                                        ng
                                                                a                                                                                                                                                                   Sa
                                                             Be a
                                                              13 ch                                                                                                        Liberty Blvd                                                lt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            La
                                                                                                                                                                                             .                                                    ke                                                                                                                        Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Av                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                                                                 Independenc                                                                              e  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Gar
                                                                     Blv            11b                                                                                                 e Ave.                                                                                                                                                                      fie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ld
                                                                         d.                               16                                 16                       Ardmore Av
                                                                                                                                                                                        e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      UP RR
                                                                                                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                                                                    Firestone Blv
                                                                                                                                                                                         d.
        92nd St.
                                                                                                                              11b                                            11a                                                                                                       11b                                                  14 a
                                                                                                                                                                  Southern Av
                      Alame                     Truba Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                        e.
                                                                                               13b
                                                                                                                           Elizabeth Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RIVER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Alexander Av
                                   (W
                            da St.                                                                                                      e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LOS ANGE
                                                              15a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LES
                                  )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Southern
                                          Alame
                                                                                                                                                            Tweedy B                                                                                                                                                                                  Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                 lvd.
         103rd St.
                                                                                                                                                                          15b                                                                                                                                     710
                                           da St.                                                                                                                                                                                                  15c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ND
                                                 (E)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        lR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            d.
      Sa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  O
          nta                                                          Century Blvd                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RI                                                                oo
                                                                                                    . (W)
     Sa       A                                                    San
        nta na B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UP                ld Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rS
                    lv
                                                 UP RR
            An
                                                                    ta Fe Ave.
               a B d. N                                                                                                                                                                                                       Abbott Rd.                                                                                                                                    ive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RR
                  lvd       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             G 4b
                      . S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         arfie
                          .                                                                                                                                                                                                  Imperial Hwy.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ol
                                                             Fe
                                                                  rn w
                                                                      oo
                                                                            d
                                                                                       Av
                                                                                          e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 M
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ar                           echwood Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                        tin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Be                                  e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         er
                                    Mona                                                                                                                                                                                      Ki
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bl                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         vd
                                        Blvd.
                                                                                                                                                                                    Fe                                                                                       t Rd
                                                                                                                                       Long Beach Blvd.
                                                                                                                                                                                         rnw                                                  .                                                                                                                Ga
                                                                                                                                                                                            ood                                                                                                                                                                   rd   en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Wrig
                                                                                               Santa F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            da
                                                                                                                                                                           d.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                h                                                                                                le
                                                                                                                                                                          is R                                               Av                                                                                                                                                       St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      105                      e.
                                                                                                                                                                     Bull                                                                                                                                                                                        Ma
                                                                                                 e Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ce                                               in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ntu
       El Segundo Blvd.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ry                                             St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Blv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tic A                                                                                                           d.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (E)
                                                                                                 Legend                                                                                                                                 ve.
                     City Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                             Atlan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Garfield Ave.
      11a. See Figure 11a. Firestone Boulevard between
                           Evergreen Avenue and Hildreth Avenue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Paramount
      11b. See Figure 11b. Firestone Boulevard - Enhanced Intersections,
                           West of Evergreen Avenue and East of Hildreth Avenue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Blvd.
      12. See Figure 12. Atlantic Avenue
      13a. See Figure 13a. Long Beach Boulevard - North of Firestone Boulevard
      13b. See Figure 13b. Long Beach Boulevard - South of Firestone Boulevard
      14a. See Figure 14a. Garfield Avenue - Rio Hondo Channel to North City Limit
      14b. See Figure 14b. Garfield Avenue - South of Rio Hondo Channel
      15a. See Figure 15a. Tweedy Boulevard - West of Long Beach Boulevard                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N
      15b. See Figure 15b. Tweedy Boulevard - Long Beach to Hunt Avenue
      15c. See Figure 15c. Tweedy Boulevard - East of Hunt Avenue
      16. See Figure 16. State Street and California Street
      17. See Figure 17. Otis Street
    Figure 10
    Key City Streets/Corridors with Specific Street Standards                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 The Mobility Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Transportation Strategies & Solutions
    City of South Gate Circulation Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mobility Element 183
    Table ME 3 – Corridor Characteristics: Firestone Boulevard
                                     A multi-modal transportation corridor – serving multiple transportation modes. The principal arte-
    Key Transportation Function:     rial roadway in the City, and the only east-west Primary Arterial. Carries local and through traffic.
                                     Serves local and adjacent land uses.
    Street Type:                     Boulevard (Primary Arterial).
    Adjacent Land Uses:              Commercial, institutional, mixed use, high-density residential.
                                     Intended to carry higher traffic volumes, but not at high traffic speeds, in a multi-modal and
    Traffic Function:
                                     pedestrian-friendly environment.
    Truck Function:                  Designated Truck Route.
    Transit Function:                Primary Transit Street. Serves multiple transit routes.
                                     Not on bike network. Bike network is on parallel routes.
    Bicycle/Pedestrian Function:
                                     Design as pedestrian-friendly environment (wider sidewalks, intersection crossings, etc.).
    On-Street Parking:               Yes – may be restricted during peak periods.
                                     Maximum six lanes between Evergreen Avenue, and Hildreth Avenue. (See Figure ME 2)
    No. of Through Lanes:
                                     Minimum six lanes west of Evergreen Avenue and east of Hildreth Avenue.
                                     Yes, between Evergreen Avenue and Hildreth Avenue.
    Median:
                                     Where feasible west of Evergreen Avenue and east of Hildreth Avenue.
                                     See Figure ME 11a and 11b for roadway cross-section.
    Design Characteristics:          Roadway design to achieve balance between auto needs and transit/pedestrian needs.
                                     Design to create the principal urban boulevard in the City.
184 South Gate General Plan 2035

       Figure ME 11a Firestone
                          Proposed Street  Standard Section
                                        Boulevard            for Firestone
                                                      (Evergreen           Boulevard
                                                                        Avenue        between Evergreen
                                                                                   to Hildreth   Avenue)  Avenue
                          and Hildreth Avenue.
                    15'           13'        11'       12'          14'        12'       11'       13'           15'
                 Sidewalk       Travel     Travel    Travel      Median       Travel   Travel     Travel      Sidewalk
                                 Lane/      Lane     Lane         & Left      Lane      Lane      Lane/
                                Parking                            Turn                          Parking
                                                                  Lane
                                                              86' Roadway
                                                            116' Right-of-Way
              Notes:
              1. Median width may be reduced to 10' minimum and difference allocated to travel lanes, on arterial streets
                  with high truck volumes.
              2. Lane widths may be modified within overall roadway width to accommodate trucks as necessary.
              3. A median nose should be provided where roadway width allows.
              4. Parking may be restricted in peak periods.
              5. Width may be increased for sidewalk width (easement on private property with building setbacks).
Figure 11a     Proposed Street Standard Section for Firestone Boulevard between
               Evergreen and Hildreth                                                               The Mobility Group
                                                                                                     Transportation Strategies & Solutions
City of South Gate Circulation Plan
                                                                                                     Mobility Element 185
                         Firestone Boulevard (West of Evergreen and East of Hildreth)
                                                 For Enhanced Intersections
     Figure ME 11b       Proposed Street Standard Section for Firestone Boulevard West of Evergreen Avenue & East of
                         Hildreth Avenue - For Enhanced Intersections
                     15'         13'         11'      11-12'   11-12'    11-12'   11-12'    11'       13'           15'
                 Sidewalk       Travel     Travel     Travel       Median        Travel  Travel      Travel      Sidewalk
                                Lane        Lane       Lane         & Left        Lane    Lane        Lane
                                                                     Turn
                                                                     Lane
                                                             92-96' Roadway
                                                          122-126' Right-of-Way
             Notes:
             1. A median nose should be provided where roadway width allows.
             2. Lane widths may be modified within overall roadway width to accommodate trucks as necessary.
             3. Width may be increased for: right-turn lane (max 12'); intersection skew of offsets (as necessary); bus pullout
                (max 10'-12'); additional sidewalk width (easement on private property with building setbacks).
             4. Between Atlantic Avenue and Garfield Avenue, Firestone Boulevard should be a minimum of eight lanes (excluding
                left turns). Exact lane configuration and cross section to be determined by design studies at time of widening.
 Figure 11b   Proposed Street Standard Section for Firestone Blvd. West of
              Evergreen & East of Hildreth - For Enhanced Intersections                                 The Mobility Group
                                                                                                        Transportation Strategies & Solutions
 City of South Gate Circulation Plan
186 South Gate General Plan 2035
 Table ME 4 – Corridor Characteristics: Atlantic Avenue
                                A multi-modal transportation corridor – serving multiple transportation modes. A key
 Key Transportation Function:   arterial roadway in the City. Carries local and through traffic serves local and adjacent land
                                uses. Carries significant volumes of truck traffic north of Tweedy Boulevard.
 Street Type:                   Boulevard (Primary Arterial).
 Adjacent Land Uses:            Commercial, industrial, mixed use and high density residential.
                                Intended to carry higher traffic volumes, but not at high traffic speeds, in a multi-modal
 Traffic Function:              and pedestrian-friendly environment. Higher traffic and truck volumes north of Tweedy
                                Boulevard. Lower volumes and less trucks south of Tweedy Boulevard.
 Truck Function:                Designated Truck Route.
 Transit Function:              Primary Transit Street. Serves multiple transit routes.
                                Not on bike network. Bike network is on other routes.
 Bicycle/Pedestrian Function:
                                Design as pedestrian-friendly environment (wider sidewalks, intersection crossings, etc.)
 On-Street Parking:             Yes – may be restricted during peak periods.
 No. of Through Lanes:          Maximum six lanes.
 Median:                        Yes, where feasible.
                                See Figure ME 12 for roadway cross-section.
 Design Characteristics:
                                Roadway design to achieve balance between auto needs and transit/pedestrian needs.
                                                                                                            Mobility Element 187

       Figure ME 12     Proposed Street Standard Section for Atlantic Avenue
                                                       Atlantic Avenue
                   15'           13'       11'        12'          14'        12'      11'        13'           15'
                Sidewalk       Travel     Travel    Travel      Median       Travel Travel       Travel      Sidewalk
                                Lane/     Lane      Lane         & Left      Lane    Lane        Lane/
                               Parking                            Turn                          Parking
                                                                 Lane
                                                             86' Roadway
                                                           116' Right-of-Way
             Notes:
             1. Median width may be reduced to 10' minimum and difference allocated to travel lanes, on arterial streets
                 with high truck volumes.
             2. Lane widths may be modified within overall roadway width to accommodate trucks as necessary.
             3. A median nose should be provided where roadway width allows.
             4. Parking may be restricted in peak periods.
             5. Width may be increased for: sidewalk width (easement on private property with building setbacks).
                                                                                                                                   10/30/08
Figure 12     Proposed Street Standard Section for Atlantic Avenue
                                                                                                    The Mobility Group
                                                                                                    Transportation Strategies & Solutions
City of South Gate Circulation Plan
 188 South Gate General Plan 2035
 Table ME 5 – Corridor Characteristics: Long Beach Boulevard
                                A multi-modal transportation corridor – serving multiple transportation modes. The key
 Key Transportation Function:
                                arterial roadway on the west side of the City. Carries local and through traffic.
 Street Type:                   Boulevard (Primary Arterial).
 Adjacent Land Uses:            Commercial, retail, institutional, and mixed use.
 Traffic Function:              Has to serve both local traffic accessing adjacent land uses, and through traffic.
 Truck Function:                Not a Designated Truck Route.
                                Primary Transit Street. Serves multiple transit routes. Direct route to Green Line Station at
 Transit Function:
                                I-105.
                                Not on bike network. Bike network is on parallel routes.
 Bicycle/Pedestrian Function:
                                Design as pedestrian-friendly environment (wider sidewalks, intersection crossings, etc.).
 On-Street Parking:             Yes – may be restricted during peak periods.
                                Maximum four lanes north of Firestone Boulevard.
 No. of Through Lanes:
                                Maximum six lanes south of Firestone Boulevard.
 Median:                        Yes, where feasible.
                                See Figure ME 13a and ME 13b for roadway cross-section.
 Design Characteristics:        Conduct Study to determine design parameters south of Firestone. Design street to
                                achieve balance between auto needs, transit/pedestrian needs, and parking needs.
                                                                                                          Mobility Element 189

                                   Long Beach Boulevard - North of Firestone
        Figure ME 13a    Proposed Street Standard Section for Long Beach Boulevard - North of Firestone Boulevard
                 12-15’              20’             12’        10-12’       12’         20’              12-15’
                Sidewalk           Travel          Travel     Median       Travel      Travel           Sidewalk
                                   Lane/           Lane        & Left      Lane         Lane/
                                  Parking                       Turn                   Parking
                                                                Lane
                                                          74-76’ Roadway
                                                        98-100’ Right-of-Way
              Notes
              1. Sidewalks to be 15' wide between Firestone Boulevard and Independence Avenue, and at key
                 commercial nodes (e.g. at Firestone Boulevard).
Figure 13a
Proposed Street Standard Section for Long Beach Boulevard - North of Firestone                  The Mobility Group
                                                                                                 Transportation Strategies & Solutions
City of South Gate Circulation Plan
  190 South Gate General Plan 2035

                                   Long Beach Boulevard - South of Firestone
         Figure ME 13b    Proposed Street Standard Section for Long Beach Boulevard - South of Firestone Boulevard
                  12-15’       12’         11’        11’       10-12’       11’        11’      12’        12-15’
                Sidewalk      Travel     Travel     Travel     Median      Travel     Travel    Travel    Sidewalk
                              Lane/       Lane      Lane        & Left      Lane      Lane      Lane/
                             Parking                            Turn                           Parking
                                                                Lane
                                                           78-80’ Roadway
                                                        102-104’ Right-of-Way
              Notes
              1. A median nose should be provided where roadway width allows
              2. Parking may be restricted in peak periods.
              3. Sidewalks to be 15' wide at key commercial nodes (e.g. at Firestone Boulevard and at Tweedy
                 Boulevard).
                                                                                                                                  10/30/08
Figure 13b
Proposed Street Standard Section for Long Beach Boulevard - South of Firestone                     The Mobility Group
                                                                                                   Transportation Strategies & Solutions
City of South Gate Circulation Plan
                                                                                                 Mobility Element 191

    Table ME 6 – Corridor Characteristics: Garfield Avenue
                                  A multi-modal transportation corridor – serving multiple transportation modes. A key
    Key Transportation Function:  arterial roadway on the east side of the City. Carries local and through traffic, and truck
                                  traffic.
    Street Type:                  Boulevard (Primary Arterial).
    Adjacent Land Uses:           Industrial, commercial. Residential south of Rio Hondo Channel.
    Traffic Function:             Has to serve both local traffic and through traffic.
    Truck Function:               Designated Truck Route.
    Transit Function:             Secondary Transit Street. Serves multiple transit routes.
                                  Not on bike network. Bike network is on parallel routes, including bike paths on river
    Bicycle/Pedestrian Function:
                                  channels.
    On-Street Parking:            Yes – may be restricted during peak periods.
                                  Maximum six lanes across Rio Hondo Channel and to north.
    No. of Through Lanes:
                                  Maximum four lanes south of Rio Hondo Channel.
    Median:                       Yes, where feasible.
                                  See Figure ME 14a for roadway cross-section north of Rio Hondo Channel. See Figure ME
    Design Characteristics:
                                  14b for cross-section south of Rio Hondo Channel.
192 South Gate General Plan 2035

                                   Garfield Avenue - Rio Hondo Channel to North City Limit
      Figure ME 14a      Street Standard Section for Garfield Avenue - Rio Hondo Channel to North City Limit
                12-15'       12-13'        11'       11-12'      12-14'       11-12'        11'      12-13'        12-15'
              Sidewalk       Travel      Travel      Travel      Median       Travel      Travel      Travel     Sidewalk
                              Lane/      Lane        Lane        or Left       Lane        Lane       Lane/
                             Parking                              Turn                               Parking
                                                                  Lane
                                                            80-86' Roadway
                                                         104-116' Right-of-Way
           Notes
           1. Median width may be reduced to 10' minimum and difference allocated to travel lanes, on arterial streets with
              high truck volumes.
           2. Lane widths may be modified within overall roadway width to accommodate trucks as necessary.
           3. A median nose should be provided where roadway width allows.
           4. Parking may be restricted in peak periods.
           5. Width may be increased for: bus pullout (10'-12 ' max); major development project driveway right-turn lane
              (max 12'); additional sidewalk width (easement on private property with building setbacks).
           6. See Figure 6b for Enhanced Intersection configurations.
Figure 14a
Street Standard Section for Garfield Avenue - Rio Hondo Channel to North City Limit                    The Mobility Group
                                                                                                       Transportation Strategies & Solutions
City of South Gate Circulation Plan
                                                                                                       Mobility Element 193
                                 Garfield Avenue - South of Rio Hondo Channel
          Figure ME 14b     Street Standard Section for Garfield Avenue - South of Rio Hondo Channel
                   12'-15'            20'               12'          12'        12'              20'             12'-15'
                  Sidewalk           Travel           Travel      Median      Travel            Travel          Sidewalk
                                     Lane/             Lane       or Left-     Lane             Lane/
                                    Parking                      Turn Lane                     Parking
                                                               76' Roadway
                                                          100'-106' Right-of-Way
               Notes
               1. Width may be increased for: bus pullout (max. 10 - 12 ft); major development project driveway right-
                  turn lane (max.12 ft); additional sidewalk width (easement on private property with building setbacks).
               2. Lane and median widths may be modified within overall roadway width to accommodate trucks as
                  necessary.
Figure 14b
Street Standard Section for Garfield Avenue - South of Rio Hondo Channel                              The Mobility Group
                                                                                                      Transportation Strategies & Solutions
City of South Gate Circulation Plan
    194 South Gate General Plan 2035
 Table ME 7 – Corridor Characteristics: Tweedy Boulevard
                                          A multi-modal transportation corridor – serving multiple transportation modes. The only
 Key Transportation Function:
                                          arterial roadway on the south side of the City. Carries local and through traffic.
 Street Type:                             Avenue (Secondary Arterial).
                                          Commercial, retail concentration on Tweedy Mile. Some institutional, residential and
 Adjacent Land Uses:
                                          mixed use.
                                          Has to serve both local traffic – particularly accessing adjacent land uses in shopping area
 Traffic Function:
                                          of Tweedy Mile and through traffic.
 Truck Function:                          Not a Designated Truck Route.
 Transit Function:                        Secondary Transit Street. Serves multiple transit routes.
                                          Not on bike network. Bike network is on parallel routes. Should be traffic-calmed
 Bicycle/Pedestrian Function:
                                          pedestrian-friendly environment along Tweedy Mile.
 On-Street Parking:                       Yes – where feasible.
 No. of Through Lanes:                    Four lanes throughout City (see also below).
 Median:                                  No, not feasible.
                                          See Figure ME 15a for roadway cross section west of Long Beach Boulevard.
                                          See Figure ME 15b for cross section between Long Beach Boulevard and Hunt Avenue.
                                          Conduct Special Study for Tweedy Mile area to determine design parameters and feasibility
 Design Characteristics:                  of one-lane in each direction.
                                          Design street to achieve balance between auto needs, transit/pedestrian needs, parking
                                          needs, and 15-foot sidewalks where feasible.
                                          See Figure ME 15c for cross section east of Hunt Avenue.
                                                                                                           Mobility Element 195

                          Tweedy Boulevard - West of Long Beach Boulevard
         Figure ME 15a   Street Standard Section for Tweedy Boulevard - West of Long Beach Boulevard
                   8-12'            19-20'           10-11'     6-8'     10-11'         19-20'            8-12'
                 Sidewalk           Travel          Travel     Median    Travel          Travel         Sidewalk
                                    Lane/            Lane                 Lane           Lane/
                                   Parking                                              Parking
                                                             64-70' Roadway
                                                            80-94' Right-of-Way
re 15a
et Standard Section for Tweedy Boulevard - West of Long Beach Boulevard                              The Mobility Grou
                                                                                                     Transportation Strategies & Solution
 of 196
    SouthSouth
            GateGate    General Plan
                   Circulation       Plan2035
                  Tweedy Boulevard - Long Beach Boulevard to Hunt Avenue
           Figure ME 15b    Street Standard Section for Tweedy Boulevard - Long Beach Boulevard to Hunt Avenue
                            This illustrates street section within existing curb and property line locations. Further study required
                            for option to reduce to one traffic lane in each direction
                        12'                   19'                  11'            11'                  19'                    12'
                    Sidewalk                Travel              Travel           Travel               Travel             Sidewalk
                                            Lane/                Lane            Lane                 Lane/
                                           Parking                                                   Parking
                                                                    60' Roadway
                                                                 84' Right-of-Way
                 Notes
                 1. Width may be increased for: additional sidewalk width (easement on private
                     property with building setbacks).
                 2. Parking in wide curb lane at midblock locations. Roadway layout may transition to
                     include left turn lane at intersections in lieu of parking.
                 3. See Figure 7b for intersection configuration (use lower end of ranges).
                  4. This illustrates street section within existing curb and property line locations.
                     Further study required for option to reduce to one traffic lane in each direction
e 15b                                                                                                             Mobility Element 197
 Standard Section for Tweedy Boulevard - Long Beach Boulevard to Hunt Avenue
                                 Tweedy Boulevard - East of Hunt Avenue
         Figure ME 15c    Street Standard Section for Tweedy Boulevard - East of Hunt Avenue
                      12'               19'               11'          11'               19'      12'
                  Sidewalk             Travel           Travel       Travel             Travel Sidewalk
                                       Lane/             Lane         Lane              Lane/
                                      Parking                                          Parking
                                                           60' Roadway
                                                         84' Right-of-Way
                Notes
                1. Width may be increased for: additional sidewalk width (easement on private
                   property with building setbacks).
                2. Parking in wide curb lane at midblock locations. Roadway layout may transition to
                   include left turn lane at intersections in lieu of parking.
                3. See Figure 7b for intersection configuration (use lower end of ranges)
 5c
    198 South Gate General Plan 2035
tandard Section for Tweedy Boulevard - East of Hunt Avenue                                     The Mobility Gr
                                                                                               Transportation Strategies & Sol
 Table ME 8 – Corridor Characteristics: State Street and California Avenue
                                Secondary travel corridors (lower volumes) but serves multiple transportation modes. Car-
 Key Transportation Function:
                                ries primarily local traffic.
 Street Type:                   Avenue (Secondary Arterial).
 Adjacent Land Uses:            Primarily residential. Some commercial and institutional.
 Traffic Function:              Serves primarily local traffic (accessing adjacent land uses and adjacent neighborhoods).
 Truck Function:                Not Designated Truck Routes.
 Transit Function:              Secondary Transit Street. Serves multiple transit routes.
                                California designated as a Bike Street (no striped lane). Bike route also on parallel street to
 Bicycle/Pedestrian Function:
                                State Street. Streets should be pedestrian-friendly.
 On-Street Parking:             Yes – where feasible.
 No. of Through Lanes:          Maximum four lanes throughout City.
 Median:                        No, not feasible.
 Design Characteristics:        Figure ME 16 for roadway cross section.
                                                                                                           Mobility Element 199

                                  State Street and California Avenue
       Figure ME 16   Street Standard Section for State Street and California Avenue
                   12'               19'                11'          11'               19'      12'
               Sidewalk            Travel            Travel        Travel            Travel  Sidewalk
                                   Lane/              Lane          Lane              Lane/
                                  Parking                                            Parking
                                                        60' Roadway
                                                      84' Right-of-Way
             Notes
             1. Width may be increased for: bus pullout (10'-12' max); major development project
                driveway right-turn lane (max 12'); additional sidewalk width (easement on private
                property with building setbacks).
             2. Parking in wide curb lane at midblock locations. Roadway layout may transition to
                include left turn lane at intersections in lieu of parking.
             3. Bike lane may be substituted for parking.
             4. See Figure 7b for intersection configuration (use lower end of ranges).
6
   200Section
       South forGate   General
                           StreetPlan
                                    and2035
andard              State                 California Avenue                                  The Mobility Gro
                                                                                             Transportation Strategies & Solu
 Table ME 9 – Corridor Characteristics: Otis Street
                                Secondary travel corridor (lower volumes) but serves multiple transportation modes. Car-
 Key Transportation Function
                                ries primarily local traffic.
 Street Type:                   Street (Collector).
 Adjacent Land Uses:            Primarily residential. Some commercial and institutional.
 Traffic Function:              Serves primarily local traffic (accessing adjacent land uses and adjacent neighborhoods).
 Truck Function:                Not a Designated Truck Route.
 Transit Function:              Secondary Transit Street. Serves multiple transit routes.
                                Not on Bike Network. Bike route on parallel street (Alexander Street). Street should be
 Bicycle/Pedestrian Function:
                                pedestrian-friendly.
 On-Street Parking:             Yes – where feasible.
 No. of Through Lanes:          Maximum four lanes throughout City.
 Median:                        No, not feasible.
 Design Characteristics:        See Figure ME 17 for roadway cross section.
                                                                                                           Mobility Element 201

     Figure ME 17  Street Standard Section for Otis Street
                       Otis Street (Mid-Block with Parking or at Intersection without Left-Turn Lane)
               Otis Street   (Mid-Block with Parking or At Intersection Without Left-Turn Lane)
              Otis Street (Mid-Block with Parking or At Intersection Without Left-Turn Lane)
                              12'          18-19'           10-11'        10-11'        18-19'            12'
                              12'          18-19'           10-11'       10-11'         18-19'            12'
                           Sidewalk         Travel          Travel        Travel         Travel        Sidewalk
                          Sidewalk         Travel
                                            Lane/          Travel
                                                             Lane        Travel
                                                                           Lane         Travel
                                                                                         Lane/        Sidewalk
                                           Lane/
                                           Parking          Lane          Lane           Lane/
                                                                                        Parking
                                          Parking                                       Parking
                                                             56-60' Roadway
                                                            56-60' Roadway
                                                          80-84'' Right-of-Way
                                                          80-84'' Right-of-Way
                         Note
                        Note
                         1. Bike lane may be substituted for parking.
                        1. Bike lane may be substituted for parking.
                 Otis Street (With Center Turn Lane, or At Intersection With Left Turn Lane)
                Otis Street     (With(with
                         Otis Street   Center    Turn Lane,
                                             Center-Turn    Lane, or   AtIntersection
                                                                   or at    Intersection withWith    LeftLane)
                                                                                               Left-Turn   Turn Lane)
                               12'      11-12'        11-12'         12'         11-12'      11-12'       12'
                              12'      11-12'        11-12'          12'        11-12'      11-12'        12'
                           Sidewalk     Travel       Travel          Left        Travel      Travel    Sidewalk
                          Sidewalk     Travel
                                         Lane       Travel
                                                      Lane          Left
                                                                    Turn         Travel
                                                                                  Lane      Travel
                                                                                              Lane    Sidewalk
                                        Lane         Lane           Turn or
                                                                   Lane          Lane        Lane
                                                                  Lane
                                                                   Medianor
                                                                  Median
                                                             56-60' Roadway
                                                            56-60' Roadway
                                                           80-84' Right-of-Way
                                                          80-84' Right-of-Way
    Figure 17
   Figure 17
    Street Standard Section for Otis Street
                                                                                                        The     Mobility Group
                                                                                                        The Mobility
                                                                                                         Transportation Strategies Group
   Street Standard Section for Otis Street
                                                                                                                                   & Solutions
                                                                                                        Transportation Strategies & Solutions
    City of South Gate Circulation Plan
   City of South Gate Circulation Plan
202 South Gate General Plan 2035
GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND                                                   P.3	 The City desires to maintain a maximum Level of Service D at
                                                                             signalized intersections throughout the City, except that Level
                                                                             of Service E may be permitted in the following circumstances:
POLICIES                                                                       xx Intersections at, or adjacent to, freeway ramps
                                                                               xx Intersections of Boulevards (Primary Arterials) with other
The goals, objectives, and policies of the Mobility                                Boulevards
Element are described below. They were developed                               xx Intersections on Truck Routes
                                                                               xx Intersections at or adjacent to designated Major Commer-
to address the overall vision for transportation and
                                                                                   cial Districts (Community College, Civic Center, Gateway,
mobility in the City and to respond to the key trans-                              El Paseo, Rayo Industrial, El Portal, South Gate Triangle).
portation issues and challenges facing the City.                        	    These performance standards may require, but are not
                                                                             intended to mandate, roadway and/or intersection widen-
                                                                             ings.  They are a policy goal and shall be used to monitor
Goal ME 1:	                                                                  traffic conditions in the City and to assess the impacts of new
Provide and maintain an efficient                                            development.  Because level of service standards apply only
                                                                             to vehicular mobility and do not account for walkability or
roadway system serving all parts                                             other modes, they shall not be the sole criteria for judging
                                                                             transportation system performance.  Pedestrian walkability
of the City and support multimodal                                           and convenience, livability, transit access and operability, and
                                                                             urban aesthetics, shall also be used.  
transportation
                                                                        P.4	 The City should require that the cost of transportation mitiga-
                                                                             tions and improvements necessitated by new development be
Objective ME 1.1:                                                            borne by new development (including non-automobile solutions).
Balance the roadway system with the                                     P.5	 The City should work with adjacent jurisdictions to minimize
planned land uses in the City.                                               the traffic impacts to South Gate from projects that occur
                                                                             outside the City.
Policies
P.1	 The City should provide a safe and efficient street system, to
                                                                        Objective ME 1.2:
     support the City’s mobility goals, all transportation modes,       Fully develop the street system, and maximize
     and the City’s Land Use and Community Design Elements.
                                                                        its operational efficiency.
P.2	 The City should develop and implement street design stan-
     dards on arterial corridors that are context sensitive to adjacent Policies
     land uses and districts, and to all roadway users including
     transit, bicycles, and pedestrians, where appropriate.             P.1	 The City should improve the street system by adding to the
                                                                             street grid in the north-east part of the City to relieve the
                                                                             Firestone/Atlantic intersection, including providing additional
                                                                             overcrossings of the Los Angeles River and the I-710 freeway,
                                                                             and an additional north-south collector street between Atlan-
                                                                             tic Avenue and the Los Angeles River.
                                                                        P.2	 The City should coordinate with the I-710 Corridor Project
                                                                             to explore I-710 interchange and ramp modifications that
                                                                             improve overall traffic circulation on city streets.
The intersection of Firestone and Atlantic Boulevards
is an example of an enhanced intersection in the
General Plan.
                                                                                                                Mobility Element 203

    P.3	 The City should improve the operational efficiency of the          Objective ME 1.3:
         arterial roadway system with the implementation of traffic
         management and traffic signal operations measures to:              Maintain the City’s transportation
           xx 	Minimize delay and congestion for all modes, without         infrastructure.
               adversely impacting transit, bicycles, and pedestrians, and;
           xx 	Keep traffic on the arterial streets and minimize intru-     Policies
               sion into residential neighborhoods.
                                                                            P.1	 The City should develop and maintain adequate funding
    P.4	 The City should design and operate arterials and intersec-              sources for the ongoing maintenance and upkeep of the
         tions for the safe operation of all modes including transit,            City’s transportation infrastructure.
         bicyclists, and pedestrians.
    P.5	 The City should investigate and pursue opportunities for
         grade separations at all at-grade railroad crossings.
                                                                            Goal ME 2:
    P.6	 The City should develop and implement a Traffic Management         Provide a multi-modal transporta-
         Center, to coordinate and manage the City’s traffic signal
         system, integrate transit operations on City streets (including
                                                                            tion environment in the City that
         transit priority as appropriate), and to implement advanced
         traffic management technologies where appropriate.
                                                                            provides transportation choices
                                                                            Objective ME 2.1:
                                                                            Provide a connected, balanced, and integrated
                                                                            transportation system of bicycle and pedes-
                                                                            trian networks that enable residents to walk
                                                                            and bike, as alternatives to use of the car.
                                                                            Policies
                                                                            P.1	 The City should develop and maintain a citywide bicycle network
                                                                                 of off-street bike paths, on-street bike lanes and bike streets.
                                                                            P.2	 The City should establish a number of bike hubs (centralized
                                                                                 locations with convenient bike parking for trip destinations or
                                                                                 transfer to other transportation modes), at key transit nodes
                                                                                 or commercial nodes.
    Traffic operations centers are a strategy to manage                     P.3	 The City should provide bicycle facilities, such as bicycle lock-
                                                                                 ers and secure bike parking, throughout the City.
    existing facilities more efficiently.
                                                                            P.4	 The City should develop and establish a citywide pedestrian
                                                                                 network, including both on-street (sidewalks) and off-street
                                                                                 (trails or paths) facilities, to connect neighborhoods, schools,
                                                                                 open space, and major destinations, where feasible.  
                                                                            P.5	 The City should provide pedestrian facilities, such as benches,
                                                                                 street trees, and trash cans, throughout the City.
                                                                            P.6	 The City should enhance pedestrian and bicycle access to
                                                                                 local and regional transit.
                                                                            P.7	 The City should promote the use of bicycling and walking,
                                                                                 through the publication of comprehensive maps and resource
                                                                                 materials, and the development and implementation of
                                                                                 marketing programs.
204 South Gate General Plan 2035

P.8	 The City should coordinate the provision of the non-motor-           P.7	 The City should encourage and support all potential rail
     ized networks (bicycle and pedestrian) with adjacent jurisdic-            transit serving the City, including a high speed, grade sepa-
     tions to maximize connectivity.                                           rated, environmentally friendly transit system along the Union
                                                                               Pacific Railroad right-of-way.
P.9	 New or major renovations to office, industrial, institutional,
     and multi-family projects should provide secure off-street bi-       P.8	 The City should actively promote the use of transit within the City.
     cycle parking, and are encouraged to provide bicycle facilities,
     such as, showers and changing rooms.
                                                                          Objective ME 2.3:
Objective ME 2.2:                                                         Encourage walking, biking, and use of tran-
Improve local and regional transit service.                               sit, through a variety of supportive land use
                                                                          development and urban design measures.
Policies
                                                                          Policies
P.1	 The City should work with Metro to improve the coverage of
     transit service in South Gate, by providing transit routes that      P.1	 In order to support the goals and policies of the General Plan
     more directly serve residential neighborhoods.                            and the Mobility Element,  the City should encourage the
                                                                               land use distribution, development siting, and architectural
P.2	 The City should encourage Metro to enhance regional transit               design of new development that promotes safety, pedestrian
     connections in South Gate through additional routes and                   friendly design, and access to transit facilities.
     increased service frequency.  
                                                                          P.2	 The City should require all new and substantially renovated
P.3	 The City should support Metro’s expansion of Rapid Bus Service,           office, retail, industrial, and multi-family developments to in-
     in the region and particularly on routes serving South Gate.              stall and implement transit amenities including bus turnouts,
P.4	 The City should establish local transit circulator service, particu-      pedestrian shelters, and other streetscape elements.
     larly to serve local neighborhoods and key districts.                P.3	 The City should require new and substantially renovated
P.5	 Working with Metro, the City should provide attractive and                office, retail, industrial and multi-family developments to
     convenient bus stops, including shade/weather protection,                 include bicycle and pedestrian amenities in the vicinity
     seats, transit information, and bus shelters as appropriate.              of the development, to facilitate bicycling and walking,
                                                                               including on-site bike paths where appropriate, sidewalk
P.6	 The City should establish a transit hub near the intersections            improvements, benches, and pedestrian signal push-buttons
     at Firestone and Atlantic Boulevards. The transit hub will likely         at nearby signals.
     accommodate bus transit at first, with a potential expansion
     to include trains.                                                   P.4	 The City should require new developments to develop Trans-
                                                                               portation Demand Management (TDM) programs to minimize
                                                                               auto trips and to encourage use of transit, ridesharing,
                                                                               bicycling, and walking.
A safe and attractive pedestrian network is critical to
                                                                          Local and regional transit service should be improved
reducing rates of driving and improving physical activ-
                                                                          to provide residents with an alternative to driving.
ity levels in the City.
                                                                                                                 Mobility Element 205

    P.5	 The City should promote the use of transportation demand
         management (TDM) programs.
    P.6	 The City should encourage development of park and ride
         lots at rail stations and transit centers and near freeway inter-
         changes to encourage ridesharing and transit use.
    P.7	 The City should plan for an adequate supply, but not an
         oversupply, of parking.
    Goal ME 3:
    Minimize the adverse effects of
    traffic                                                                Attractive transit facilities, such as bus shelters, are
                                                                           envisioned throughout South Gate.
    Objective ME 3.1:
    Minimize and/or reduce adverse impacts on                              P.5	 The City should work with Caltrans to install appropriate
                                                                                directional signage for trucks on the I-710 freeway to direct
    city streets from regional through traffic.                                 truck traffic to designated truck routes in the City and mini-
                                                                                mize impacts of trucks traveling to other cities on city streets.
    Policies
                                                                           P.6	 The City should retain and strengthen ordinances restricting
    P.1	 The City should coordinate with regional authorities and adja-         trucks from residential neighborhoods.
         cent jurisdictions for regional highway network improvements,
         regional multi-modal programs, and signage programs.
    P.2	 The City should support an I-710 Project design that mini-
                                                                           Objective ME 3.3:
         mizes traffic impacts on City streets, and enhances access to     Calm traffic and protect residential neigh-
         the freeway with improved interchanges with City streets.         borhoods from traffic intrusion.	
    Objective ME 3.2:                                                      Policies
    Reduce adverse impacts from truck traffic.                             P.1	 The City should use traffic calming and management measures
                                                                                on local and collector streets to discourage traffic from diverting
    Policies                                                                    into or taking short-cuts through residential neighborhoods.
    P.1	 The City should focus truck traffic onto appropriate arterial     P.2	 The City should apply appropriate traffic management tech-
         corridors in the City.                                                 niques to control the volume and speed of traffic to appropri-
                                                                                ate levels consistent with adjacent land uses on local streets,
    P.2	 The City should work closely with Metro and Caltrans on                near schools, and along streets with a significant amount of
         the I-710 Corridor Improvements process to ensure new                  residential development.
         truck ramps in the City are suitably located to facilitate truck
         access to industrial areas of the City, and to ensure that new    P.3	 The City should develop neighborhood traffic management
         truck lanes and direct truck ramps do not adversely impact             programs where necessary and appropriate in residential
         the City and its neighborhoods.                                        neighborhoods and around schools, parks, and sensitive uses
                                                                                such as senior centers.	
    P.3	 The City should consider a truck inspection facility on or
         adjacent to I-710 within the City limits.
    P.4	 The City should coordinate with regional planning agencies,
         the Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach, and railroad opera-
         tors to maximize the use of rail for goods movement in the
         region and in the I-710 Corridor in particular. 	 
206 South Gate General Plan 2035
Goal ME 4:	                                                             IMPLEMENTATION
Effectively manage parking
                                                                        ACTIONS
Objective ME 4.1:                                                       The following describes the actions that are designed to
Manage parking demand and supply in the                                 implement the Mobility Element. A brief description of
City.                                                                   each action is provided.
Policies
P.1	 The City should ensure that adequate off-street parking is
     provided for new residential development and new additions
                                                                        Actions for Street
     that add bedrooms.
                                                                        Improvements
P.2	 The City should develop revised parking guidelines and re-         A number of street improvements need to be imple-
     quirements that allow reduced parking for new development
     projects in areas with high mixed uses, along major mixed          mented in order to improve connections, fill in some
     use corridors and near high-frequency transit service.             gaps in the existing grid, improve access to the I-710
P.3	 The City should allow joint use of shared parking and encour-      Freeway, improve circulation across the barriers of
     age and implement “Park Once” programs with appropriate            the Los Angeles River and the I-710 Freeway, improve
     parking standards for the key commercial and civic areas in the    traffic circulation, and keep traffic on arterial roadways
     City.  Park Once allows visitors to park once in a commercial
     district and then visit multiple destinations on foot, rather than and out of residential neighborhoods.
     driving between parking lots to visit different destinations.  
     Park Once programs allow less overall parking to be provided       Action ME 1:
     while encouraging walking within the commercial district.
                                                                        Implement the following street improve-
P.4	 The City should develop parking districts in key commercial
     areas. This will enable the most efficient and cost-effective      ments for general circulation (including
     provision and use of parking, including the possible construc-     transit and other modes):
     tion of parking structures as appropriate.
                                                                        Action ME 1.1: Garfield Avenue: Widen from four
                                                                        lanes to six lanes between just south of the Rio
                                                                        Hondo Channel and Firestone Boulevard.
                                                                        Action ME 1.2: Garfield Avenue: Work with the I-710
                                                                        Improvement Project to add truck ramps to I-710
                                                                        Truck Lanes within the City limits where feasible
                                                                        without adversely impacting key streets or residential
                                                                        neighborhoods.
                                                                        Action ME 1.3: I-710 Freeway Interchanges: Explore im-
                                                                        proved ramp connections to city streets as part of the
                                                                        I-710 Project, including the concept of a joint access
                                                                        and frontage road system that would provide freeway
                                                                        access/egress to the new Southern Avenue Extension,
                                                                        Firestone Boulevard, and a new easterly extension of
The City should take steps to reduce the impact of                      Independence Avenue/Ardmore Avenue.
regional truck traffic on city streets.
                                                                                                        Mobility Element 207

    Action ME 1.4: Area Bounded by I-710, Tweedy Bou-                    Action ME 1.10: Firestone Boulevard: Widen
    levard, Atlantic Avenue, UP Railroad Corridor (east-                 to a six lane boulevard, as discussed in Corridor
    west): Conduct studies to explore/implement im-                      Characteristics Section and shown in Table ME3 and
    provements to the currently lacking street grid in this              Figures ME 11a and ME 11b. West of Evergreen Av-
    area in order to relieve pressure on the intersection of             enue, and east of Hildreth Avenue, Firestone Boule-
    Firestone Boulevard and Atlantic Avenue. Roadway                     vard may need to accommodate an enhanced cross-
    improvements could include:                                          section with additional (right and left) turn lanes.
    •	 Extend Independence Avenue or Ardmore Avenue east from            Between Atlantic Avenue and Garfield Avenue, Fires-
       Otis Street, over the Los Angeles River and the I-710 Freeway to  tone Boulevard should be a minimum of eight lanes
       Garfield Avenue. This should be a Collector Street.               (excluding left turns). Exact lane configuration and
    •	 Add a new north-south Collector Street (Wilcox Avenue) to         cross section will be determined by design studies at
       connect the extended Independence/Ardmore (Patata Street),        time of widening.
       south to Firestone Boulevard just east of the railroad tracks and
       then southerly (adjacent to and east of the railroad) to connect  Action ME 1.11: Southern Avenue: Extend east, as an
       to Southern Avenue. (see Figure ME 2).
                                                                         Avenue (four lanes), across the Los Angeles River and
    Action ME 1.5: Atlantic Avenue: Widen from four                      the I-710 Freeway to connect to Garfield Avenue.
    lanes to six lanes throughout the City, as discussed in
                                                                         Action ME 1.12: Tweedy Boulevard: Conduct a study
    the Corridor Characteristics Section in Table ME 4 and
                                                                         of Tweedy Boulevard between Long Beach Boulevard
    Figure ME 12.
                                                                         and Hunt Avenue – known as the “Tweedy Mile”.
    Action ME 1.6: Alexander Avenue: Extend north from                   Tweedy Boulevard should remain a four lane street,
    Firestone Boulevard to Ardmore Avenue in conjunc-                    (as discussed in the Corridor Characteristic Section in
    tion with private property development.                              Table ME 7) but studies should address the feasibility
                                                                         of converting to a two lane street with traffic calm-
    Action ME 1.7: Long Beach Boulevard: Widen to six
                                                                         ing, traffic management, and parking strategies, to
    lanes between the South City Limit and Firestone
                                                                         create a true multi-modal and pedestrian-oriented
    Boulevard. Accommodate on-street parking and
                                                                         environment along the Tweedy Mile commercial cor-
    wider sidewalks as described under Corridor Charac-
                                                                         ridor, including 15-foot sidewalks where feasible.
    teristics in Table ME 5 and shown in Figure ME 13a.
                                                                         Action ME 1.13: Imperial Highway: Widen to a full
    Action ME 1.8: Santa Fe Avenue: Work with the
                                                                         standard six lane arterial with appropriate turn and
    County of Los Angeles to extend/connect Santa Fe
                                                                         auxiliary lanes between west and east city limits. Be-
    Avenue (in the unincorporated County) easterly along
                                                                         tween Atlantic Avenue and Garfield Avenue, Imperial
    the alignment of Independence Avenue or the rail-
                                                                         Highway should be a minimum of eight lanes (exclud-
    road right-of-way to Long Beach Boulevard, to con-
                                                                         ing left turns). Exact lane configuration and cross
    nect with Independence Avenue or Ardmore Avenue.
                                                                         section to be determined by design studies at time of
    Action ME 1.9: Independence Avenue/Ardmore                           widening.
    Avenue: Extend eastwards as a Collector Street to
                                                                         Action ME 1.14: Imperial Highway: Explore and
    Atlantic Avenue, then easterly across the Los Angeles
                                                                         implement improvements to the I-710 interchange as
    River and I-710 Freeway (with possible ramp connec-
                                                                         part of the I-710 Corridor Project, including the remov-
    tion) to Garfield Avenue. The cross-section should
                                                                         al of the existing off ramp at Abbot Road/Wright Road
    include bike lanes.
                                                                         and addition of a substitute ramp directly at Imperial
                                                                         Highway , as part of the I-710 Improvement Project.
208 South Gate General Plan 2035

Action ME 1.15: Borwick Avenue: Extend Borwick             Action ME 5:
Avenue east from Garfield Avenue to the City limit,        Develop and install improved directional
as a Collector Street (two lane) to connect to the
                                                           signage on major city streets.
City of Downey’s westward extension of Flores
Street to it’s City limit.                                 Install directional signage to and from freeway ramps
                                                           and key destinations in the City.
Action ME 1.16: Truba Avenue: Widen Truba Avenue
between Southern Avenue and Tweedy Boulevard to
                                                           Action ME 6:
a 2-lane Collector Street standard.
                                                           Update the City’s Traffic Manual.
                                                           Prepare a comprehensive update of the City’s Traf-
Actions for Traffic                                        fic Manual to make it consistent with the Mobility
                                                           Element, including: updates to all references, sources,
Management and                                             procedures, criteria, and thresholds, as appropriate;
                                                           adding a section on Guidelines for Traffic Studies for
Operations Improvements                                    Development Project; adding a section on roadway
These implementation actions are focused on enhancing      design criteria for horizontal roadway layout and lane
the efficiency, capacity, and safety of the street system. configuration/dimensions; and updating/expanding
                                                           the section on traffic management for residential
Action ME 2:                                               streets and the process for residential neighborhood
Upgrade the City’s traffic signals                         traffic management programs.
and signal timing.
Modernize traffic signal equipment as necessary, and       Actions to Manage
improve traffic signal coordination and timing along
the key arterial corridors, taking into account the needs  Truck Traffic
of transit, bicyclists, and pedestrians as well as autos.
                                                           Action ME 7:
Action ME 3:                                               Maintain and install truck directional
Conduct a system planning and design feasibil-             signage throughout the City.
ity study for an advance traffic control system.           Signage should identify the designated truck routes,
This would include all traffic signals in the City (pref-  as well as directions to the truck routes.
erably including Caltrans signals) as well as vehicle
detectors, camera surveillance, and adaptive signal        Action ME 8:
timing control software, and changeable message            Work with Caltrans to install appropriate
signs as appropriate.                                      signage on the I-710 freeway.
                                                           Signage should direct truck traffic to designated
Action ME 4:                                               truck routes.
Install an advanced traffic signal
control system.
Install an advanced traffic control system based on
the system planning and design feasibility study. This
might be local to the City of South Gate, or could be
shared with adjacent jurisdictions.
                                                                                          Mobility Element 209

    Action ME 9:                                            and ride facilities and a bicycle hub. The develop-
    Explore an Alternative Truck Route to                   ment of the station should also consider the provi-
                                                            sion of a new roadway connection on its east side
    Firestone Boulevard.
                                                            between Firestone Place and Patata Street to enhance
    Study and explore alternatives to the truck route on    vehicular access and provide relief to the Firestone/
    Firestone Boulevard between Atlantic Avenue and the     Atlantic intersection.
    west City Limit.
                                                            Action ME 13:
    Actions to Improve                                      Create an Imperial/Atlantic transit station.
                                                            Work with the City of Lynwood to designate and
    Transit Service                                         implement a second transit station/hub at or near the
                                                            intersection of Atlantic Avenue and Imperial Highway
    Action ME 10:                                           (the conjunction of a number of exiting bus routes).
    Plan and develop rail service in UPRR                   This multi-modal transit center would serve bus tran-
    north-south corridor.                                   sit, and would also include park and ride facilities and
    Work with the Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR), South-     a bicycle hub.
    ern California Association of Governments (SCAG),
    Metro, and other agencies to pursue passenger rail      Action ME 14:
    transit service in this railroad corridor. Such service Improve regional transit service.
    could be high speed grade separated rail, but could     Work with Metro to enhance regional transit service
    also be more conventional light rail, heavy rail, or    in the City including additional routes serving more
    commuter rail service.                                  destinations for South Gate residents, and increased
                                                            service frequencies. Transit service should be added
    Action ME 11:                                           on streets such as Otis Street, California Avenue,
    Coordinate with the City of Downey on                   State Street, and Santa Ana Street to increase the
    potential train station.                                accessibility of residential neighborhoods to transit
                                                            lines as well as on existing routes such as Firestone
    Coordinate on a potential site in Downey adjacent to
                                                            Boulevard, Tweedy Boulevard, Long Beach Boulevard,
    the Hollydale area for the potential high speed, grade
                                                            Atlantic Avenue, and Garfield Avenue.
    separated transit line on the Union Pacific Railroad
    right-of-way.
                                                            Action ME 15:
    Action ME 12:                                           Initiate local transit service.
    Create a Firestone/Atlantic transit station.            Initiate and develop a local transit service in the City
                                                            that operates small buses serving destinations around
    Designate and implement a transit station at the
                                                            South Gate. These buses should operate on fixed
    north-east corner of the Firestone/Atlantic intersec-
                                                            routes (with possibly some minimal real-time devia-
    tion. This should begin immediately in the short-
                                                            tion) and on regular and convenient schedules. They
    term, as a bus transit station, and be expanded into
                                                            should provide flexible service routes between the
    a rail transit station as and when rail transit service
                                                            different areas of the City, and should connect resi-
    is implemented in the corridor. The transit station
                                                            dential neighborhoods with activity centers, commer-
    should be a multi-modal transit center, including park
                                                            cial centers, schools (for example the Tweedy Mile,
210 South Gate General Plan 2035
the Civic Center, other shopping areas, etc.), and the    Action ME 16:
Metro Green Line Station at Long Beach Boulevard          Build park and ride lots.
and the I-105 Freeway.
                                                          Provide park and ride lots at rail stations and transit
This local service should serve residential neighbor-     centers and near freeway interchanges to encourage
hoods, employment and commercial nodes, institu-          ridesharing and transit use.
tional facilities and recreational areas, and connect to
major destinations such as downtown and shopping          Action ME 17:
districts. This local transit service should provide more
                                                          Provide enhanced bus stop amenities.
frequent service than is currently provided and could
                                                          Work with Metro and developers to provide attrac-
allow on-call deviations from semi-fixed routes. The
                                                          tive and convenient bus stops, to include bus shelters,
service could be based on smaller (20-35 seat) buses.
                                                          shade/rain protection, seats, transit information, etc.
This local service could use streets such as: Para-
mount Boulevard, Gardendale Street, Main Street,          Action ME 18:
Tweedy Boulevard, Hildreth Avenue, Otis Street,
                                                          Promote the use of transit.
Southern Avenue, Independence and Ardmore Av-
                                                          Actively promote the use of transit, through the
enues, and Truba Avenue, as well as the main arteri-
                                                          publication of transit route maps, schedules and other
als in the City, in order to provide service as close as
                                                          information, the development and implementation
possible to residential neighborhoods.
                                                          of marketing programs, and the provision of coordi-
The combination of regional and local service on          nated transit service and bicycle and pedestrian facili-
these transit corridors could put transit service within  ties information. The City should also provide more
at most a quarter-mile of all residences in South Gate,   locations in South Gate where residents can purchase
and could serve all key destinations within the City.     transit passes (currently available only at City Hall).
Action ME 15.1: Conduct a Transit Planning Study: To
determine the best approach to initiating local transit
service, to develop a Short-Range (Five Year) Transit
                                                          Actions to Improve
Plan for operating such a service and to determine
funding sources.
                                                          Bicycle Facilities
Action ME 15.2: Pursue Funding Sources for a Local        Action ME 19:
Internal Transit Service: Explore the possibility of out- Conduct a citywide bicycle study and
side funding sources to support a local transit service.  develop a bicycle plan.
Action ME 15.3: Explore the Feasibility of Extending      The study should result in a Bicycle Transportation
Local Transit Service: Explore the possibility of extend- Plan suitable for obtaining public funding, and should
ing to adjacent jurisdictions in cooperation with such    develop the planning, implementation and design
jurisdictions who could also participate in funding if    details of the bicycle facility and amenity elements of
beneficial to the City of South Gate.                     the Mobility Element, including the identification of
                                                          both capital and operating funding sources.
Action ME 15.4: Work with Regional Transit Op-
erators (Metro): To develop the optimum coordination
and integration of bus transit services between the local
City transit system and the regional service.
                                                                                           Mobility Element 211
    Action ME 20:                                                    Action ME 23:
    Add traffic signals where bike streets                           In conjunction with other agencies and de-
    cross arterial roadways.                                         velopers, the City should develop and imple-
    The implementation of Bike Streets will require traffic          ment an ongoing bicycle amenities program.
    signalization where they cross arterial roadways, in             To facilitate the use of bicycles, the City should pro-
    order to facilitate the safe crossing of those arteri-           vide for the installation of bicycle lockers, and parking
    als by bicyclists and pedestrians. Signals should be             spaces at the bicycle hubs, the Civic Center, and other
    convenient to bicyclists with accessible push-buttons            public buildings or areas such as parks, pool, etc.,
    to activate the signal.                                          and should work with developers to provide the same
                                                                     facilities at new or substantially renovated private
    Action ME 21:                                                    development projects.
    Improve bicycle access to the regional
    bike paths on the Los Angeles River                              Action ME 24:
    and the Rio Hondo Channel.                                       Modify the municipal code for bicycle parking.
    In order to ensure the connectivity of the Citywide bicycle      Modify the Municipal Code to require provision of
    system, and particularly to connect to the south-east part       bicycle parking spaces, bicycle lockers, and, as appropri-
    of the City, existing connections should be maintained,          ate, showers for bicycle riders at new buildings provid-
    and new connections to the Los Angeles River Bike Path           ing significant employment, at transit stations, in the
    should be implemented at the following locations:                commercial districts, and at recreational destinations.
    •	 Vicinity of Aldrich Road or Tweedy Place (maintain or modify
       existing connection).                                         Action ME 25:
    •	 Century Boulevard (E).                                        Add bicycle push buttons at traffic signals.
    •	 Extension of Independence Avenue/Ardmore Avenue.              Provide traffic control push button devices at conve-
    •	 Tweedy Boulevard east of Atlantic Avenue to Los Angeles River nient locations for bicyclists at signalized intersections
       (portion on private property).                                on the identified Bicycle Network.
    Action ME 22:                                                    Action ME 26:
    Install “bicycle hubs.”                                          Promote the use of bicycles.
    Install bicycle hubs that provide secure bicycle lockers,
                                                                     Prepare and distribute bike route maps and bike facili-
    bike racks, and connections to transit, at the follow-
                                                                     ties information.
    ing key locations:
    •	 The Firestone/Atlantic Transit Station.
                                                                     Action ME 27:
    •	 The Imperial/Atlantic Transit Station.                        Develop procedures for incorporating bike
    •	 Along Tweedy Boulevard (with possible locations at Alexander  facilities into new development projects.
       Avenue, Otis Street, and at California Avenue) serving the
       Tweedy Mile.                                                  Develop procedures for new development to support
                                                                     and promote the use of bicycles and to contribute to
    •	 Civic Center at California Avenue and Firestone Boulevard/
       Ardmore Avenue.                                               enhancing supporting facilities and amenities.
    •	 In the vicinity of Firestone/Santa Fe and the proposed Commu-
       nity College Campus.
212 South Gate General Plan 2035

Actions to Improve                                                     Actions to Change the
Pedestrian Facilities                                                  Municipal Code to
Action ME 28:                                                          Improve Circulation
Conduct a citywide pedestrian study to
develop a pedestrian plan and program.                                 Action ME 31:
                                                                       Modify the City’s Municipal Code.
This should focus on the planning, implementation and
design details of the pedestrian network and pedes-                    The modifications should incorporate the following:
trian amenity components of the Mobility Element,                      •	 Regulate drive-thru facilities in South Gate, particularly in
including the identification of both capital and operat-                  pedestrian oriented areas, with careful attention to vehicle/
                                                                          pedestrian interactions.
ing funding sources. This should include pedestrian
facilities such as benches, water fountains, streets, etc.             •	 Stipulate maximum parking ratios as well as minimum parking
                                                                          ratios for land uses.
The Pedestrian Amenities Program shall also:
                                                                       •	 Include minimum requirements for rideshare and bicycle park-
•	 Provide wider sidewalks, where feasible, per the City’s modified
                                                                          ing in off-street parking facilities.
   street standards.
                                                                       •	 Encourage shared use parking in those areas where a mix of uses
•	 Establish streetscape and pedestrian requirements for new or
                                                                          with different peak usage are located adjacent or near each other.
   renovated developments along Corridors and in Districts.
•	 Establish streetscape design and pedestrian amenities to be
   installed by the City.
                                                                       Actions for Neighborhood
•	 Include pedestrian walk phases at traffic signals in Districts,
   along Corridors with high pedestrian volumes, and at intersec-
   tions that serve public facilities such as schools, parks, library,
                                                                       Traffic Management
   post office, etc.
•	 Provide lighting for facilities and installation of safety stations
                                                                       Programs
   (for emergency communication to authorities).
                                                                       Action ME 32:
                                                                       Develop a prototype neighborhood
Action ME 29:
                                                                       traffic management program.
Develop procedures for new development
to support and promote walking and con-                                The program should identify appropriate traffic calm-
                                                                       ing tools for different types of roadways, and estab-
tribute to enhancing supporting facilities
                                                                       lish a process and procedures for the study of traffic
and amenities.                                                         calming needs and the development of appropriate
                                                                       traffic calming programs in residential neighborhoods.
Action ME 30:
Promote walking in the City.
                                                                       Action ME 33:
Actively promote walking, including the publication of pe-
                                                                       Implement a city education program
destrian route maps and pedestrian facilities information.
                                                                       on safe travel speeds.
                                                                       Develop and implement an educational program on safe
                                                                       speeds on residential streets and work with residential
                                                                       neighborhoods to reduce speeds on residential streets.
                                                                                                               Mobility Element 213

    Actions for Parking                                       Actions to Develop
    Action ME 34:                                             Transportation Demand
    Develop parking policies and modify parking
    requirements to restrict the over-provision of            Management (TDM)
    on-site parking for private developments.
                                                              Programs.
    Action ME 35:
                                                              Action ME 36:
    Explore the establishment of parking
                                                              Develop a TDM program.
    districts in commercial areas.
                                                              Develop a prototypical (model) TDM Plan that defines
    Such districts would implement the “park once”
                                                              procedures for developing specific TDM programs,
    program. This should comprise the conduct of specific
                                                              along with a menu of TDM strategies and actions and
    area studies to identify the overall need for parking by
                                                              procedures for their implementation, that can be used
    user type, to determine locations for parking facilities,
                                                              as a model for developers and agencies/institutions to
    to identify construction and maintenance requirements,
                                                              develop specific TDM plans for individual development
    and to determine appropriate financing mechanisms.
                                                              projects. This prototypical plan should also identify
                                                              thresholds (building types and sizes) for the require-
                                                              ment of preparing such specific TDM plans.
214 South Gate General Plan 2035

5
  Economic Element
    INTRODUCTION
    Purpose
    The purpose of the Economic Element is to guide South Gate in achiev-
    ing its vision of a prosperous, fiscally sound community that offers a
    high quality of life to all residents. The Element’s goals, objectives, and
    policies offer specific guidance for achieving this vision.
    Association to Other
    General Plan Elements
    While the Economic Element is focused on helping the City maintain its
    fiscal stability and economic character and attract quality employees and
    jobs, it also works together with several other General Plan elements,      The purpose of the Economic
    particularly the Community Design Element. The Community Design
    Element establishes the City’s land use standards for development and       Element is to guide South Gate
    urban design, including density and intensity. The goals and policies
    in the Community Design Element will play a major role in creating a        in achieving its vision of a pros-
    diversified economic base and attracting quality development projects
    to South Gate, which will have a major effect on implementation of the      perous, fiscally sound commu-
    Economic Element.
                                                                                nity that offers a high quality of
    The Economic Element is also influenced by the Housing and Mobility
    Elements. For example, the types of residences and housing uses allow-
                                                                                life to all residents.
    able in particular areas of the City may help shape economic develop-
    ment strategies. Mobility – the movement of cars, bicycles and pedes-
    trians – is important because access to businesses, large and small, is
    critical to their ultimate success.
216 South Gate General Plan 2035

Contents of the
Economic Element
The Economic Element begins with an exploration of   Following the existing conditions discussion is a
the City’s existing economic conditions as of 2008.  discussion of key issues and challenges the City faces
This review highlights South Gate’s current economic over the next 20 years. The next section outlines key
base, including the number and types of jobs in the  economic development concepts that are important
City and major industries. It also summarizes the    for managed fiscal growth and stability. The Element
City’s commercial, industrial and office real estate concludes with a list of goals, objectives, policies and
sectors, with an emphasis on sales tax revenue-      implementation actions.
generating areas.
                                                                                 Economic Element 217

    EXISTING ECONOMIC
    CONDITIONS
    Over the past fifty years, South Gate has evolved from a manufactur-
    ing hub with many well-paying union jobs to a more diversified mix
    of industries including retail trade, warehousing, and wholesale trade.
    This evolution, which has mostly been a result of broader regional and
    international trends, has been accompanied by an exodus of high-paying
    manufacturers from the City. South Gate’s population remains largely
    working class, but there is currently a mismatch between the higher-pay-
    ing specialized manufacturing jobs available and the workforce’s educa-
    tion and skill level. As a result, many South Gate residents are employed
    in lower-paying retail and service jobs. Part of the City’s economic trans-
    formation includes its working-class foundation now demanding more
    mainstream shopping services, higher paying jobs, and access to educa-
    tional opportunities, employment and improved community services.
    Current Economy
    South Gate’s economy is supported by approximately 17,700 jobs,
    as reported by the Employment Development Department (EDD)1 in
    2007. The manufacturing sector provides 30 percent of these jobs, the
    largest share of any industry. Many direct and indirect manufacturing
    businesses are located in the City, taking advantage of its proximity to
    Downtown Los Angeles, one of the largest economic centers in the
    nation in addition to the Ports of Los Angeles, Long Beach and the
    Alameda Corridor.
    Over the past decade, South Gate’s economy has grown, especially in
    relation to Los Angeles County’s economy as a whole. South Gate’s mod-
    erate annual job growth of 5.27 percent between 1996 and 2006 was
    well above Los Angeles County’s average annual growth of 0.86 percent.
    1	   The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) reported 19,690
         jobs in South Gate as of 2003. SCAG estimates are commonly-used metrics for
         jobs,however the Economic Element utilizes EDD data because of the industry-spe-
         cific employment detail provided, which is not available from SCAG.
218 South Gate General Plan 2035

Table 5-1: South Gate Job Growth between 1996 and 2006 Relative to Local Counties
                                                    1996          2001       2006          % Growth       % Growth          Average
                                                                                                 over           over      Annual %
                                                                                           1996-2001     1996-2006     Growth Rate
 South Gate                                          11,579       17,506     17,681          51.19%        52.70%           5.27%
 Los Angeles County                              3,631,100     3,803,100  3,942,500           4.74%         8.58%           0.86%
 Orange County                                   1,187,100     1,427,900  1,520,000          20.28%        28.04%           2.80%
 Riverside County                                3,038,400     3,786,900  4,857,400          24.63%        59.87%           5.99%
 San Bernardino County                           3,692,600     4,382,600  5,063,800          18.69%        37.13%           3.71%
 Source: California EDD (www.labormarketinfo.edd.ca.gov); 2008
Key Economic Industry                                                    retailers but have not been able to consistently attract
                                                                         national credit-tenants. The El Paseo Shopping Center,
Sectors in South Gate                                                    a 300,000 square foot regional retail center developed
                                                                         in 2000, signals a change in this trend. El Paseo not
This section contains an analysis of three key eco-                      only attracts South Gate residents, but also brings
nomic sectors, each of which is either a high-growth                     patrons from Downey, Lynwood, Huntington Park and
sector or potential high-growth sector for the City.                     other nearby cities. The South Gate Towne Center is
These industries are: manufacturing, retail trade, and                   a 175,000 square foot retail center adjacent to the El
transportation/warehousing.                                              Paseo. It also draws retail patrons to the City with the
Manufacturing plays a major role in South Gate’s                         presence of a Sam’s Club Warehouse and numerous
economy. The City’s advantage in this sector is due                      inline retail stores and restaurants. The establishment
in part to its central location and proximity to major                   of South Gate as a regional retail destination will be
highways, railways, Los Angeles International Airport                    furthered by the anticipated El Portal retail center, at
and the Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach. Numer-                      the intersection of Firestone Boulevard and Atlantic
ous industries based in South Gate take advantage of                     Avenue. El Portal will bring approximately 600,000 ad-
the City’s transportation networks, connecting them to                   ditional square feet of national-brand and local retailers
manufacturing businesses and suppliers in the greater                    to South Gate, providing an estimated $1.93 million in
Los Angeles region. The relatively low cost of doing                     annual sales tax revenue.
business in South Gate further helps attract manufac-                    Transportation and warehousing is a high-potential and
turers to the City. South Gate has a low business license                high-growth industry attracted by South Gate’s con-
tax, relatively low labor costs, and no utility user tax.                venient location and proximity to major transportation
Retail trade is one of the fastest growing industries in                 nodes. Between 1996 and 2006 this sector grew 11 per-
the City. Between 1996 and 2006 South Gate saw a                         cent, resulting in an additional 668 jobs within the City.
12.4 percent growth in retail industry jobs. Much of
the City’s retail growth is occurring along Firestone
Boulevard. Currently, Firestone is home to many new
                                                                         Real Estate Sector
and used auto dealerships, which provide substantial
taxable annual sales for the City. Other major commer-
                                                                         Performance
cial districts in the City include Tweedy Mile, Hollydale                Opportunities for new development in South Gate are
Business District, State Street, Paramount Boulevard,                    limited since the City is almost entirely built-out. As
Long Beach Boulevard and El Paseo. Most areas of the                     such, real estate opportunities will come from rede-
City have experienced some growth in locally-based                       velopment of existing structures or underutilized land.
                                                                                                       Economic Element 219

    The following is a discussion of the retail-commercial,    Tweedy Corridor
    industrial, and commercial-office real estate sectors in   Tweedy Boulevard, running east to west from Al-
    different District and Corridors in the City. Generally,   ameda Boulevard to Atlantic Avenue, is comprised
    the boundaries of the areas analyzed in this real es-      of approximately 250 businesses. Together, these
    tate analysis correlate with the Districts and Corridors   businesses generate approximately $45.1 million of
    described in the Community Design Element. How-            taxable annual sales. Tweedy Mile is a smaller section
    ever, in some cases, the real estate analysis encom-       of Tweedy Boulevard between Long Beach Boule-
    passes a slightly different geography than what has        vard to Hunt Avenue. Tweedy Mile is comprised of
    been established in the Community Design Element,          a variety of smaller retailers including banks, beauty
    and these instances have been noted.                       salons, jewelry stores and pharmacies. The Tweedy
                                                               Marketplace shopping center, which contains an Alb-
    Retail-Commercial                                          ertson’s supermarket and a number of smaller stores,
                                                               is located in this area. This area generally corresponds
    The retail real estate market in South Gate is strong      to the Tweedy Corridor presented in the Community
    locally, and is beginning to attract shoppers from         Design Element.
    neighboring cities and the greater Los Angeles region.
    During community workshops conducted as part of            Hollydale Business District
    General Plan outreach, many residents said they found      The Hollydale Business District is located near the I-710
    it necessary to shop outside of South Gate to purchase     and I-105 freeway intersection on Garfield Avenue
    the breadth of family household goods from a single        between Cortland Avenue and McKinley Avenue. This
    store location. Alternatively, by staying within the City, area generates approximately $9 million in taxable an-
    residents felt they were required to visit several smaller nual sales and has approximately 15 businesses. This
    neighborhood stores to meet all of their shopping          area generally encompasses sub-area 2 of the Garfield
    needs. In order to remedy this, South Gate is in the       Corridor in the Community Design Element.
    process of several revitalization and redevelopment
    projects that will help further stimulate the retail-com-
    mercial real estate market. Commercial retail rents and
    sales prices in South Gate are lower than the adjacent
    City of Los Angeles and the region as a whole. The
    retail-commercial market is concentrated in seven Dis-
    tricts and Corridors throughout the City, as follows:
                                                               The Los Angeles Harley Davidson Dealer is located
                                                               on Paramount Boulevard in South Gate. The business
                                                               is a destination for Los Angeles area residents and a
                                                               source of revenue for the City.
    The Hollydale Business District on Garfield Avenue
    serves as the “main street” for the southeast portion
    of the City.
220 South Gate General Plan 2035

El Paseo-South Gate Towne Center District                Long Beach Boulevard
There are three major retail centers at the intersection Long Beach Boulevard is a major sub-regional thor-
of Firestone Boulevard and Garfield Avenue: El Paseo,    oughfare that travels north to south along the west
the South Gate Towne Center and a Target Retail          side of South Gate. This corridor is home to an
store. The El Paseo commercial retail center consists    estimated 187 businesses generating approximately
of 300,000 square feet of building area over 22 acres    $66.4 million in taxable annual sales. This area is co-
of land at the northeast corner of Firestone Boulevard   terminus with the Long Beach Corridor in the Com-
and Garfield Avenue. The center includes a 20-screen     munity Design Element.
Edwards movie theater, La Curacao, Starbucks Cof-
fee and several smaller retail users. The South Gate     Firestone Boulevard
Towne Center, with a Sam’s Club and El Super grocery     Firestone Boulevard is the main east to west arterial
store, is directly adjacent to El Paseo. Located across  roadway through South Gate and is considered the
Firestone to the south is a Target retail store. The     City’s “window to the world.” The corridor is home
three centers combined with surrounding retailers        to over 224 businesses, which generate approximate-
total 47 businesses generating approximately $102        ly $133.4 million in taxable annual sales. Most of the
million in taxable annual sales. This area is a subset   City’s used auto dealerships are located along Fires-
of the El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center District         tone Boulevard. This area includes the Firestone Cor-
presented in the Community Design Element.               ridor as defined in the Community Design Element. It
                                                         also generally includes the parcels fronting Firestone
State Street                                             Boulevard that are located in the Civic Center, Com-
State Street travels north to south through the City. A  munity College and Gateway Districts.
particularly densely populated corridor of businesses
spans between Santa Ana and Firestone Boulevard.
                                                         Industrial
This corridor, which is co-terminus with the State
Corridor in the Community Design Element, is home        Overall, the industrial real estate market in South
to approximately 97 retail businesses and generates      Gate is competitive. As a City historically dominated
approximately $34 million in taxable annual sales.       by the manufacturing industry, South Gate has sev-
                                                         eral areas with concentrations of industrial users. The
Paramount Boulevard                                      location of these areas is detailed in the Community
Paramount Boulevard runs north to south between          Design Element. Sales and rental prices for industrial
Gardendale Street and the I-105 Freeway. The 46 busi-    land and property in South Gate are low compared to
nesses here, including the Los Angeles Harley David-     the downtown Los Angeles industrial core, but closely
son dealership, generate a combined $15.1 million in     aligned with the regional market as a whole. The
taxable annual sales. This area is co-terminus with the  industrial market is concentrated in eight Districts and
Paramount Corridor in the Community Design Element.      Corridors throughout the City. Except where noted,
                                                         the geographic boundaries are the same as those in
                                                         the Community Design Element.
                                                                                       Economic Element 221

    Southwest Industrial District                              Imperial Industrial District
    The Southwest Industrial District is located at the        The Imperial Industrial District is located at the east-
    southwest edge of the City, north of Century Boule-        ern edge of the City adjacent to the I-710 freeway. It
    vard and east of Alameda Street. It is made up of 27       contains 194 businesses producing approximately $36.1
    businesses generating approximately $6.25 million in       million in taxable annual sales. This area is a sub-set of
    taxable annual sales and includes two large business-      the Imperial District presented in the Community Design
    es that cater to the fashion industry.                     Element.
    Ardine Industrial District                                 South Gate Triangle District
    The Ardine Industrial District is located on the north-    The South Gate Triangle District is located at the
    ern boundary of the City adjacent to Cudahy east of        eastern edge of the City directly north of the Imperial
    Otis Street and north of Firestone Boulevard. This area    Industrial District. It contains 12 businesses producing
    is comprised of 23 businesses generating approxi-          approximately $16.2 million in taxable annual sales.
    mately $24.8 million in taxable annual sales.
    Firestone Industrial District
                                                               Commercial Office
    The Firestone Industrial District is located just north of Currently, the presence of commercial office real
    Firestone Boulevard and south of the Ardine Industrial     estate in South Gate is limited, given the City’s history
    area. It is made up of 80 businesses that produce ap-      as a manufacturing hub. With South Gate’s proximity
    proximately $35.3 million in taxable annual sales.         to Downtown Los Angeles, many professional office
                                                               tenants seek the higher profile office buildings there.
    Rayo Industrial District
    The Rayo Industrial District is located to the east of     Following a review of South Gate’s current economic
    Atlantic Avenue, south of Firestone Boulevard. This        conditions and select area performance the Key Issues
    area is home to 40 businesses generating approxi-          section identifies several significant topics that should
    mately $7.6 million in taxable annual sales.               be addressed in coming years.
    Gateway District
    The Gateway Industrial District is located at the north-
    east of the City, bordering Cudahy to the north. This
    area is made up of 153 businesses producing approxi-
    mately $61.6 million in taxable annual sales. This
    area is a sub-set of the Gateway District presented in
    the Community Design Element.
    Century Corridor
    Century Boulevard is a relatively small area in the
    southern part of the City, made up of 82 businesses        Hon, which produces office furniture, is located on
    producing approximately $22.6 million in taxable           Firestone Boulevard on the west side of the City. This
    annual sales.                                              and similar uses provide job opportunities for city
                                                               residents and contribute to the local tax base.
222 South Gate General Plan 2035

  KEY ISSUES AND
  CHALLENGES
  South Gate’s economy has a number of key issues and challenges
  that the City should address to ensure economic growth. These issues
  were identified through both analysis and outreach to residents and
  other stakeholders during the General Plan process. The following is a
  description of these key issues.
  Future Role of Industrial Users
  Industrial manufacturers, assemblers and related businesses have been a
  large part of South Gate’s development since the City’s incorporation in
  1923. However, business costs in Los Angeles County are high relative to
  other California counties and bordering states. To adequately plan for its
  future, South Gate should assess the state of its current industrial users
  and develop a strategy to retain or diversify its industrial base.
  Presence as a Warehousing and Transportation Stronghold
  South Gate has several geographic advantages, including access to
  freeways, railways and the Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach. While
  this provides a strong attraction to trucking and logistics firms, the traf-
  fic generated by these businesses causes air pollution and its negative
  health impacts, roadway congestion, and costly damage to South Gate’s
  local infrastructure. At some point, without local job support, the nega-
  tive impacts of this truck traffic may outweigh the advantage of having a
  large number of logistics firms in the City. South Gate should identify the
  extent to which it wants to maintain this economic sector. In deciding to
  maintain or increase its trucking and logistics businesses, it should con-
  sider that several adjacent cities also have similar locational advantages
  as South Gate, and will likely serve as competitors for these businesses.
                                                    Economic Element 223

    Limited National-Brand Retail                             Educational Attainment Levels of
    Presence in South Gate                                    South Gate Residents
    South Gate is home to relatively few national-brand       South Gate residents’ educational attainment levels
    retailers. While the many neighborhood-serving shops      are lower than those of Los Angeles County as a
    and businesses provide character and variety to the       whole. Cities whose residents have higher educa-
    City, national retailers signify economic strength and    tional attainment levels tend to enjoy more stable
    viability to other businesses and potential residents.    economies, and have greater potential for economic
    Name-brand stores bring with them a large influx          growth. Education is strongly correlated with earning
    of investment capital including the lease and pur-        ability, resulting in higher hourly wages and salaries.
    chase of land and retail space, the improvement of        Thus, raising the educational levels of South Gate
    infrastructure, and the beautification of surrounding     residents is a strategy for improving the overall eco-
    areas. Additionally, national-brand retailers can draw    nomic conditions in the City.
    shoppers from adjacent cities, which would provide
    much-needed sales tax revenue to South Gate. Retail-
    ers are beginning to take notice of the purchasing
    power and other advantages available in South Gate.
    Efforts to attract these retailers should be maintained.
    During community workshops residents expressed
    dissatisfaction with the lack of large “one-stop”
    retail establishments where they could purchase all
    or at least most of their home shopping needs. As a
    result, residents travel to such retailers in neighboring
    cities, which is a detriment to South Gate in terms of
    lost sales tax revenue. Many said they would rather
    avoid the commute and keep their purchasing dol-
    lars within the City. At the same time, residents also
    expressed a fondness for many of the local businesses
    in the City, which add character and help build local
    wealth. While recruiting national retailers to the City
    is an important part of providing services to residents
    and increasing the tax base, the City should also take
    steps to support successful local businesses and main-
    tain a healthy mix of both large and small retailers.
224 South Gate General Plan 2035

  KEY ECONOMIC
  DEVELOPMENT
  CONCEPTS
  In addition to helping City staff and residents understand the current
  economic character, this chapter also provides guidance for the immediate
  and long-term future. During the General Plan update process, residents
  and City staff spent a great deal of time providing input and expressing
  their desires for a better South Gate.
  This section of the Economic Element summarizes the fundamental
  guiding economic principles developed during the General Plan update
  process. Goals, objectives, policies and implementation actions in the
  Economic Element flow out of these key concepts and strategies.
  Create Incentives for Employers to Locate in South Gate
  One component of redefining the City’s identity will be to help attract
  and incentivize businesses to relocate or start up in South Gate. The
  City can offer incentives in the form of tax credits or reduced develop-
  ment and permitting fees. One major advantage for South Gate is its
  selection as a California Enterprise Zone city. This designation offers
  qualifying business owners tax benefits and access to grant and loan
  funding to build and expand their businesses within the City. Going
  forward, the City should help business operators identify their eligibility
  for these benefits through ongoing outreach and education efforts.
  Foster Small Business Operation and Growth through Loan
  Programs and Easier Administrative Processes
  Businesses are often limited by the availability of capital. Until a few years
  ago, South Gate offered its local business owners loans to improve build-
  ing façades and make minor capital improvement purchases. Reinstate-
  ment of this program will help small business owners improve their own
  properties and the City’s commercial areas as a whole. Local business
  owners also expressed frustration in getting approvals for business opera-
  tion necessities such as business licenses. The City should take proactive
  steps to simplify such processes or administer them more efficiently.
                                                   Economic Element 225

    Preserve Current Local Retail                             process residents expressed a desire for South Gate
    along Tweedy Mile                                         to move away from heavy manufacturing in favor
    Tweedy Mile is considered by most South Gate resi-        of lighter “boutique” manufacturing, fashion and
    dents to be the heart of the City, an area where retail   research and development uses. The City also desires
    and commercial uses with great character are numer-       to attract selected “green technology” companies
    ous and mostly owned by local “mom-and-pop” opera-        (those which are focused on developing environmen-
    tors. This independently-owned entrepreneurial spirit is  tally-sensitive products, technologies and processes),
    part of South Gate’s character and requires preservation  which could provide a source of employment for
    so that larger national chain retailers do not completely residents and create the opportunity for South Gate
    replace the independent business operators.               to increase its base of more highly skilled labor.
    Redefine the Industrially-Oriented                        Create Additional Business
    Character of the City                                     Improvement Districts
    In the past, South Gate has derived a great deal of       The City currently has one major Business Improve-
    identity and character from the manufacturing and         ment District (BID), the Tweedy Mile Business As-
    industrial companies that made their homes in the         sociation. BIDs help the local economy by organiz-
    City. While this identity is a source of pride for the    ing business operators, landowners and the City
    City, residents stand to benefit from redefining the      government to achieve mutually beneficial goals.
    City’s vision and regional identity in a changing eco-    BIDs offer two major advantages. First, a group of
    nomic environment by attracting other industries and      consolidated interests is more effective than actions
    job sources. As one example, during the General Plan      of singular decision-makers. Second, the local nature
    Small “mom and pop” retail establishments should be preserved along Tweedy Mile.
226 South Gate General Plan 2035

of BID’s also enables the organization to understand           ties at and around these points. For instance, “super”
its constituents and immediate area more intimately            retail developments such as El Paseo or the proposed
than the City government as a whole. Areas that                El Portal projects should be visible and easily acces-
could benefit from additional BIDs include the State,          sible from freeways and major corridors to boost visits
Paramount, Long Beach, and Firestone Corridors and             by residents from neighboring cities. Such efforts will
the Hollydale Business District. The area surrounding          help establish South Gate as a regional entertainment
the East Los Angeles Community College at Firestone            and retail shopping hub.
Boulevard and Alameda Street may also benefit from
a BID. The City is considering plans to create a BID           Create Educational Opportunities
around the community college based on an expanded              The General Plan should develop strategies to in-
campus and potential to attract service retail, new            crease the educational levels of South Gate residents.
residential housing and open space.                            More educated residents would benefit South Gate in
                                                               a variety of ways, including providing a more skilled,
Capitalize on the City’s Central Access                        stable, and productive pool of workers. This en-
from Highways and Freeways                                     hanced workforce would then be able to fill a larger
South Gate benefits from its location between several          number of the City’s many jobs in sectors such as
major highways and roadways including the I-710,               sales, health care, teaching, maintenance operations,
the I-105, Firestone Boulevard and Long Beach                  and transportation-related occupations. Key partners
Boulevard. In conjunction with future land use and             to increasing educational attainment levels should
planning efforts, the City should strive to capitalize on      include the Los Angeles Community College, public
available development and redevelopment opportuni-             school districts, private educators, and other providers
                                                               of continuing and lifelong education.
The City should capitalize on its location along the I-710 freeway. El Paseo, located on Firestone west of I-710, ben-
efits from its proximity to the regional transportation system.
                                                                                            Economic Element 227

    GOALS, OBJECTIVES
    AND POLICIES
    The purpose of the following economic goals, objectives and policies
    is to guide the City’s future economic development efforts and achieve
    a diverse and fiscally sound economy. Since economic development is
    not a static process, these goals, objectives and policies both provide
    a guide for desired development activities and maintain flexibility to
    respond to changing economic trends and local market conditions.
    Goal E 1:
    Fiscal revenue generation that meets the
    City’s long-term demands
    Objective E 1.1:
    Generate sufficient fiscal revenue through the
    use of land use planning.
    Policies
    P.1	 The City should maintain and enhance public infrastructure such as multi-modal
         streets, streetscapes, and utilities in order to boost business productivity and access.
    P.2	 The City will coordinate land use planning with economic policy to ensure long-
         term fiscal health.
    P.3	 The City may require a fiscal impact analysis for any development project request-
         ing public funding, infrastructure participation or revenue sharing.
    P.4	 The City should regularly monitor the rate and fee structure of utility costs to ensure
         that the City does not experience a net revenue loss from providing utility service.
    P.5	 The City should evaluate the impacts of new development on a case-by-case
         basis, thereby identifying individual characteristics of each.
    P.6	 The City should impose a development impact fee for new development projects in
         order to produce more general fund revenues. The fee would be a one-time cost to
         the developer at the time a project is constructed to help pay the marginal cost for
         facilities and infrastructure necessary to accommodate future growth.
228 South Gate General Plan 2035

Objective E 1.2:                                                      Objective E 2.2:
Streamline and coordinate the development                             Promote development opportunities for
review process by implementing and                                    international and national retailers while
maintaining an efficient public facilities                            supporting existing local businesses.
funding program.
                                                                      Policies
Policies                                                              P.1	 The City should carefully consider approvals of new interna-
                                                                           tional, national and regional business operators to ensure
P.1	 The City should develop and institute a broad-based public
                                                                           they do not negatively impact locally-based businesses.
     facilities financing program that will work to ensure adequate
     long term funding for infrastructure and/or capital improve-     P.2	 The City should conduct periodic analyses to ensure adequate
     ment projects.                                                        absorption of new businesses within areas of proposed
                                                                           development, reuse or redevelopment.
P.2	 The City should develop and implement a coordinated plan
     between capital improvements, infrastructure and the Gen-        P.3	 The City should develop programs to support small businesses.
     eral Plan and update the plan periodically.                      P.4	 The City will pursue the creation of a “Firestone Retail and
P.3	 The City will require that large-scale development projects           Entertainment Corridor” that extends along Firestone Bou-
     include a detailed financing plan that outlines sources and           levard from the east side of San Miguel to the Rio Channel.  
     uses of funds for infrastructure and improvements. This plan          Businesses targeted for this corridor will be national and
     will be consistent with the City’s financing policies and goals.      regional retailers and entertainment venues that attract visi-
                                                                           tors from throughout the region.
                                                                      P.5	 New large-scale retail development should only be located
Goal E 2:                                                                  in locations with direct highway, boulevard and/or freeway
                                                                           access. Specific areas targeted for such uses are: the Gateway
To enhance South Gate’s commercial                                         District, the El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center District, the
market by attracting and retaining                                         Imperial District, the South Gate Triangle District, the Rayo
                                                                           Industrial District, the Firestone Industrial District.
a healthy balance of local and na-                                    P.6	 The City will invest resources and funding to improve streets,
                                                                           plazas and other public spaces in Districts and Corridors, as
tional businesses                                                          defined by the Community Design and Mobility Elements.
                                                                      P.7	 The City may offer short-term low- or no- interest busi-
Objective E 2.1:                                                           ness loans to property and business owners for façade and
                                                                           property improvements.
Support and retain current South Gate-
based businesses.
Policies
P.1	 The City will actively support business operators and uses
     desired as part of its economic vision.
P.2	 In order to increase their competitive advantage, the City
     should provide assistance to local businesses in the form
     of financing, networking and other resources as available
     and appropriate.
P.3	 The City should create more business improvement districts
     (BIDs) to organize and create cohesion among businesses in
     several South Gate Districts.                                    Firestone Boulevard on the east side of the City is
                                                                      envisioned as a retail and entertainment destina-
                                                                      tion. This example shows the success of Citywalk
                                                                      in Universal City.
                                                                                                           Economic Element 229

    Objective E 2.3:                                                      Objective E 3.3:
    Maintain the fiscal revenue stream                                    Reinvest in South Gate businesses.
    generated by the current economic base.
                                                                          Policies
    Policies                                                              P.1	 The City should develop and maintain outreach programs to
                                                                               inform local businesses about Enterprise Zone benefits. Such
    P.1	 The City will conduct thorough and frequent reviews of fiscal
                                                                               programs will help educate owners and operators about
         policy in order to maintain balanced tax and fee structures.
                                                                               potential benefits from tax relief or grant monies.
    P.2	 The City should actively seek to replace vacating businesses
                                                                          P.2	 The City may allocate funding for business improvement loans
         with users capable of generating similar or greater fiscal
                                                                               for owners and operators to make small capital improvements.
         revenue streams.
    Goal E 3:                                                             Goal E 4:
    Enhanced employment, educational                                      A diversified economic base
    and business opportunities                                            Objective E 4.1:
                                                                          Help create a new identity and a more
    Objective E 3.1:
                                                                          diverse business base for South Gate.
    Create more employment opportunities for
    South Gate residents.                                                 Policies
                                                                          P.1	 The City should support expansion of a diverse range of busi-
    Policies                                                                   ness activity, including “boutique” fabrication and metallurgy,
    P.1	 The City should create incentives to retain and expand new            specialized textile, health care services, education services
         businesses and industry sectors.                                      research and development, and “green technology.”.
    P.2	 The City should promote development of light industrial          P.2	 The City should expand Light Industrial/Flex uses in selected ar-
         or commercial projects in accordance with the Community               eas of the City, as described in the Community Design Element.
         Design element.                                                  P.3	 The City will not greatly expand the amount of land for ware-
                                                                               housing/distribution uses. Warehousing/distribution uses may
    Objective E 3.2:                                                           remain in their current locations.
    Increase the number of City residents                                 P.4	 The City should support biotechnology and environmentally
                                                                               friendly “green” businesses in and around the Community
    employed by South Gate businesses.                                         College District.
    Policies
    P.1	 The City should provide incentives for South Gate-based em-
         ployers to hire residents. Incentives could include targeted tax
         and fee relief, expedited administrative approvals or low-cost
         loans for businesses.
    P.2	 The City should develop and maintain “matching” programs
         that help coordinate the needs of local companies with the
         skill sets of residents.
    P.3	 The City may work with local community college and vocation-
         al-training non profit groups to develop programming aimed at
         training residents for jobs typical of South Gate employers.
                                                                          Office and R&D uses should be explored over the
    P.4	 The City should promote the benefits of South Gate’s Enter-
         prise Zone status to local businesses that may qualify for and   time horizon of the General Plan as way of diver-
         receive economic benefits by employing residents.                sifying the tax base.
230 South Gate General Plan 2035

  IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS
  The following implementation actions should be completed by the City
  in order to accomplish the goals of the Economic Element.
  Action E 1:
  Develop a business attraction and marketing campaign.
  A business attraction and marketing campaign should be developed
  and actively managed in order to help re-brand the City and bring new
  business opportunities to South Gate. Such a program may involve the
  following:
  •	 Develop attractive and appropriate promotional marketing materials to promote the
     City, its character, amenities and opportunities.
          xx Market South Gate’s Enterprise Zone designation as a benefit to 
              qualifying businesses.
          xx Market redevelopment project areas and potential development sites.
  •	 Identify target industries (stable growth industries) that fit with City needs such as
     revenue generation, traffic, and air quality.
  •	 Conduct regular mailings and email “blasts” to companies in targeted industries to
     establish and maintain awareness of available opportunities in South Gate. The City
     may also choose to advertise in relevant trade publications.
  •	 Develop geographically-organized (local, regional, national, international) lists of firms
     within target industries to contact through outreach efforts. These lists should be
     updated annually.
  •	 Develop and maintain working relationships with local real estate brokers. These con-
     nections will help maintain the City’s awareness of opportunities, trends and general
     real estate market behavior. The City may also use these relationships to help bring
     development to focused areas of South Gate.
  •	 Identify and target developers with proven experience in retail, commercial and/or
     mixed use projects of similar industry composition and location as South Gate (i.e.
     Huntington Park, Lynwood, Downey, Santa Ana, San Fernando).
  •	 Regularly attend retail industry conventions at the regional, state and national level
     to promote opportunities in the City (e.g. International Council of Shopping Centers).
                                                            Economic Element 231

    Action E 2:                                                            Action E 3:
    Develop a business retention program.                                  Institute a development impact fee.
    The City should develop, implement and maintain a                      Institute a development impact fee for new develop-
    business retention program to help manage the City’s                   ments in order to generate more fiscal revenue for the
    existing commercial base. The City may do so through                   City’s general fund. Impact fees are one-time charges
    the following:                                                         assessed to new developments as a way to raise funds
    •	 Using surveys, develop a list and corresponding map of busi-        for public facilities (i.e. roads, parks, schools) ben-
       nesses currently located in South Gate. This list should be kept    efiting the existing community and future residents.
       current through annual updates.                                     Impact fees should be periodically monitored and
    •	 Coordinate and regularly stage community-oriented events            reviewed such that, to the extent possible, they do not
       through Business Improvement Districts (see Action E 5) and         counteract efforts and policies to attract business.
       the Chamber of Commerce. These events are aimed at con-
       necting residents and patrons to specific commercial areas to
       improve spending and visibility of those businesses.                Action E 4:
    •	 Conduct a survey program with existing businesses to best           Create an incentive program for South
       identify their needs, desires and satisfaction level. To the extent Gate-based employers to hire residents.
       possible, the City should choose to make policy changes based
       on this feedback in order to better serve the business commu-       When residents leave the City to work elsewhere,
       nity. Such surveys should be conducted every two years.             they take with them a portion of the money spent for
    •	 Diligently consider development proposals for new projects          goods and services during the work day. Therefore,
       along Tweedy Mile and work with the Tweedy Mile Business            the City should create an incentive program for South
       Association to ensure any large commercial presence does not        Gate-based employers to hire residents. This action will
       displace existing business.
                                                                           help to boost the economy by increasing both employ-
    •	 Develop a permit expediting program for residents and busi-         ment rates and the amount of money spent within the
       ness owners to quickly obtain permits or licenses.
                                                                           City. Such incentives for employers may include:
    •	 Offer short-term business improvement loans at low or no cost
       to South Gate business owners. These loans would be limited         •	 Lease subsidies from appropriate City or Agency funds
       in both monetary amount and payback duration. Uses for such         •	 Discounted short or long term loans
       loans would include building façade improvement and capital
       improvement purchases.                                              •	 Tax credits
    •	 Offer incentives for new commercial development or redevelop-       •	 Property or building improvement assistance (monetary and/or
       ment that provides on-site amenities to employees (i.e. day            administrative approval)
       care, cafeteria, etc.)
                                                                           •	 City-sponsored training classes (i.e. Enterprise Zone qualifica-
    •	 Offer additional incentives to business owners and property            tions and benefits)
       owners for improving the appearance of aging shopping cen-
                                                                           •	 Education assistance programs supported by private and/or
       ters and retail space. These incentives may come in the form of
                                                                              government funding
       fee waivers or credits.
232 South Gate General Plan 2035

Action E 5:                                              Action E 7:
Create new business improvement districts.               Create a tracking system of underutilized
Encourage creation of more Business Improvement          or underperforming land, and create an
Districts (BIDs) to help organize and support concen-    incentive program to redevelop it.
trated areas of business operations in the City. BIDs    South Gate has underperforming properties that do
require cooperation between the City and private         not meet their highest and best use. The City should
business owners to provide services in addition to       maintain an inventory of any vacant or underutilized
those already provided by the City. Such benefits        land designated for commercial or industrial uses and
include street cleaning and maintenance, lighting,       identify opportunities for infill development. This in-
public safety officers and beautification campaigns.     ventory would create organization and project track-
Special assessments are placed on property owners in     ing around efforts to revitalize the City. Ideally, the
order to generate the additional revenue necessary to    City should target underutilized buildings or vacant
support such services. BIDs may be particularly suit-    parcels for “fast-track” development and/or redevel-
able and beneficial to the following areas:              opment, consistent with policies of the General Plan.
•	 Firestone Corridor
•	 Hollydale Business District                           Action E 8:
•	 State Corridor                                        Assemble a local business and industrial
•	 Long Beach Corridor
                                                         relations committee.
                                                         The City should work with local business leaders to
•	 Paramount Corridor
                                                         create a business relations committee, industrial coun-
•	 Transit station areas                                 cil, or similar committee. By selecting approximately
•	 Major education-related areas                         10 to 15 members representing selected geographic
                                                         areas and industry sectors, this group would help the
Action E 6:                                              City understand more about the trends, conditions
Implement a coordination plan for capital                and needs of various groups. Quarterly meetings
                                                         would ensure that current issues are discussed and
improvements, infrastructure and the Gen-
                                                         in concert with existing and proposed BIDs (Action E
eral Plan.                                               5), appropriate measures may be taken to satisfy and
The City should develop and implement a plan coordi-
                                                         assist the business community.
nating capital improvements, infrastructure and the Gen-
eral Plan. Such a plan would synchronize City allocation
of resources with General Plan principles and Elements.
                                                                                      Economic Element 233

6
  Green City Element
    INTRODUCTION
    This Element of the General Plan provides goals, objectives, policies,
    and implementation actions on making South Gate a “green” city.
    The Element addresses parks, civic plazas, open space, rivers, trails,
    equestrian facilities, the conservation of natural resources, energy and
    climate change, and green building. This Element should be used in
    conjunction with the South Gate Parks and Recreation Master Plan, the
    Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan, and Street Tree Master Plan.
    The Element covers the following topics:
    •	 Parks, Plazas, Trails and Open Space
    •	 Flooding
    •	 Conservation and Enhancement of Natural and Biological Resources
    •	 Green Building
    •	 Climate Change
    These topic areas encompass the Open Space and Conservation Ele-
    ments required by state law, as described below. Each topic is ad-
    dressed in its own section. Each section contains a brief description of
    the relevant existing conditions as well as goals, objectives, policies and
    implementation actions.
236 South Gate General Plan 2035

                              STATUTORY
                              REQUIREMENTS
                              The following is a discussion of statutory requirements established by
                              the State that are addressed in the Green City Element.
                              Open Space
                              The Green City Element combines the open space element required
                              by the State of California with portions of the required conservation
                              element. A city must have an action plan for the “comprehensive
                              and long-range preservation and conservation of open space land,”
                              (California Government Code (CGC) Section 65563). The purpose of
                              the open space element is “to assure that cities and counties recognize
The Green City Element
                              that open space land is a limited and valuable resource which must be
                              conserved whenever possible.” (CGC Section 65561(a)).
combines the open space
                              The State identifies numerous types of open space that must be ad-
element required by the State dressed in the General Plan. The types of open space land are: 1) open
                              space for the preservation of natural resources such as habitat, 2)
of California with portions   open space for the managed production of resources, 3) open space
                              for outdoor recreation, 4) open space for public health and safety, 5)
of the required conservation
                              open space in support of the missions of military installations, and 6)
                              open space for the protection of certain places or features (CGC Sec-
element.
                              tion 65560). Of these types of open space land, South Gate primarily
                              contains open space for outdoor recreation, provided by its city park
                              and multiuse trail system and the nearby rivers. There is also a small
                              amount of open space for public health and safety, such as flood zones
                              or buffers from highways.
                                                                           Green City Element 237

    Resource Conservation                                     AB 32, S-3-05, SB 375
    State law also requires “a conservation element for       With the passage of Assembly Bill 32 and the issu-
    the conservation, development, and utilization of         ing of Executive Order S-3-05, the State of California
    natural resources including water and its hydraulic       has mandated a state-wide reduction in greenhouse
    force, forests, soils, rivers and other waters, harbors,  gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2020. In addition, SB
    fisheries, wildlife, minerals and other resources”        375, a new law passed by the state in 2008, clari-
    (CGC Section 65302(d)). Because South Gate is a           fies that CARB will set emissions reductions targets
    fully urbanized area, the planning area also does not     for regions, which they must meet to avoid certain
    contain significant biological resources such as native   penalties or funding cuts. Additionally, the Attorney
    or migratory wildlife species or endangered species.      General, in enforcing AB 32, has brought lawsuits
    Nonetheless, to the extent that they exist or may exist   against local governments that have failed to address
    in the future, this Element contains policies in the fol- greenhouse gas emissions in their General Plans,
    lowing required conservation areas:                       and has provided comment letters to multiple cities
    •	 Water and its hydraulic forces                         around the State requesting that climate change and
                                                              greenhouse gas emissions be addressed in the Gen-
    •	 Forests
                                                              eral Plan. The Climate Change section of this Green
    •	 Soils                                                  City Element is intended to address comments the At-
    •	 Rivers                                                 torney General has provided to other cities, to foresee
    •	 Wildlife                                               the requirements described in the CARB Scoping Plan,
                                                              and to broadly promote AB 32.
    •	 Fisheries
    The planning area does not contain harbors or miner-
    al resources, and therefore no policies about this are
    included. Other policy areas in this Element, in such
    areas as green building or environmentally preferable
    purchasing, are included as optional policy areas that
    the City believes are important to address. Policies
    about recycling and water conservation can be found
    in the Public Facilities and Services Element.
238 South Gate General Plan 2035

  KEY ISSUES AND
  CHALLENGES
  The “Greening of South Gate” was one of the top community priori-
  ties that came out of the General Plan update process. South Gate
  has a number of key issues and challenges that the City should address
  to accomplish this priority and ensure that the future of the City is
  “greener” than its’ past. These issues were discovered through research
  and outreach to residents and other stakeholders during the General
  Plan process. As a result of these efforts, several “green city” issues
  have been identified as areas to be addressed in the General Plan.
  Global Climate Change
  One of the major challenges facing South Gate – as well as the
  State and the country– is global climate change. The precise effects
  of climate change on individual communities, such as South Gate,
  are uncertain. However, increasing fluctuations in temperature and
  unpredictability of weather patterns are among some of the conse-
  quences that are already being experienced in California. While impacts
  are uncertain, it is clear that South Gate can take steps to reduce its
  production of greenhouse gas emissions, which lead to climate change.
  Greenhouse gas emissions are strongly influenced by development
  patterns, which dictate how energy is used in transportation and build-
  ings. In this context, local development patterns and practices are of
  both local and global importance and will be increasingly relevant and
  valuable in the long-term planning horizon of this General Plan.
  Lack of Park Space
  The City is underserved by parks and those that exist are unevenly
  distributed throughout the City. Many South Gate homes are located
  more than ¼ mile from a park and some neighborhoods are complete-
  ly underserved. Although new facilities are a high priority, it is difficult
  for the City to fund such efforts because the City does not collect a
  parks impact fee for new development nor does it have another source
  of funding for parks projects.
                                                Green City Element 239

    Poor Condition of the                                   Lack of Landscaping
    Los Angeles River and                                   During the General Plan update process, the com-
                                                            munity expressed a desire to increase the amount of
    Rio Hondo                                               landscaping and greenery in the City. Street trees are
                                                            needed on many streets (particularly major roadways),
    The Los Angeles River and Rio Hondo are potential       and trees and landscaping are needed in many com-
    green resources for South Gate. However, the current    mercial and industrial areas.
    condition of these water ways is significantly degrad-
    ed. Both suffer from severe pollution, are unattractive
    and have limited functionality as anything more than
    intermittent flood control channels. There are multi-
    use trails along the Los Angeles River and Rio Hondo
    Channel, however these are unattractive with few
    pedestrian and bicycle amenities.
                                                            Many major roads in South Gate lack street trees and
                                                            other greenery.
    Multi-use trails along the Los Angeles River and Rio
    Hondo Channel provide one of the few pedestrian and
    bicycle amenities in South Gate.
240 South Gate General Plan 2035
  KEY STRATEGIES
  FOR THE GREEN CITY
  ELEMENT
  Addressing the issues and challenges facing South Gate requires a bold
  vision for the City’s future as well as practical strategies for achiev-
  ing that future. During the General Plan update process, South Gate
  citizens and the City Council embraced the vision of South Gate as a
  “green” city in which trees, parks and open spaces are abundant, and
  the community pursues environmentally responsible development and
  policies. The following are the strategies in the Green City Element to
  help achieve the vision of a greener South Gate.
  Address Climate Change in the
  General Plan
  The City will pursue a cross-cutting set of policies – about energy, land
  use, walking, cycling, and transit use, buildings, waste, ecology and
  government operations – that both reduce greenhouse gas emissions
  and adapt to the reality of a changing climate. The City will also set
  emissions reduction targets for itself, track its progress over time, and
  develop a detailed Climate Action Plan. The commitment to reducing
  the city’s global climate change impacts was supported by the passage
  of a City Council resolution on April 8, 2008 that committed to estab-
  lishing a greenhouse gas emission reduction target and the develop-
  ment of a climate action plan. As part of this effort, the City joined
  the International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI), an
  international non-profit organization that assists local governments
  with meeting their climate goals.
                                                 Green City Element 241

    Capitalize on the Los An-                                  Improve Access to Parks,
    geles River and Rio Hondo                                  Trails and Open Spaces
    Channel as a City Resource                                 The City will maintain and enhance existing parks,
                                                               which provide a crucial amenity. The City will also
    The City will seek to develop the Los Angeles River        seek to increase the amount of parks, trails and open
    and Rio Hondo Channel and transform these areas            space whenever possible, to enhance pedestrian con-
    into community assets. The Rivers can provide much-        nections to these areas.
    needed open space, and new development near the
    rivers can improve their ecological functioning and
    provide increased access.
    Create a Green Building
    Program
    The City will develop a comprehensive green building
    program that includes energy efficiency, water effi-
    ciency, material selection and indoor air quality. Tactics Parks are a crucial amenity to South Gate residents.
    for achieving this include updating the City’s Building
    Code, expediting the planning process for green build-
    ings, and providing resources and advice to builders.
                                                               Increase the Amount of
                                                               Landscaping Throughout
                                                               the City
                                                               During the public outreach process, the community
                                                               identified a greener city as one of its most impor-
                                                               tant priorities. The City will accomplish this goal
                                                               by aggressively pursuing a street-tree planting and
                                                               maintenance program, enhancing existing parks and
                                                               open space, requiring greenery and landscaping as a
                                                               condition of new development, and looking for other
    The City will encourage the use of green technolo-
                                                               opportunities to enhance and increase greenery.
    gies, like the solar panels on this building, as part of a
    comprehensive green building program.
                                                               An agressive street-tree planting and maintenance
                                                               program will be an important step to making South
                                                               Gate a greener city.
242 South Gate General Plan 2035

  PARKS, PLAZAS,
  TRAILS, AND OPEN
  SPACE
  Existing Conditions
  The City of South Gate Parks and Recreation Department is responsible
  for the development and grounds maintenance of the City’s parks and
  the Public Works Department is responsible for facilities maintenance.
  According to the Parks and Recreation Department, there are 9 parks
  in the City that total 165.74 acres. Figure GC-1 shows the location of
  the parks and multi-use trails in the City. As is seen in Table GC-1, the
  majority of the acres are located in 2 parks, South Gate Park and Hol-
  lydale Regional Park. These facilities contain a wide range of passive
  and active recreational facilities and, due to their size, are considered
  regional facilities and used by residents in surrounding areas. South
  Gate’s parks provide a range of facilities including athletic fields, play
  equipment, picnic areas, a swimming pool, grassy open spaces, and
  activity buildings.
   Table GC-1: Parks
   Park Name                        Acres   Facilities
   South Gate Park                  96.8    Auditorium, Sports Center with
                                            gym and pool, athletic fields, play-
                                            grounds, tennis courts, 3-Par golf
                                            course, Jr. hockey rink, pergolas,
                                            and senior recreation center
   Hollydale Regional Park          56.0    Playground, tennis courts, ball
                                            fields, and equestrian arena
   Cesar Chavez Park                9.0     Playgrounds, and a pergola
   Circle Park                      4.0     Playground, ball field
   Hollydale Community Park         2.2     Community center, playground,
                                            and ball field
   State Street Park                0.8     Grass field
   Gardendale Tot Lot               0.45    Playground
   Triangle Park                    0.3     Pergola, seating
   Stanford Avenue Park             0.19    Playground
   Total                            169.74
   Source: City of South Gate, 2006
                                                 Green City Element 243

    New or existing trails in the City are envisioned both        The South Gate Parks and Recreation Master Plan
    as transportation options integrated into the City’s          provides a more detailed policy platform and imple-
    transportation network and as recreational alterna-           mentation structure to the parks policies included
    tives to South Gate Park, which is heavily used. There        below. Parks and trails can be active or passive, and
    are Class I multi-use trails that run along the east side     are important destinations for recreation, relaxation,
    of the Rio Hondo Channel and the west side of the             or public gathering. Civic plazas are smaller centers of
    Los Angeles River, north of Imperial Highway. (Class I        passive public space that provide benches or resting
    facilities are physically separated from roadways and         spots in an attractive environment within the urban
    dedicated to cycling and other recreational activities.)      fabric. They are preserved exclusively for non-recre-
    These facilities are part of the regional system estab-       ational pedestrian use and have the potential to add
    lished and maintained by the County of Los Angeles.           important public gathering and green space to the
    There is also a bike path north of Southern Avenue            City. There are very few opportunity areas for large
    between Long Beach Boulevard and Atlantic Avenue              new parks in South Gate, and therefore civic plazas
    in the City of Los Angeles Department of Water and            are a key component of the City’s strategy for provid-
    Power (LADWP) right-of-way. A bicycle lane exists on          ing open space.
    the south side of Southern Avenue from Southern
    Place to the Los Angeles River. There is also a network
    of equestrian facilities along the riverfront.
    Figure GC 1      Parcels designated as Park/Plaza/Open Space.
244 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goals, Objectives,                                                    Objective GC 1.2:
                                                                      Expand public space in the City by establish-
and Policies                                                          ing new parks, civic plazas, and open space.
Goal GC 1:                                                            Policies:
                                                                      P.1	 New parkland, civic plazas, and open space will be created as
An extensive, high-quality system                                          funding and other opportunities become available.
of parks, civic plazas, and open                                      P.2	 The City will pursue innovative ways to provide parks and open
                                                                           space, including developing green roofs on buildings, reclaim-
space                                                                      ing previously developed land, targeting vacant lots for use as
                                                                           passive parks or community gardens, or other strategies.
Objective GC 1.1:                                                     P.3	 The City will pursue joint use agreements with the Los Ange-
Maintain and improve existing parks and recre-                             les Unified School District, Los Angeles Community College
                                                                           District, and East Los Angeles College.
ational facilities.
                                                                      P.4	 Wherever feasible, development of new park facilities will be
Policies:                                                                  located in areas of the City currently underserved by parks.
P.1	 The specific actions and policies in the Park and Recreation     P.5	 The City will collect land dedications or in lieu fees from new
     Master Plan will be implemented as funding allows.                    development for the provision of parks and recreation facili-
                                                                           ties, in pursuit of a desired parkland standard of 3 acres per
P.2	 South Gate will provide a full range of park and recreational         1,000 residents, as allowed by the California Quimby Act.  The
     opportunities and active and passive public space for residents.      City will prefer the physical provision of park and recreation
                                                                           infrastructure to in lieu fees, and will administer a Parkland
P.3	 The City will prioritize the continued provision of high-quality      Deduction Fee program through which new development can
     recreational and community programs, since these highly               provide parkland in lieu of certain development fees.
     subscribed programs increase social connection, physical
     activity, and quality of life.                                   P.6	 The City will expand the amount of open space by establish-
                                                                           ing a series of civic plazas. In particular, the following areas
P.4	 All parks will be clean, well-kept, and well-maintained,              should be prioritized for plazas:
     preserving it as one of the main community gathering points
     in the City.                                                            xx   Civic Center
                                                                             xx   Gateway Transit Center
P.5	 Parks in South Gate should be safe and well lit environments            xx   Community College District
     for recreational activities, both day and night.                        xx   Tweedy/Atlantic Education Center
                                                                             xx   Tweedy Boulevard
                                                                             xx   Imperial District, near the intersection of Imperial Boule-
                                                                                  vard and Garfield Avenue
                                                                             xx Hollydale Village
South Gate will provide a full rante of park and recreational opportunities throuhgout the community.
                                                                                                          Green City Element 245
     Goal GC 2:                                                          Objective GC 2.2:
     Improved trails, equestrian facili-                                 Maintain and enhance equestrian facilities.
     ties and green streets                                              Policies:
                                                                         P.1	 The City will plan for the continuation of equestrian facilities
     Objective GC 2.1:                                                        along the Los Angeles River and Rio Hondo Channel.
     Expand and enhance the City’s trail network.                        P.2	 The City will allow stables, and other equestrian facilities in
                                                                              suitable locations, in close proximity to the equestrian trails.
     Policies:
     P.1	 New trails should contribute to increased connectivity across  Objective GC 2.3:
          the City by reducing pedestrian and cycle travel times, inte-  Create green streets throughout the City.
          grating with existing sidewalks, bike lanes and other bicycle/
          pedestrian infrastructure, and providing an alternate mode of
          access to goods, services, and other desirable destinations.   Policies:
     P.2	 New trails should integrate with existing local, regional, and P.1	 The City will implement and periodically update the Street
          state trail networks.                                               Tree Master Plan, which provides for a comprehensive street
                                                                              tree planting and maintenance program. The plan should
     P.3	 Whenever possible, trails should be multi-use, accommodat-          include the following components:
          ing both cyclists and pedestrians.
                                                                                xx Identification of streets where trees may be installed.
     P.4	 The City should pursue new north/south trail connections              xx Standards for the location of street trees.
          across the City, in particular connecting to the potential            xx Standards for spacing between street trees.
          east-west trails along Southern Avenue and Independence/              xx Specification of a list of acceptable tree species and the
          Ardmore.  These trail connections should be coordinated with             appropriate streets and locations for each species.
          the proposed bicycle network in the Mobility Element.                 xx Standards for size of trees and specifications for their
                                                                                   installation (e.g. size of well, staking, materials).
     P.5	 The City should enhance the existing Class I bicycle facili-          xx Identification of responsibilities, procedures, and stan-
          ties that run along the east side of the Rio Hondo Channel               dards for tree maintenance.
          and the west side of the Los Angeles River, transforming
          them from underutilized pathways to beautified, connected      P.2	 Project developers for redevelopment projects in Districts
          pedestrian and bicycle thoroughfares with amenities such as         and Corridors will be required to plant new street trees and
          benches, tables, and lighting.                                      improve the streetscape as a condition of approval.
     P.6	 The City will pursue a Class I trail along the LADWP right-
          of-way that connects the west side of the City to the Los
          Angeles River trail.
     P.7	 The City will pursue a Class I trail along the railroad right-
          of-way between Ardmore and Independence Avenues. This
          trail should connect the College District with the potential
          Gateway Transit Village and the Los Angeles River.
                                                                         Equestrian trails and facilities are part of the City’s
                                                                         open space and trails network.
246 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goal GC 3:                                                             Implementation Actions
Enhanced utilization of the Los
                                                                       Action GC 1: Adopt an ordinance allowing
Angeles River and the Rio Hondo                                        for the collection of Quimby Fees.
Channel as open space                                                  Community Development Department, with the as-
                                                                       sistance of the Parks and Recreation Department and
Objective GC 3.1:                                                      the City Attorney, will draft an ordinance that will al-
Improve access to and use of the Los Angeles                           low the implementation of the Quimby Act in South
River and Rio Hondo Channel.                                           Gate, consistent with state law.
Policies:                                                              Action GC 2: Update the Parks and Recre-
P.1	 The City will capitalize on the Los Angeles River and Rio         ation Master Plan on a regular basis.
     Hondo Channel as public amenities that can enhance access         The Parks and Recreation Department, in coordination
     to open space, create a unique identity for the City and
     enhance economic development opportunities in the City.           with other city departments, will update the Parks and
                                                                       Recreation Master Plan on a regular basis. The intervals
P.2	 New development along the Los Angeles River and the Rio Hondo
     Channel should encourage access to and utilization of the rivers. between updates may vary based on specific condi-
                                                                       tions but updates should take place approximately
P.3	 The City should seek to develop attractive destinations, busi-
     nesses, and resting points along and in close proximity to the    once every five years.
     Los Angeles River and Rio Hondo Channel.
P.4	 New development, redevelopment, landscaping, and infra-           Action GC 3: Create an equestrian overlay
     structure along the Los Angeles River and the Rio Hondo           district during the update of the Zoning Code.
     Channel should utilize xeriscaping and native plants and
     enhance riparian habitat, wherever feasible.
                                                                       The Community Development Department, in coordi-
                                                                       nation with the Parks and Recreation Department, will
P.5	 New development that may result in increased water pollu-
     tion to the Los Angeles River or the Rio Hondo Channel will
                                                                       create an equestrian overlay district as part of the Zon-
     be required to mitigate the potential sources of pollution,       ing Code update. The purpose of this overlay will be to
     especially pollution from stormwater runoff.                      identify areas of the City that would be appropriate and
P.6	 The City may support regional or multi-jurisdictional efforts to  feasible for allowing equestrian access and facilities.
     improve the riverfront and to naturalize the river in a manner
     that restores the ecological functioning of the area.  
                                                                                                   Green City Element 247
    FLOODING
    Existing Conditions
    The Los Angeles River and Rio Hondo Channel represent the primary
    flood risk for the City of South Gate. During a flood in 1980, the lower
    Los Angeles River reached its flood control capacity and the U.S. Army
    Corps of Engineers determined that portions of the system provided
    less than a 40-year level of flood protection, far below the minimum
    federal standard for flood control channels of 100 years. The Los An-
    geles County Drainage Area (LACDA) Project, completed in 2001 and
    administered by the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works,
    was a response to this flooding danger. The project raised the height
    of 21 miles of levee along the Los Angeles River from the Southern
    Pacific Railroad to the confluence with the Rio Hondo, and along the
    Rio Hondo Channel from the confluence with the Los Angeles River to
    just downstream of the Whittier Narrows Dam. The LACDA provided
    133-year storm flood protection in the areas in which it was installed,
    including through the City of South Gate. As a result, National Flood
    Insurance Program (NFIP) river and flood hazard insurance is no longer
    required anywhere within South Gate City limits. This is demonstrated
    in the LACDA Overflow Map,1 which identifies areas in Los Angeles
    County where flood insurance is mandatory and shows South Gate
    outside of these areas. The recreational benefits from the LACDA in-
    cluded improvements to equestrian and bicycle trails, installation of rest
    stops, and landscaping. Because the City’s elevation is around 115 feet
    there is little to no risk of tsunamis, which rarely rise more than 40 feet
    above sea level before hitting land.
    The City of South Gate Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan was adopted
    by the City Council on October 26, 2004 and amended May 13, 2008.
    This Plan identifies information regarding flood hazards, establishes a
    set of comprehensive goals, policies and objectives and a set of feasible
    implementation measures pursuant to CGC Section 65302(g)2. The
    Plan includes all of the information and maps required by state law.
    In a letter dated July 23, 2008, FEMA Region IX approved the Plan for
    a 5 year period. A copy of the document is included in the National
    Emergency Management Information System.2
    1	  http://dpw.lacounty.gov/wmd/watershed/LA/lacda_map.cfm
    2	  Official Letter from Ms. Sally Ziolkows, Director, Mitigation Division FEMA Region IX to
        Mr. Alvie Betancourt, Planning Department, City of South Gate CA. Dated July 23, 2008.
248 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goals, Objectives,                                                 Implementation Actions
and Policies                                                       Action GC 5:
                                                                   Review, and if necessary revise the Green City
Goal GC 4:                                                         Element Flooding section upon each revision
The prevention of hazards from                                     of the Housing Element.
flooding                                                           In accordance with CGC Section 65302(g), this section
                                                                   of the Green City Element will be updated upon each
Objective GC 4.1:                                                  revision of the Housing Element.
Encourage appropriate flood control and
prevent negative impacts of new develop-                           Action GC 6:
ment on flood-control efforts.                                     Update the Natural Hazard Mitigation
Policies:
                                                                   Plan on a regular basis.
                                                                   The Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan will be updated
P.1	 The City of South Gate Natural Hazard Mitigation
                                                                   upon each revision of the Housing Element to ensure
     Plan, including all background materials, goals, policies,
     objectives and implementation measures will be incorporated   that it includes all information in accordance with
     into this General Plan.                                       CGC Section 65302(g).
P.2	 New development in South Gate should not exacerbate
     potential flooding hazards.
P.3	 The City will provide continued support for the Los Angeles
     County Drainage Project (LACDP), which reduces the flood
     risk in a significant portion of the City.
P.4	 The City will coordinate with the flood-control activities of
     the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works.
P.5	 The City will work with the Emergency Services Division of
     the Los Angeles County Division of the Army Corps of Engi-
     neers to develop better flood warning systems.
P.6	 The Public Works Department will continue to identify and
     enforce NPDES provisions within the City.
                                                                                               Green City Element 249
    CONSERVATION AND
    ENHANCEMENT OF
    NATURAL AND BIO-
    LOGICAL RESOURCES
    Existing Conditions
    This section provides information on the natural and biological resources
    such as threatened or endangered species, mineral resources and green
    spaces, such as landscaping and street trees.
    South Gate is an entirely urbanized area. Plants and trees are limited
    to parks, streetscaping, some riparian zones around the Los Angeles
                                                                                 The Los Angeles River and Rio
    River and Rio Hondo Channel, and private yards and gardens. There are
    no known threatened or endangered species and very sparse wildlife,
                                                                                 Hondo Channel represent the
    though migratory or native birds may be found in natural areas such as
    South Gate Park or areas around the Los Angeles River.                       primary flood risk for the City
    Residents contributing to the General Plan update process identified a
    greener city as a priority. Many of the City’s best opportunities for green-
                                                                                 of South Gate.
    ing the City involve preserving and enhancing existing spaces, and in
    some cases rehabilitating or converting them back to biologically active
    areas. Improving parks and open space, enhancing the Rio Hondo Chan-
    nel and Los Angeles River, and streetscape improvements are the major
    policy goals that can achieve this. Improving the “urban forest” - the
    network of trees throughout the City - is another important opportunity
    to enhance the City’s biological resources.
    Additionally, the City can conserve and enhance global natural and
    biological resources by purchasing environmentally preferable products
    and making informed consumer choices. In an increasingly globalized
    economy, and in the absence of major natural resources within the City,
    this is one of South Gate’s best opportunities to have a positive effect
    on natural and biological resources. Other strategies to conserve natural
    and biological resources well beyond the City limits include enhanced
    community-wide recycling and reuse, as discussed in the Public Facili-
    ties and Services Element, and reduced energy use and greenhouse gas
    emissions, as discussed later in this Element.
250 South Gate General Plan 2035

To this end, the South Gate Municipal Code (SGMC)                     Objective GC 5.2:
Chapter 1.54 Purchasing System And Bidding Rules                      Preserve and enhance the City’s urban forest.
(sections 1.54.710 - 750) supports purchasing re-
cycled and environmentally-preferred products, and                    Policies:
reducing the environmental impacts of city opera-                     P.1	 The City will preserve and expand the urban forest in accor-
tions. Specifically, the SGMC contains the following                       dance with the Street Tree Master Plan.  
language relating to environmentally preferred prod-                  P.2	 The City will be responsible for maintaining street trees.
ucts and the use of recycle materials:
                                                                      P.3	 Residents will be responsible for watering new and existing
•	 Require all city departments to adopt and promote the use of            streets trees on or adjacent to their property.  
   recycled or recyclable supplies and materials
                                                                      P.4	 The City should consider native and drought resistant species
•	 Require the use of recycled or recyclable supplies and materials        of street trees whenever possible.  
   as a condition of approval for all city-sponsored construction,
   demolition, and renovation projects                                P.5	 The City should use integrated pest management to avoid the
                                                                           unnecessary use of pesticides.
•	 Encourage city staff to reduce their consumption of resources
                                                                      P.6	 As needed, new non-residential and multifamily develop-
                                                                           ment will be required to incorporate the new tree planting
Goals, Objectives,
                                                                           or landscape improvements in the public rights-of-way along
                                                                           the property boundary consistent with the Tree Master Plan.
and Policies                                                          Objective GC 5.3:
                                                                      Create “green” parking lots with trees and
Goal GC 5:                                                            other landscaping in order to improve vi-
The protection of local and global                                    sual appearance and to minimize negative
natural resources                                                     effects on the environment.
                                                                      Policies:
Objective GC 5.1:
                                                                      P.1	 Large parking lots as part of new development or major
Preserve and enhance the City’s plants                                     renovations should be well landscaped with trees and other
and wildlife.                                                              greenery and designed to hold and filter stormwater runoff,
                                                                           reduce heat island effects and create a comfortable pedes-
Policies:                                                                  trian environment.
P.1	 The City should encourage property owners to landscape           P.2	 Where parking lots front public streets, landscaping should
     their property, and will encourage native plants, tree planting,      be provided to serve as a buffer between the parking lot and
     and xeriscaping.                                                      the public right-of-way.
P.2	 The City should protect any rare or endangered plants or
     wildlife that may be found in the City in the future.
                                                                                                       Green City Element 251

    Objective GC 5.4:
    Increase the use of environmentally preferable
                                                                         Implementation Actions
    products in city purchasing and operations.                          Action GC 8:
                                                                         Create, maintain and distribute a list of
    Policies:
                                                                         preferred “green products.”
    P.1	 The City will purchase and use recycled-content office prod-    The City’s purchasing supervisor will create, maintain
         ucts, whenever practicable, using U.S. EPA recycled content
         standards as a guide. The City will also include such direc-    and distribute a list of preferred “green products”
         tions in its standard professional services contract.           consistent with the City’s Green Purchasing ordinance
    P.2	 The City will include environmentally preferable purchasing     (SGMC 1.54.700-750).
         requirements in janitorial contracts and direct city custodians
         to purchase and use environmentally preferable products.
    P.3	 The City will use recycled mulch and soil products in city
         park and landscaping projects whenever practicable, and will
         include the same direction in city landscaping contracts.
    P.4	 The City should use recycled content playground equipment,
         park landscape surfacing, and other park and recreational
         equipment whenever feasible.
    P.5	 The City should use recycled-content materials for building,
         streetscaping and roadway construction whenever feasible.
    Using environmentally preferable products can reduce the environmental impacts of City operations and maintenance.
252 South Gate General Plan 2035

  GREEN BUILDING
  Existing Conditions
  Green building is a term used to refer to buildings that have a reduced
  impact on the natural environment compared to conventional building
  practices. While the exact definition of green building varies widely
  and is defined based on local circumstances, the term usually refers to
  buildings that use less energy, conserve water, use recycled materials in
  the construction and ongoing maintenance, and create healthy indoor
  environments for inhabitants.
  While retrofitting the existing building stock could have a wide and im-
  mediate impact on South Gate’s greenhouse gas emissions, new green
  buildings can have an important long-term and accumulating impact as
  they replace old buildings. Green building efforts that address single-
  family homes as well as municipal, commercial, mixed-use or multi-unit
  residential projects, and address existing as well as new buildings, have
  the most widespread and long-lasting effect. However, cities often
  have less direct leverage over existing buildings, and green building
  requirements for smaller development like single-family homes can be
  more difficult to administer than requirements for larger developments
  or municipal buildings.
  Besides minimizing impact on the environment, green building incentives
  and initiatives have the potential to encourage economic investment in
  South Gate’s Neighborhoods, Districts and Corridors, and to increase
  health and productivity. During the planning horizon of this General
  Plan, green building technology is likely to become more widespread,
  mainstream and incentivized or required by various bodies other than the
  City, and as green buildings reap increasing dividends, their presence in
  South Gate will improve the City’s overall strategic position.
                                                Green City Element 253

    Goals, Objectives,                                                    Implementation Actions
    and Policies                                                          Action GC 9:
                                                                          Develop a green building ordinance or
    Goal GC 6:                                                            program for different kinds of new devel-
    A robust green building program                                       opment and remodels.
                                                                          Develop a green building ordinance or program for
    Objective GC 6.1:                                                     different kinds of new development and remodels.
                                                                          The green building ordinance or program may ad-
    Increase the use of green techniques in
                                                                          dress the following issues, among others:
    new buildings, new building sites and
                                                                                xx Updating the City’s Building Code to require and/or
    building remodels and retrofits.                                               provide incentives for recycling of construction materials,
                                                                                   solar access, pipe insulation, water heater heat-traps and
    Policies:                                                                      any other widely attainable green building techniques.
    P.1	 All new municipal buildings should meet or exceed silver in            xx Energy efficiency required or incentivized above Title 24
         the appropriate LEED Rating System, or a comparable green              xx Water conservation
         building standard.                                                     xx Brownfield rehabilitation
                                                                                xx On-site renewable energy, especially solar
    P.2	 The City should encourage green building techniques efforts in         xx Different types of development that may be required or
         single-family homes as well as in new municipal, commercial,              incentivized to be certified or certifiable under the U.S.
         mixed-use or multifamily residential projects.                            Green Building Council’s LEED (Leadership in Energy and
                                                                                   Environmental Design) rating systems, the Green Point
    P.3	 The City should encourage and create incentives for green                 Rated system, Build-it-Green or another other green
         building techniques in existing building retrofits as well as             building standards deemed appropriate by the City
         new buildings.                                                         xx Expedited plan check or design review, or waiving of
    P.4	 The City should emphasize design for water conservation in its            fees, for new green development
         green building efforts.                                                xx Procedures for projects to demonstrate compliance with
                                                                                   requirements or incentives
    P.5	 New buildings should meet or exceed California Title 24 energy
         efficiency requirements.                                         Action GC 10:
    P.6	 When feasible or required by law, new development should         Standardize incentives for green building
         utilize Low Impact Design (LID) features, including infiltration
         of stormwater, but LID should not interfere with the City’s
                                                                          practices.
         goals of infill development and appropriate densities as         Separately or as part of the green building ordinance,
         defined in the Community Design Element.                         standardize a program for fee reductions, incremental
    P.7	 The City should assess all new development’s use of green        incentives, rebates, grants, density bonuses, or expedit-
         building techniques as a formal stage of design review.          ed plan checks for projects that adhere to the various
    P.8	 The City may finance energy efficiency retrofits and on-site re- portions of the green building ordinance or program.
         newable energy installation through a local assessment district,
         or provide administrative or financial support in other ways.
    P.9	 On an ongoing basis, city staff should be trained to imple-
         ment the green building program and to provide advice and
         expertise about green building to residents, particularly small-
         scale developers or homeowners that may have less access to
         green building expertise.  
                                                                          Buildings are responsible for around 40 % of world
                                                                          energy consumption. Implemeneting green building
                                                                          practices are an important step to greening the City.
254 South Gate General Plan 2035

  CLIMATE CHANGE
  Existing Conditions
  Global climate change is an increasingly acknowledged global environ-
  mental issue. There is scientific consensus that it is caused by green-
  house gases being released into the atmosphere faster than the earth’s
  natural systems can re-absorb them. Models predict world tempera-
  tures will rise by between 1.4 and 5.8 °C (2.5 and 10.4 °F) during the
  21st century, depending on the level to which atmospheric concen-
  trations of greenhouse gases rise, and on the eventual effect of such
  rises.3 These global changes would affect residents of South Gate in a
  variety of ways, including:
  •	 More frequent heat waves.
  •	 Rising sea levels, which would threaten nearby coastal infrastructure such as the Port
     of Los Angeles, other development near sea level, and coastal ecosystems.  
  •	 More extreme weather events such as storms and floods.
  •	 Increased drought and water supply shortages .
  •	 Increased potential for tropical insect-borne diseases.
  Besides a small portion of emissions resulting from waste decomposi-
  tion, soil disruption, or the release of industrial chemicals, energy use
  (in buildings, transportation, or elsewhere) is the primary source of
  greenhouse gas emissions in most U.S. cities, including South Gate.
  This means that local planning and urban development decisions are
  crucial to addressing global climate change.
  On April 8, 2008, the City passed Resolution 7245 expressing a com-
  mitment to conduct periodic greenhouse gas emissions inventories and
  enact policies and actions that will achieve emissions reductions. Con-
  current with the General Plan update, the City and its consultant, Raimi
  + Associates, prepared a greenhouse gas inventory that provides an
  overview of the major causes of greenhouse gas emissions that result
  from activity in the City of South Gate.
  The Greenhouse Gas Inventory inventory was conducted separately
  for municipal sources (resulting from city operations) and community
  sources (resulting from transportation, building energy use, and waste
  produced by all South Gate residents). Total municipal emissions in
  South Gate (8,678 metric tons CO2eq) is only around 1.5% of the
  3	   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Working Group III Report: Climate
       Change 2007: Mitigation of Climate Change, p. 133.
                                                         Green City Element 255

    amount of total community emissions (575,206
    metric tons CO2eq). This means that addressing         Goals, Objectives,
    community-wide emissions is crucial for any long-
    term strategy of emissions reductions, while munici-
                                                           and Policies
    pal actions taken early can provide a model for wider
    community action. Of community emissions, 51.5%
                                                           Goal GC 7:
    came from residential and commercial building en-      To mitigate against and adapt to
    ergy use, 41.4% came from transportation within city   climate change
    limits, and 7.1% came from waste produced by resi-
    dents. This means that buildings and transportation
                                                           Objective GC 7.1:
    are the largest targets for city-wide emissions reduc-
                                                           Reduce South Gate’s production of green-
    tions, followed by waste. The South Gate Greenhouse
    Gas Inventory of 2005 emissions is included as an
                                                           house emissions and contribution to cli-
    appendix to the Green City Element, and informs the    mate change, and adapt to the effects of
    policies and actions below.                            climate change.
    Since climate change is a cross-cutting issue relevant Policies:
    to various policy arenas, it has been addressed in a
                                                           P.1	 The City will pro-actively cooperate with the State to imple-
    cross-cutting way throughout some of the elements           ment AB 32, which calls for reducing greenhouse gas emis-
    of this General Plan. This Climate Change section           sions to 1990 levels by 2020, and Executive Order S-3-05,
                                                                which calls for 1990 levels by 2020 and 80% below 1990
    of the Green City Element includes a summary table
                                                                levels by 2050.
    of policies throughout the General Plan that directly
                                                           P.2	 In cooperation with the State and SCAG, the City will pro-
    reduce greenhouse gas emissions or help the City
                                                                actively promote implementation of SB 375, in particular
    adapt to climate change. It also contains policies and      utilizing its incentives for transit-oriented development.  
    actions explicitly related to the City’s approach to
                                                           P.3	 The City will strive to reduce its per capita greenhouse gas
    climate change, such as emissions reduction targets,        emissions to 15% below 2005 levels by 2020 (note: the 2005
    guidelines for preparing inventories or plans, and          levels are presented in the 2005 Greenhouse Gas Inventory,
                                                                which is located in the Appendix of this General Plan).
    general reduction strategies.
                                                           P.4	 The City will reduce greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to
                                                                climate change with efforts in the following areas:
                                                                  xx Energy. Major mitigation and adaptation strategies
                                                                      will include incentivizing renewable energy installation,
                                                                      facilitating green technology and business, and reduc-
                                                                      ing community-wide energy consumption through the
                                                                      strategies described here.  
                                                                  xx Land Use. Major mitigation and adaptation strategies
                                                                      will include transit-oriented development, compact
                                                                      development, infill development, and encouraging a
                                                                      mix of uses.
                                                                  xx Transportation. Major mitigation and adaptation
                                                                      strategies will include enhanced multi-modal transporta-
                                                                      tion, cycling infrastructure and walking infrastructure.
256 South Gate General Plan 2035

     xx Buildings. Major mitigation and adaptation strate-         P.1	 The City will create a Climate Action Plan to guide city efforts
         gies will include green building incentives, assessment        in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to climate
         of green building techniques as a formal stage of city         change. Any major city decisions made before the Climate
         design review, and development of a green build-               Action Plan is prepared should be consistent with the climate
         ing ordinance. Adaptation strategies will also include         change goals and strategies in the Green City Element.
         increased water efficiency in buildings.
     xx Waste. Major mitigation strategies will include in-        P.2	 To the extent feasible, the City should complete a greenhouse
         creased composting and recycling, and efforts to reduce        gas inventory and review the Climate Action Plan’s mitigation
         waste generation.                                              strategies every 5 years to ensure they are still appropriate.
     xx Ecology. Major mitigation strategies will include tree
         planting and city greening. Major adaptation strategies
         will include native and drought-resistant planting.  
     xx Government Operations. Major mitigation strategies
                                                                   Implementation Actions
         will include green procurement and energy saving in
         operations and maintenance.                               Action GC 11:
     xx Communication and Programs. Major mitiga-                  Create a Climate Action Plan.
         tion and adaptation strategies may include energy- or
                                                                   Create a Climate Action Plan that builds on the major
         climate change-themed publications and workshops,
         facilitating energy audits for residents, or establishing strategies listed in the Climate Change section of the
         partnerships to promote climate action.                   Green City Element, and clarifies how the City will
      (For a list of related policies already addressed in         meet its emissions reduction target. The Climate Ac-
      the General Plan, see Table GC 2.)
                                                                   tion Plan should include specific mitigations in addi-
                                                                   tion to overall strategies, and it should be completed
                                                                   within one year of adoption of the General Plan.
Reducing carbon emaissions from vehicles is an important component of addressing climate change.
                                                                                                     Green City Element 257

     Table GC 2: Key Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation General Plan Objectives, Policies and Actions
     Community Design Element
     Land use policies and actions in the Community Design Element have a variety of climate change benefits. Nearly all new
     development in South Gate will be compact and infill since the City is almost entirely built out, and many policies pro-
     mote a mix of uses. A compact mix of uses will increase local access to goods and services. This will increase walkability,
     decrease trip distances, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. A better balance of local jobs and employed residents also
     decreases commute distances and associated emissions. Multiple policies and actions call for transit-oriented development
     and support of regional transportation connections. Transit-oriented development enables residents to use public transit and
     increases system-wide transit use, thereby reducing greenhouse gas emissions. More compact buildings also use less energy
     and produce fewer building emissions.
     Urban design and transportation policies and actions also have climate change benefits. Multiple policies and actions require
     or encourage an enhanced and safer pedestrian environment – addressing building facades and entrances, architecture,
     streetscapes, parking, and pedestrian connections – which is likely to increase walking rates and decrease community
     transportation emissions. Policies that allow for improvement or expansion to public transit, bicycle and pedestrian facilities
     increase trips made by those modes and decrease transportation emissions.
     At the building level, policies that encourage building and building material reuse, green building techniques, and durable
     architecture with a higher chance of being maintained and invested in decrease current and future emissions from buildings.
     Green buildings, infrastructure, and businesses are also better adapted to future resource constraints from climate change
     than conventional buildings. Finally, parks and community gardens protect against heat island effect and potential future
     disruptions in the food supply chain from changing climate or energy shortages.
     Goals/Objectives                           Policy Content
     Objective CD 1.1: Enhance South Gate’s     P.1 calls for the City to accommodate its share of regional housing needs.
     role, participation and leadership in the
                                                P.5 calls for the City to “actively support regional transportation decisions that benefit the
     region.
                                                City and the region.”
     Objective CD 1.2: Pursue new uses and      P.1 commits the City to pursuing several major projects and activities, including:
     projects that make South Gate a great      •	 High-speed transit along the Union Pacific right-of-way
     place to live, work, socialize and do
     business.                                  •	 Expanded public transportation and bicycle infrastructure
     Goal CD 2: A complete, integrated and      All Objectives and Policies within Goal CD 2 encourage a complete, integrated and bal-
     balanced mix of residential and non-       anced mix of residential and non-residential uses, with a clearly defined urban form of
     residential uses that meets the needs of   “Neighborhoods,” “Districts,” and “Corridors.”
     existing and future residents
     Objective CD 2.2: Maintain a jobs-hous-    P.1 to P.3 set a target of 1.5 jobs for every housing unit, call for a match between residents
     ing balance in the City.                   and appropriate job types, and limit conversion of non-residential land to residential uses.
     Objective CD 2.4: Provide land for a       P.1 to P.4 call for preserving land for a diversity of job-producing uses.
     diversity of job-producing uses through-
     out the City.
     Objective CD 2.7: Allow increased          P.1 to P.3 define density bonuses available for various public improvements and public
     densities for projects that provide public amenities, including USGBC-certified green buildings.
     amenities and improvements beyond
     those required by code.
     Objective CD 3.1: Support transit-orient- P.1 requires the City to encourage multi-modal transportation, including public transit,
     ed development in the City.                walking, and biking.
                                                P.2 to P.6 commit the City to pursuing higher intensity, pedestrian oriented, transit oriented
                                                development near areas well-served by high frequency bus transit, and identifies several of
                                                these areas, including new transit villages at Firestone and Atlantic and in Hollydale.
     Objective CD 3.2: Minimize the impact      P.1 to P.12 encourage and require parking design that preserves and enhances the pedes-
     of parking on the pedestrian environ-      trian environment and the urban fabric, including placing parking behind buildings, reduc-
     ment and residential neighborhoods.        ing parking heat islands, and discouraging large uncovered lots.
258 South Gate General Plan 2035

  Community Design Element
  Goals/Objectives                           Policy Content
  Objective CD 4.5: Locate services and      P.1 encourages “complete” neighborhoods, including parks, community gardens, and
  amenities within walking distance of       goods and services within walking distance of homes.
  neighborhoods.
                                             P.2 and P.3 encourage pedestrian connections between neighborhoods and neighborhood
                                             centers with neighborhood-serving retail, services, and public gathering places.
  Goal CD 5: Revitalization of Tweedy Mile Objectives and Policies within Goal CD 5 encourage enhancement of Tweedy Mile as a
  to become the social and cultural heart    central shopping and public gathering area.
  of South Gate
  Objective CD 6.1: Create a series of       P.1 to P.4 define distinct Districts in the City. Districts have designated purposes such as job
  distinct Districts throughout the City,    production, mixed uses and multifamily housing, and/or expanded retail. Specific locations
  each with its own character, identity and for these uses are identified throughout the policies for specific Districts.
  mix of uses.
                                             P.5 and P.6 encourage diverse housing choices, including live-work units and mixed use
                                             buildings. Specific locations for housing types and mixed use areas are identified through-
                                             out the policies for specific Districts.
                                             P.7 encourages high-quality urban design and architecture to enhance the urban fabric.
  Objective CD 6.2: Design landscaping,      P.3 and P.5 require new development to enhance the pedestrian environment, including
  buildings and sites to enhance the pe-     minimizing blank walls and providing entrances and interesting building facades along
  destrian environment and enhance the       sidewalks, integrating sidewalks and plazas, incorporating first-floor uses that encourage
  urban character of the City’s Districts.   pedestrian traffic, minimizing setbacks, and providing street trees and landscaping.
  Objective 7.1: Create attractive corridors P.1 to P.8 identify corridors as areas that should be re-developed with a mix of uses and
  with a mix of uses throughout the City     housing types and a reduced number of single-use retail parcels.
  of South Gate.
  Objective 7.2: Design landscaping, build- P.2 and P.4 require new development to enhance the pedestrian environment, including
  ings and sites to enhance the pedestrian minimizing blank walls and providing entrances and interesting building facades along
  environment.                               sidewalks, integrating sidewalks and plazas, incorporating first-floor uses that encourage
                                             pedestrian traffic, minimizing setbacks, and providing street trees and landscaping.
  Objective 8.1 Ensure high quality archi-   P.1 to P.8 require high quality, pedestrian-friendly, durable architecture and urban design.
  tecture and urban design throughout
  the City.
  Objective CD 9.1: Identify and preserve    P.1 encourages preservation of historically and culturally significant buildings.
  cultural and historic resources.
  Community Design Element – Specific
  Districts or Corridors
  District or Corridor                       Policy Content
  Civic Center District                      P.1 and P.2 specifically encourage pedestrian safety and pedestrian connections across
                                             California Street, given the high level of foot traffic expected in the Civic Center District.
                                             P.3 encourages all new buildings to be certified green buildings.
  South Gate College District                P.1 and P.9 encourage adaptive reuse and façade preservation of the existing Firestone Tire
                                             Factory.
                                             P.1 and P.5 encourage development of “green workforce” training and curicullae.
                                             P.3 requires the City to pursue a public/private partnership creating a green technology
                                             center.
                                             P.4 encourages all new buildings to be certified green buildings.
  Gateway District                           P.1 and P.2 require the City to create a specific plan for a future transit district, and to work
                                             with regional transit agencies to promote multi-modal transit.
                                             P.3 to P.5 identify the need for additional through-streets and pedestrian connections
                                             within the district.
  Imperial District                          P.9 allows for a potential high-density transit village near Imperial Boulevard.
  Ardine Industrial District                 P.3 encourages use of rail over trucks to move freight.
  Tweedy Mile Corridor                       Objectives and policies include specific guidelines and requirements for enhancing the
                                             pedestrian environment along Tweedy Mile.
                                                                                                              Green City Element 259

     Community Design Element
     District or Corridor                          Policy Content
     Garfield Corridor                             P.2 encourages creation of a business assessment district for streetscape beautification.
                                                   P.1 and P.6 commit the City to completing a specific in-progress mixed use project.
      Actions                                      Action CD 2: Create Citywide Design Guidelines and/or Streetscape Plans. Planned ac-
                                                   tions include detailed streetscape plans for Corridors, implementing street cleaning and
                                                   improvement programs, and identifying streetscape and pedestrian facility improvements.
                                                   Action CD 3: Create a Density Bonus Program. Program would define ways for project
                                                   developers to achieve increased density for their projects.
                                                   Action CD 8: Undertake a Citywide Parking Management Study. Planned topics to be
                                                   explored include parking pricing and shared parking.
                                                   Action CD 12: Commission an Historic Resource Survey. Planned topics to be explored
                                                   include preserving significant historic resources and a historic resources ordinance.
     Mobility Element
     Policies and actions in the Mobility Element that enhance public transit, walking and bicycling are likely to achieve substantial green-
     house gas reductions. Improvements in transit, pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure and service are likely to result in an increase in
     trips made by these modes, which will decrease community transportation emissions. Enhanced bicycle, pedestrian and street connec-
     tions across barriers could decrease transportation emissions by increasing bike and pedestrian trips and allowing shorter vehicle trips.
     South Gate’s encouragement of freight and passenger rail infrastructure could also reduce community transportation emissions by
     replacing freight trucks and other traffic with rail.
     The Mobility Element calls for increasing the feasibility of mixed use and transit-oriented development, which supports transit, in-
     duces walking, and is usually more compact and energy-efficient than average. This will result in decreased community building and
     transportation emissions. Policies that limit parking or increase the feasibility of urban development that is not automobile dependent
     encourage alternatives to single-occupancy vehicles and enhance the pedestrian environment. Policies that call for street-widening
     could cause additional community transportation emissions by inducing increased VMT.
     Goals/Objectives                              Policy Content
     Objective ME 1.1: Balance the roadway         P.2 calls for establishing multi-modal arterial corridor design standards, including for tran-
     system with the planned uses in the City. sit, bikes and pedestrians.
     Objective ME 1.2: Fully develop the           P.1 calls for a more connective street grid, with additional connections over barriers such as
     street system, and maximize its opera-        the Los Angeles River and I-710 freeway.
     tional efficiency.
                                                   P.2 and P.3 call for consideration of all modes, including transit, bicycles and pedestrians, in
                                                   design, operation and maintenance of roadways.
     Objective ME 2.1: Provide a connected,        P.1 to P.3 call for developing a citywide bicycle network, including on- and off-street bike
     balanced, and integrated transportation       paths, bike lanes, widespread bike parking, and centralized bike hubs near transit facilities
     system of bicycle and pedestrian net-         and commercial uses.
     works that enable residents to walk and
                                                   P.4 to P.5 call for developing a citywide pedestrian network, including connections to
     bike, as alternatives to use of the car.
                                                   schools, neighborhoods, open space, and other major destinations, and including facilities
                                                   such as benches and street trees throughout the City.
                                                   P.6 encourages enhanced pedestrian and bike access to regional transit.
                                                   P.7 encourages publication of bike and pedestrian maps and resource materials.
                                                   P.8 encourages coordination with neighboring jurisdictions in provision of bike and pedes-
                                                   trian facilities.
                                                   P.9 encourages office, industrial, institutional, and multi-family projects to provide bike
                                                   parking and facilities.
260 South Gate General Plan 2035

  Mobility Element
  Goals/Objectives                           Policy Content
  Objective ME 2.2: Improve local and        P.1, P.2 and P.4 encourage the City to work with Metro (LACMTA) to provide more direct
  regional transit service in the City.      transit routes to neighborhoods, provide additional routes, and increase the frequency of
                                             routes.
                                             P.3 calls for supporting Metro’s expansion of Rapid Bus Service.
                                             P.5 encourages the City to work with Metro to provide attractive and convenient bus
                                             stops.
                                             P.6 encourages development of a bus transit hub at Firestone and Atlantic, with potential
                                             expansion.
                                             P.7 calls for the City to support all potential rail transit serving the City, including high-
                                             speed rail.
  Objective M 2.3: Encourage walking,        P.1 encourages land use and architecture that promotes transit access and pedestrian
  biking and use of transit, through a vari- orientation.
  ety of supportive land use development
                                             P.2 to P.4 call for the City to require office, retail, industrial, and multi-family development
  and urban design measures.
                                             to install transit, bike, and pedestrian amenities, and to develop Transportation Demand
                                             Management (TDM) programs.
                                             P.5 encourages the promotion of TDM programs.
                                             P.6 encourages development of park and ride facilities.
  Objective M 3.2: Reduce adverse im-        P.4 calls for coordination with regional planning agencies to encourage use of rail along
  pacts from truck traffic.                  the I-710 corridor.
  Objective M 4.1: Manage parking de-        P.2 calls for revision of the City’s parking guidelines to allow reduced parking for new
  mand and supply in the City.               development in areas with high mixed uses, along major mixed use corridors, and near
                                             high-frequency transit service.
                                             P.3. calls for “Park Once” programs to encourage walking within commercial districts.
                                                                                                                Green City Element 261

     Mobility Element
     Goals/Objectives        Policy Content
     Actions                 Action ME.1: Implement various street improvements for general circulation. Guidelines
                             include public transit and other transportation modes.
                             Action ME 2: Upgrade the City’s traffic signals and signal timing. Upgrade specifications Call
                             for taking into account the needs of pedestrians, bicyclists and transit in addition to autos.
                             Action ME 10: Plan and develop rail service in UPRR north-south corridor. Action includes
                             planned coordination with multiple public agencies to support rail development.
                             Action ME 11: Coordinate with City of Downey on potential train station. This action commits
                             the City to cooperating with Downey for a potential high speed, grade-separated transit line
                             on the Union Pacific right-of-way.
                             Action ME 12: Create a Firestone/Atlantic transit station. The Firestone/Atlantic station would
                             be a hub for multiple transit modes.
                             Action ME 13: Create an Imperial/Atlantic transit station. The Imperial/Atlantic station would
                             be a hub for multiple transit modes.
                             Action ME 15: Initiate local transit service. This action calls for initiation of a local bus service
                             in the City and defines its desired characteristics and types of service.
                             Action ME 16: Build park and ride lots. This action commits the City to building park and ride
                             lots, which decrease VMT.
                             Action ME 17: Provide enhanced bus stop amenities. This action commits the City to certain
                             bus stop improvements.
                             Action ME 18: Promote the use of transit. This action defines activities to promote transit use
                             throughout the City.
                             Action ME 19: Conduct a citywide bicycle study and develop a bicycle plan. A bicycle plan
                             would include planned improvements to the bike network as well as specific plans for things
                             like traffic controls and push buttons for bicycles to cross arterial roadways.
                             Action ME 21: Improve bicycle access to the regional bike paths on the Los Angeles River
                             and the Rio Hondo Channel. Connection to the existing regional bike path would increase its
                             utilization by residents.
                             Action ME 22: Install bicycle “hubs.” Hubs would be important destinations providing goods,
                             services, and interesting resting points along the bicycle network.
                             Action ME 23: In conjunction with other agencies and developers the City should develop
                             and implement an ongoing bicycle amenities program. Bicycle amenities would be installed at
                             various publicly-owned locations.
                             Action ME 24: Modify the city code for bicycle parking. Planned modifications include requir-
                             ing provision of bike parking and showers.
                             Action ME 26: Promote the use of bicycles. Bicycle use would be promoted by the prepara-
                             tion and distribution of bike route maps and facilities information.
                             Action ME 27: Develop procedures for incorporating bike facilities into new development
                             projects. Procedures would define requirements for including bike infrastructure in new
                             development.
                             Action ME 28: Conduct a citywide pedestrian study to develop a pedestrian plan and
                             program. The planned Pedestrian Amenities Program would involve comprehensive improve-
                             ments to streetscapes and the walking network.
                             Action ME 29: Develop procedures for new development to support and promote walking
                             and contribute to enhancing supporting facilities and amenities. Procedures would define
                             requirements for including pedestrian infrastructure in new development.
                             Action ME 30: Promote walking in the City. Walking would be promoted by the preparation
                             and distribution of walking route maps and facilities information.
                             Action ME 34: Develop parking policies and modify parking requirements to restrict the over-
                             provision of on-site parking for private developments.
                             Action ME 35: Explore the establishment of parking districts in commercial areas. This would
                             implement the “park once” program.
                             Action ME 36: Develop TDM Program. A TDM program would define specific TDM strategies
                             and procedures that could be used as a model for individual development projects.
262 South Gate General Plan 2035

  Economic Element
  The Economic Element calls for walkable multi-modal streets, locally available goods and services, and more South Gate residents
  working in South Gate, which will all decrease VMT and therefore greenhouse gas emissions. Additionally, an increase in the level of
  green businesses and technology will both reduce climate change impacts and adapt to future constraints from climate change.
  Goals/Objectives                               Policy Content
  Objective E 1.1: Generate sufficient fis-      P.1 encourages maintenance and enhancement of infrastructure such as multi-modal
  cal revenue through the use of land use        streets.
  planning.
  Goal E 2: To enhance South Gate’s              Objectives and policies call for attracting and retaining commercial businesses.
  commercial market by attracting and
  retaining a healthy balance of local and
  national businesses
  Goal E 3: Enhance employment, educa-           Objectives and policies call for an increased number of South Gate residents to be em-
  tional and business opportunities              ployed in improved South Gate businesses.
  Objective E 4.1: Help create a new iden-       P.1 encourages expansion of diverse business activity, including “green technology.”
  tity and a more diverse business base for
  South Gate.
                                                 P.4 encourages environmentally friendly “green” businesses in and around the Community
                                                 College District.
  Actions                                        Action E 1: Develop a business attraction and marketing campaign. Business attraction
                                                 would focus on providing a balances mix of business and jobs in the City.
                                                 Action E 2: Develop a business retention program. The business retention program would
                                                 support existing businesses and jobs.
                                                 Action E 4: Create an incentive program for South Gate-based employers to hire residents.
                                                 Creating connections between local jobs and residents encourages jobs-housing balance
                                                 and reduces VMT.
                                                 Action E 5: Create new business improvement districts. Business improvement districts cre-
                                                 ate synergies between businesses and support local-serving businesses.
  Public Facilities and Services Element
  Several policies and actions in the Public Facilities Element are likely to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Creating mixed use, walk-
  able public facilities and ensuring that fire codes allow mixed use, compact, walkable development will both decrease VMT and
  community emissions from transportation. Increased energy efficiency in educational facilities and water infrastructure and decreased
  waste and landfilling throughout the City will also decrease greenhouse gas emissions. Policies that increase water efficiency and
  conservation are adaptations to drought – which is exacerbated by climate change – and increased permeable surfaces for treating
  stormwater can decrease heat island effect, which is a protection against higher temperatures from climate change.
  Goals/Objectives                               Policy Content
  Objective PF 2.2: Ensure that all new de-      P.4 calls for “allowing mixed use and compact development, pedestrian-friendly streets,
  velopment includes adequate provision          and other elements of a walkable, bikeable, and safe City” while maintaining fire access in
  for fire safety                                new development.
  Objective PF 3.2: Assist educational           P.3 calls for a mixed use campus for the proposed new high and middle schools on Tweedy
  providers in the location and design of        Boulevard.
  school sites to prevent negative impacts
                                                 P.4 encourages energy efficiency in educational facility renovation.
  on the health, safety and welfare of
  students and nearby residents.
  Objective PF 4.1: Reduce the volume            P.1 to P.5 encourage maintained and enhanced recycling services and set a waste diversion
  of solid waste generated in South Gate         goal.
  through recycling and resource conser-
  vation.
                                                                                                             Green City Element 263

     Public Facilities and Services Element
     Goals/Objectives                         Policy Content
     Objective PF 5.2: Promote water conser-  P.1 and P.2 encourage creation of recycled water infrastructure.
     vation and increase the use of reclaimed
                                              P.3, P.6 and P.9 encourage use of recycled water and xeriscaping on municipal property
     and recycled water.
                                              and in municipal operations.
                                              P.4 encourages incentives to potential customers for using recycled water.
                                              P.5, P.7, and P.8 require that large new development be compatible with recycled water
                                              use, and encourages xeriscaping and rainwater capture and reuse.
     Objective PF 5.3: Promote coordination   P.4 calls for increased energy efficiency in water infrastructure.
     between land use planning and water
     facilities and service.
     Objective PF 7.2: Encourage coordina-    P.3, P.5 and P.6 encourage permeable surfaces and treatment of stormwater on-site.
     tion between land use planning, site
     design and stormwater control.
     Actions                                  Action PF 3: Pursue Safe Routes to School Grand Funding. Safe Routes to Schools is a prov-
                                              en source of funding with clear benefits for safety and increasing walking and bicycling.
                                              Action PF 4: Implement and Update the Recycling and Diversion Plan. This Plan would
                                              increase recycling and waste reduction throughout the City.
                                              Action PF 5: Expand Public Education Programs About Waste Reduction and Diversion
                                              Strategies. This program would increase awareness of waste reduction and recycling and
                                              promote behavior change.
                                              Action PF 6: Amend Building Code to Allow Water-conserving Technologies. A new al-
                                              lowanced in the building code would enable utilization of a variety of water-conserving
                                              technologies.
                                              Action PF 10: Adopt the Reclaimed Water Usage Plan. this plan would define conditions and
                                              applications for reclaimed water, which provide water conservation and energy savings.
                                              Action PF 12: Explore an Energy Efficiency Evaluation Program for the Water System. This
                                              action would identify opportunities to reduce energy from water conveyance and treatment.
                                              Action PF 16: Revise the Building Code to Allow Technologies that Reduce Stormwater
                                              Runoff. Revisions to the building code would allow new technologies that reduce storm-
                                              water runoff but may be currently disallowed.
264 South Gate General Plan 2035
7
  Healthy Community
  Element
    INTRODUCTION
    The increased prevalence of chronic diseases in the United States,            Work on the Healthy Community
    including diabetes, obesity, heart disease and respiratory illnesses
    has been widely recognized as one of the major social and economic            Element (including an existing
    challenges. Recent research has found that people’s environments –
    where they live and work, how they travel, what they eat and where            conditions report and three pub-
    and when they play, socialize, and are physically active – have a major
    impact on their health and well-being. In response to these issues, the
                                                                                  lic workshops on health in South
    General Plan includes this Healthy Community Element, which provides
                                                                                  Gate) was funded by the Kaiser
    policy direction for improving health for South Gate residents.
    Although conventional planning practices (such as separating residential      Foundation and is a collabora-
    and commercial uses, building low density areas, constructing streets
    primarily for automobiles, and not providing adequate transportation          tive effort between the City of
    choices) are not the single cause of chronic health problems in the
    United States, there is increasing documentation that they are often a
                                                                                  South Gate, the Los Angeles
    contributing factor. Research indicates that auto-oriented, low density,
                                                                                  County Department of Public
    single use places – as well as places underserved by parks and active
    recreation facilities – discourage physical activity and therefore contribute
                                                                                  Health (LACDPH), Public Health
    to an increased risk of heart disease, cancer, stroke, and diabetes. These
    four diseases are among the top ten causes of death in California; heart      Law & Policy, the Transportation
    disease, stroke and diabetes are also the top three killers in the City of
    South Gate. Poor nutrition, which can be exacerbated by land use deci-        and Land Use Collaborative, and
    sions that limit people’s access to healthy food, also contribute to these
    chronic diseases. Physical inactivity and poor nutrition is also a primary    Raimi + Associates.
    Research has found that lifestyles in low-density, auto-oriented commu-
    nities, such as the one pictured above, contribute to poor health out-
    comes such as obesity, diabetes, respiratory illness and social isolation.
266 South Gate General Plan 2035

risk factor for obesity (the fastest-growing disease in      including long commute times, exposure to crime, lack
California, along with diabetes), and obesity in turn        of transportation choice and lack of access to public
increases the risk of a myriad of chronic diseases. Con-     spaces.
versely, research shows that higher density, walkable
                                                             This Healthy Community Element addresses the major
urban places, transportation choices, and access to rec-
                                                             intersections of public health and planning, includ-
reation all increase physical activity, and thus promote
                                                             ing transportation and active living, access to nutri-
positive health impacts.
                                                             tious foods, access to health care, mental health and
Land uses and urban form have other health impacts           social capital and clean air. It also addresses safety
as well. Emissions from transportation sources are           issues such as seismic safety, neighborhood safety,
strongly linked with respiratory diseases, while auto-       and emergency preparedness. Because health is such
mobile accidents consistently kill over 40,000 Ameri-        a cross cutting issue, the policy areas covered in this
cans each year. Land use decisions also impact people’s      Element at times overlap with the other Elements in
access to grocery stores, farmers markets, community         the General Plan. Where such overlap occurs, policies
gardens and other sources of nutritious foods and
healthcare. Poor mental health is associated with a
number of factors related to how cities are designed,
Walkable communities with a diverse mix of uses enable
residents to walk and bike, rather than drive, to meet
their daily needs. This results in positive health outcomes.
                                                                           Healthy Community Element 267

    reference and reinforce the appropriate Element rather than repeating
    language included elsewhere.        STATUTORY
    REQUIREMENTS
    The California State Government Code Section 65302, requires that all
    general plans include a safety element, as follows:
      “A safety element for the protection of the community from any unreason-
      able risks associated with the effects of seismically induced surface rupture,
      ground shaking, ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope
      instability leading to mudslides and landslides; subsidence, liquefaction,
      and other seismic hazards identified pursuant to Chapter 7.8 (commencing
      with Section 2690) of Division 2 of the Public Resources Code, and other
      geologic hazards known to the legislative body; flooding; and wild land
      and urban fires.”
    The mandatory state requirements for a safety element are met in the
    Healthy Community Element and the Green City Element of the General
    Plan. The Healthy Community Element includes policies and programs to
    protect the community from risks associated with seismic and geologic
    hazards. The Green City Element addresses flooding hazards. The City of
    South Gate Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan, adopted October 26, 2004
    and amended May 13, 2008, provides the required background material
    and policies related to these hazards and is hereby incorporated into this
    General Plan. It addresses additional issues related to emergency pre-
    paredness, hazard mitigation, and general public safety concerns.
268 South Gate General Plan 2035

  PUBLIC OUTREACH
  In preparation for this Healthy Community Element, South Gate con-
  ducted three public workshops to educate residents about the relation-
  ship between planning and health, to better understand the commu-
  nity’s priorities for health, and to provide an opportunity for citizens
  to discuss their concerns about the overall health in the community,
  healthy eating and access to nutritious foods, and the quality and
  safety of the pedestrian environment. Over 100 people attended these
  workshops. The data gathered at these workshops directly informed
  the content of the Healthy Community Element. These workshops are
  described in detail in Chapter 2 of the General Plan, entitled, “Devel-
  opment of the General Plan.”
  Over 100 people attended communicty workshops focused on health issues
  in SouthGate.
  Citizens participated in a work Audit to identify health issues in
  their community.
                                    Healthy Community Element 269

    EXISTING
    CONDITIONS
    SUMMARY
    This section presents a summary of the existing health conditions in South Gate.
    The findings are a summary of the South Gate Public Health Existing Conditions
    Report (May 2008) which provides an overview of the relationship between
    planning and public health and discusses the key health conditions in the City.
    It also reflects information collected during the three public outreach meetings
    held as part of the process of developing the Community Health Element.
    Overall Health in South Gate
    South Gate, as part of the San Antonio Health District defined by the Los
    Angeles County Department of Public Health (LACDPH), has a higher rate of
    people (20 percent higher for adults and 40 percent higher for children) who
    report being in poor or fair health overall than is found in Los Angeles County
    as a whole. The City’s health challenges include high rates of obesity and death
    rates from diabetes, poor nutrition, lower-than-average access to healthcare
    and higher-than-average rates of poverty. The data suggests that obesity, which
    is strongly affected by lack of physical activity, may be a critical public health
    problem for South Gate. This is borne out by the fact that 68.0 percent of South
    Gate residents are obese or overweight, compared to 56.4 percent of residents
    in Los Angeles County and 56.1 percent state-wide.
    Chronic Diseases
    Diabetes, heart disease and stroke are the three leading causes of death in
    South Gate. Although South Gate residents suffer disproportionately from
    these conditions, many are not diagnosed or are diagnosed at a late stage
    of the disease. These diseases are generally linked to unhealthy weight, poor
    nutrition, and physical inactivity, and these are conditions suffered by many
    South Gate residents. Age is a major risk factor for these chronic diseases.
    Because South Gate has a younger-than-average population, there may be
    residents with unhealthy lifestyles that are at high risk for developing these
    chronic diseases in older age, but that have not yet been diagnosed. Treat-
    ment and diagnosis is often hampered by lack of preventative care, lack of
    insurance and poor access to healthcare.
270 South Gate General Plan 2035

Rates of Overweight and                                   thousand residents, just half the 3 acres per thousand
                                                          recommended by the State. Lastly, South Gate does
Obese Residents                                           not have a well-developed bicycle network or infra-
                                                          structure, a fact which limits the ability of residents to
The City’s adult overweight and obesity rates are         use bicycles for commuting, daily needs, or recre-
significantly higher than Los Angeles County and the      ational purposes.
State of California. Specifically, 68 percent of South
Gate residents are overweight or obese, compared to
56 percent in both Los Angeles County and the State       Nutrition
of California. The rates also have been increasing at     As noted above, South Gate has higher than aver-
nearly twice the rate of Los Angeles County since         age rates of obesity and overweight residents and
1999 thus making obesity a major issues for the City.     poor diet is likely a significant cause of this trend.
                                                          According to a survey prepared by the LACDPH,
Physical Activity                                         children in South Gate eat more fast food and adults
                                                          eat less fruits and vegetables than residents of Los
Overall, residents of South Gate and surrounding          Angeles County as a whole. One reason people may
cities report a similar or slightly higher amount of      consume higher levels of unhealthy food is that it
physical activity than residents of Los Angeles County    is often cheaper and easier to access than healthier
and residents of the State as a whole. However, there     food options. As is shown in Figure HC 2, South Gate
are some barriers to activity faced by the community.     has a significant number of retailers selling food with
According to research by LACDPH, a slightly higher        low nutritional values distributed throughout the City
than average proportion of the population reports         while healthy food sources are more limited both in
that their level of physical activity is limited due to   number and proximity to residential parcels. Where
poor mental or physical health. Generally, the City has   grocery stores do exist in the City, residents feel they
a very good pedestrian network, however there are         carry lower than average quality food products. That
some parts of the City where walking and bicycling is     said, there are some good options for purchasing
curtailed because of large physical barriers (i.e., major healthy foods, including the Farmer’s Market in South
roadways with high traffic volumes, the Los Angeles       Gate Park that sells fresh fruits and vegetables, al-
River and I-710) that cut off neighborhoods from          though the hours this resource is available are limited.
each other and some sidewalks are in need of repair.
Another limit to physical activity is the 30 minutes
or more a day South Gate residents spend com-
                                                          Transportation Safety
muting to work. This commute time is higher than          Based on data provided by the South Gate Police De-
both the national average of 25.0 minutes and the         partment, there were a total of 6,214 traffic collisions
Los Angeles County average of 28.7 minutes. Long          in South Gate from 2003 to 2007. Of these, 1,091
commute times reduce the amount of time available         (about 218 per year) involved injuries and 15 (about
for physical activity as well as levels of community      3 per year) resulted in fatalities. The location of
involvement. Another limiting factor on activity levels   these accidents are shown in Figures HC 3 and HC 4.
is restricted access to recreational and open space       The majority of injury and fatality incidents occurred
in South Gate as is shown in Figure HC 1. Only 28.3       on South Gate’s high-volume streets, most notably
percent of parcels are within ¼ mile of a park and        Firestone Boulevard, but also along Garfield Avenue,
the City has only approximately 1.5 acres of park per     Tweedy Boulevard, Long Beach Boulevard, and Tuba
                                                                         Healthy Community Element 271

    and Santa Fe Avenues. Other accidents with injuries
    are spread throughout the City. Pedestrian accidents    Access to Healthcare
    (though not fatal pedestrian accidents) were con-       Residents of South Gate have lower than average ac-
    centrated on Tweedy Boulevard, where there is high      cess to insurance and health care facilities. With 32
    pedestrian traffic.                                     percent of adults and 12 percent of children uninsured,
                                                            South Gate and surrounding cities have about 50
                                                            percent more uninsured residents than the county as
    Air Quality                                             a whole. South Gate’s high rate of uninsured residents
    South Gate is fortunate to experience less air pol-     is a public health problem with wide-ranging negative
    lution than its inland neighbors, primarily because     impacts resulting from lack of treatment for treat-
    of prevailing winds that blow air pollution inland.     able diseases and lack of preventative care. Even if
    Over the last several years, the City rarely exceeded   residents are insured, there are a limited number of
    the federal standards for ozone, although it was        health care facilities in the City. There are no hospitals
    somewhat more likely to be subject to high levels of    in South Gate, though there are some relatively close
    particulate matter. At the same time South Gate’s       by. Close-by facilities include St. Francis Medical Center
    reported rates of adult asthma, childhood asthma and    in Lynwood, the Bell Gardens Health Center, Downey
    chronic respiratory illness are all lower than average  Regional Medical Center, and AltaMed Health Services
    for Los Angeles County and the rest of California.      in Pico Rivera. The Martin Luther King-Harbor Hospital
    While this is good news for South Gate, there are       in Los Angeles had been one of the closest full-service
    some concerns about air quality and respiratory ill-    hospitals to South Gate, but it closed in late 2007.
    nesses. One concern is that cases of asthma may
    be underreported as a result of residents’ restricted
    access to health care. Respiratory disease data is col- Social Capital and
    lected for the San Antonio Health District in general,
    and thus does not identify whether there are specific
                                                            Mental Health
    pockets within South Gate that have higher instances    Compared to other jurisdictions, South Gate residents
    of respiratory problems. Additionally, 15 percent of    are under higher than average economic stress, result-
    residential parcels in the City are within 500 feet of  ing from relatively low incomes, high unemployment
    heavy industrial lands (see Figure HC 5) and 19.4 per-  rates, difficulty in finding adequate and affordable
    cent of residential parcels are located within 500 feet housing and concentrations of poverty within certain
    of freeways and designated truck routes (see Figure     areas of the City. Even with these pressures, South Gate
    HC 6). Residents of these parcels may have a higher     residents have a high level of community involvement
    risk of cancer or lung disease.                         and strong family and community networks and support
                                                            systems, which can have a positive impact on mental
                                                            health. This is evidenced by the high number of people
                                                            who participate in some form of community activity, in-
                                                            cluding participation in school activities, sports programs
                                                            sponsored by the City, and civic organizations.
272 South Gate General Plan 2035

Figure HC 1 Parcels with 1/4 mile of parks.
Figure HC 2 Location of healthy and unhealthy food sources.
                                                           Healthy Community Element 273
    Figure HC 3 Locations of incidents with injuries or fatalities (2003-2007).
    Figure HC 4 Fatalities and injury incidents involving pedestrians (2005-2007).
274 South Gate General Plan 2035
Figure HC 5 Parcels within 500 feet of heavy industrial uses.
Figure HC 6 Parcels within 500 feet of a designated truck route.
                                                                Healthy Community Element 275
    KEY ISSUES AND
    CHALLENGES
    The Existing health conditions in South Gate suggest several key issues
    and challenges that should be addressed in the Community Health Ele-
    ment. These issues are summarized below.
    High Rates of Overweight and Obese Residents
    South Gate has high overweight and obesity rates that undoubtedly
    contribute to its high number of residents who report being in poor
    health. Overweight and obesity rates are influenced by levels of physi-
    cal activity and access to nutritious foods.
    Barriers to Physical Activity
    South Gate residents report being relatively physically active. However, many
    transportation corridors – such as roadways, freeways and train tracks – are
    difficult and dangerous for pedestrians to cross and thus discourage physical
    activity. In other parts of the City, the traditional street grid has been replaced
    with giant blocks of industrial or commercial buildings, creating areas that
    are unattractive and unpleasant for walking. Streetscapes in various parts
    of the City are not inviting to pedestrian activity. Residents’ ability to bicycle,
    walk, and exercise for recreation is also limited by a relative lack of parks and
    recreation facilities, a cohesive bicycle network, and the distance many South
    Gate residents must travel to reach such facilities.
    Lack of Access to Nutritious Foods
    There is a general lack of access to healthy foods in South Gate. This
    has impacts on overall community health in the City, as evidenced by
    the high rates of obese and overweight residents. A significant number
    of the food outlets, grocery stores, restaurants and other food pur-
    veyors in the City offer food choices of limited quality, freshness, and
    nutritional value.
    Lack of Access to Health Care
    Access to health care is a major health policy issue in South Gate. Many
    people cannot afford health care, and there is a limited number of
    health providers in the area. A lack of access to health care can exacer-
    bate diseases like heart disease or diabetes, which is already diagnosed
    at higher-than-average rates in South Gate.
276 South Gate General Plan 2035

Unsafe Streets for Walking,                             Poor Air Quality
Driving, and Cycling                                    Though South Gate has better ambient air quality
There are concerns about pedestrian and vehicle         and lower than average reported rates of respiratory
safety in South Gate as a result of the number of       disease than elsewhere in the region, many South
pedestrian/vehicle accidents along the City’s larg-     Gate residents live near sources of air pollution – heavy
est streets. This is especially true of areas with high industrial lands, truck routes or freeways – that con-
pedestrian and vehicle traffic.                         tribute to respiratory illnesses. It is also possible that
                                                        the City’s lower than average level of access to health
                                                        insurance, information and care leads to under-diag-
                                                        nosing and under-reporting of respiratory disease.
                                                        Vulnerable Populations
                                                        South Gate has a high proportion of residents that
                                                        are considered especially vulnerable to public health
                                                        risks, including children, the elderly, the disabled,
                                                        recent immigrants, and those in poverty. In general,
                                                        children are especially susceptible to asthma from air
                                                        pollution and the elderly and disabled can be socially
                                                        isolated and less physically active. Recent immigrants
                                                        face health risks from overcrowding, and may also be
                                                        less likely to seek health services out of fear of legal
                                                        repercussions due to their immigration status. Poverty
                                                        consistently co-migrates with a wide variety of nega-
                                                        tive health outcomes.
                                                        Safety Issues Due to Seismic Events
Some streets in South Gate are designed primarily       South Gate is located in the seismically active Los
for vehicles and provide little space for pedestrians   Angels area and thus the City and its residents are
and cyclists. These streets are locations with high     susceptible to disasters resulting from earthquakes. As
traffic collision rates.                                referenced above, The City of South Gate Natural Haz-
                                                        ards Mitigation Plan, adopted October 26, 2004 and
                                                        amended May 13, 2008, includes much of the back-
                                                        ground and policy direction for addressing this issue.
                                                                       Healthy Community Element 277

    KEY HEALTHY
    COMMUNITY
    CONCEPTS
    The purpose of the Healthy Community Element is to address South
    Gate’s key health issues and challenges. The following key concepts
    have informed policy in the Healthy Community Element, and are in-
    tended to address South Gate’s key health issues and challenges.
    Promote Land Use and Transportation Decisions
    that Support Healthy Lifestyles
    The development patterns of the City – how the land uses are ar-
    ranged, the urban form is constructed, and the streets designed –
    should encourage people to drive less, walk more, and have greater
    access to healthy food. This can be achieved by focusing development
    in mixed use districts and along major transit corridors, constructing a
    diverse mix of uses throughout the City and providing neighborhood
    retail and services within the majority of residences. It can also be
    achieved by creating attractive and safe pedestrian and bicycle facilities
    and by promoting high-quality transit service. Many of the land use,
    Proximity to parks, perceived safety, and the presence of others exercising
    have been strongly correlated with increased levels of physical activity.
278 South Gate General Plan 2035

urban design and transportation policies relevant to     pand access to existing healthy food retailers, such as
health are included in other elements of the General     grocery stores and the farmers’ market. It should use
Plan. For this reason, the Healthy Community Ele-        economic development, land use, and other incentives
ment includes a table of the General Plan’s policies     to attract new retailers and encourage the selection of
and implementation actions with the strongest health     healthy food options at restaurants, stores, and other
benefits (see Table HC 1).                               food vendors that already exist in the City. The City
                                                         should also support the creation of community gardens
Buffer Sensitive Uses from Pollution                     and farmers markets throughout the City.
Sources of pollution should be sufficiently buffered
from sensitive uses, which include schools, residences,  Make City Actions a Model for Good Health
hospitals and health care facilities, and childcare or   The City should lead the charge to make South Gate
eldercare facilities. The main sources of pollution that citizens healthier. It should sponsor events that raise
should be buffered from sensitive uses are freeways,     awareness of healthy lifestyle choices, inform citizens
truck routes, dirty industrial uses, and concentrations  of the resources available for them to improve their
of hazardous or toxic materials.                         own health, and sponsor programs that help munici-
                                                         pal employees to live healthier lifestyles, such as serv-
Provide Easy and Affordable Access to                    ing nutritious food at all city-sponsored events.
Nutritious Foods
The City should encourage increased access to af-        Focus on Preventative Care
fordable nutritious food for all residents, particularly There are many ways in which preventative care,
children. As a model employer, the City should make      which increases residents’ chance of staying healthy,
sure that healthy food choices are available in all City is encouraged in the General Plan and the Healthy
facilities. The City should also work to retain and ex-  Community Element. First, as is mentioned elsewhere,
                                                         the City will make land use and transportation deci-
                                                         sions that encourage physical activity and access to
                                                         healthy food. Second, the City will cooperate with
                                                         local agencies to promote access to health care and
                                                         regular doctors visits. And third, the City will spon-
                                                         sor health-oriented events, activities and programs so
                                                         that city employees and residents have a better un-
                                                         derstanding of how to make healthy lifestyle choices.
                                                         Strengthen Social Networks through
                                                         Land Use Decisions
                                                         The City should foster the continuation and creation
                                                         of strong family, community and civic networks. The
                                                         City, community groups, religious organizations, and
                                                         neighborhood associations can provide places for
General Plan policies are designed to buffer sensitive   residents to meet, organize, learn and socialize. These
land uses – homes, schools and senior facilities – from  activities increase social capital, which has positive
sources of air pollution such as heavy industrial areas  cross-cutting physical and mental health benefits.
and high-volume roads.
                                                                        Healthy Community Element 279

    Promote Access to Health Care.                         Minimize Potential Health Impacts of Natural
    South Gate residents should have access to quality     and Manmade Disasters and Hazards
    and affordable health care. Preventative measures –    The City should promote sound public policy de-
    such as screening for common health problems like      signed to protect citizens, critical facilities, infrastruc-
    diabetes and respiratory illnesses, dental care, vac-  ture, private property, and the environment from
    cinations – should be widely available and promoted.   natural hazards. It should also lead an effort to plan
    Although, the City does not directly provide health    for natural and manmade hazards that includes resi-
    care, it should explore how it can promote access to   dents, public and private sector organizations.
    health care. The City should attract a wide range of
    health care providers – including hospitals, clinics,
    e-health outlets, mobile health facilities, and phar-
    macies – to locate in the City. It should also sponsor
    events and work with other organizations and agen-
    cies to facilitate residents to take advantage of low
    cost insurance, health care resources, and preventa-
    tive care.
280 South Gate General Plan 2035

  Goals, Objectives, and Policies
  Goal HC 1:
  High levels of health and well-being
  for all residents
  Objective HC 1.1:
  Establish procedures and collaborations that improve
  the health of South Gate’s residents.
  Policies:
  P.1	 Improving the overall health conditions in South Gate will be a priority for the City.
  P.2	 The City should promote and maintain the health and safety of the public through
       its direct actions, policies, programs, and publications.
  P.3	 The City should encourage the participation of individuals, organizations and busi-
       nesses in supporting the health and safety of the public.
  P.4	 The City should collaborate to the extent possible with health care providers in the
       City on decisions related to public health.  These organizations and agencies include
       the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health, local health clinics, non-profit
       social service organizations and regional health care providers such as hospitals.
  P.5	 The City may seek input from the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health
       and others on proposed development projects or other land use and transportation
       decisions to ensure that the decisions achieve positive health outcomes.
  P.6	 The City may work with Los Angeles County Department Public Health to develop
       communication and collaboration between health officials and planners.
  Objective HC 1.2:
  Monitor the overall status of health in the community.
  Policies
  P.1	 The City should track the community’s health status over time using the indicators
       presented in the South Gate General Plan Public Health Existing Conditions Report.
  P.2	 The City should work with the local school districts to monitor and improve student
       health over time.
                                          Healthy Community Element 281

    Objective HC 1.3:                                                     P.3	 All new and rehabilitated city buildings should be designed
                                                                               and constructed to improve the health of the workers and
    Promote preventative care as a means of                                    visitors.  Actions should, at minimum, include:
    improving health conditions in the City.                                      xx Where practical, locating the building near transit and a
                                                                                     diverse mix of uses.
    Policies                                                                      xx Siting the building to encourage walking.
                                                                                  xx Providing secure bicycle parking and other cycling-
    P.1	 To the greatest extent feasible, the City will cooperate with
                                                                                     friendly facilities such as showers and lockers.
         other agencies to promote preventative care, including such
                                                                                  xx Using materials that are proven to eliminate negative
         preventative techniques as regular doctor’s visits and pre-
                                                                                     health impact on employees.
         natal care, increased physical activity, and enhanced nutrition.
                                                                                  xx Designing internal staircases to be visually prominent
    P.2	 The City should support regional and national disease preven-               and attractive.
         tion programs, particularly those designed to reduce incidences          xx Designing buildings to allow for high levels of natural
         of asthma, obesity, diabetes, heart disease and cancer.                     light and air.
    P.3	 The City should cooperate with regional and national organiza-   P.4	 The City will publicize its health-related successes to local
         tions to promote programs to reduce dependence on substanc-           employers and the media.
         es harmful to health, including drugs, alcohol and tobacco.      P.5	 The City will encourage local employers to adopt healthy
    P.4	 The City should support  local health care providers and the          living/healthy employee programs and practices.
         Los Angeles County Department of Public Health in their
         efforts to provide low- or no-cost health services to residents
         in need. Such services might include periodic check ups (e.g.
         blood pressure tests, diabetes screening, etc.), blood drives
         and education campaigns about the risk factors, prevention,
         and treatment alternatives for the most common health
         problems in South Gate.
    Objective HC 1.4:
    Promote the City as a health leader for
    residents and businesses.
    Policies
    P.1	 The City will promote healthy lifestyles and activities at
         government offices and government-organized events.              General Plan policies actively promote development
    P.2	 The City should promote the health and well being of city        near existing and future transit. Locating near transit
         employees through health challenges (e.g. weight loss            reduces driving rates and increases the likelihood of
         contests, stop smoking, lunchtime/worktime sponsored
                                                                          residents receiving the minimum recommended levels
         events, bike to work days), healthy food choices, and
         healthy work environments.                                       of physical activity.
282 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goal HC 2:                                                               Objective HC 2.2:
Land use patterns and transportation                                     Enhance existing neighborhoods to create
                                                                         safe and attractive places for recreation
systems that encourage physical                                          and exercise.
activity, promote healthy living,
                                                                         Policies
and reduce chronic illnesses
                                                                         P.1	 The City will seek to increase its amount of parks, trails, open
                                                                               spaces and green spaces —which are important tools for in-
Objective HC 2.1:                                                              creasing levels of physical activity and reducing the incidence
Promote land use patterns that encourage                                       of chronic illness.
physical activity and healthy lifestyles.                                P.2	 The City will strive to make its recreational facilities accessible
                                                                               to all South Gate residents.
Policies                                                                 P.3	 The City will actively promote and implement the policies in
P.1	 The City should make land use and urban design decisions                  the Green City Element that increase the amount of, and ac-
     that promote physical activity, promote access to nutritious              cess to, and quality of parks and open spaces in South Gate.
     foods, and reduce air pollution.                                    P.4	 The City will continue to work with the local school districts
P.2	 The City will recognize and actively promote goals, objectives,           to implement and maintain the Beyond the Bell program for
     and policies in the Community Design Element that achieve                 after-school use of school facilities for playing fields, park
     positive health outcomes.  These include the following:                   spaces and other activities.
       xx Revitalizing Tweedy Mile with new retail, residential and      P.5	 The City will work with public and private civic institutions to
           upper-story office uses.                                            incorporate healthy public spaces into significant new devel-
       xx Redeveloping the Corridors and Districts with a diverse              opment projects and planning efforts throughout the City, as
           mix of higher-intensity uses.                                       defined in the Green City Element.
       xx Building higher density development near existing and          (See Table HC 1 for a list of key policies in the Green City Element
           proposed future transit.                                      that impact health outcomes)
       xx Enhancing existing neighborhoods with walkable streets,
           a diverse mix of housing types, and neighborhood
           services (such as stores, recreational facilities, and child-
           care) within walking distance. This could also include
           promoting building designs that enhance opportunities
           for defensible space.
       xx Creating new mixed use districts throughout the City, such
           as the Community College District, the Civic Center District
           and the El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center District.
(See Table HC 1 for a list of key policies in the Community Design
Element that impact health outcomes.)
                                                                         Expanding parks and open spaces is a critical part of
                                                                         improving health outcomes in the City.
                                                                                           Healthy Community Element 283

    Objective HC 2.3:                                                      Goal HC 3:
    Improve the transportation system to                                   Excellent pedestrian and bicycle
    increase opportunities for physical activity
    and healthy lifestyles and reduce residents’
                                                                           networks throughout the City
    reliance on cars.
                                                                           Objective HC 3.1:
    Policies                                                               Create a high quality pedestrian network
    P.1	 The City will promote and support transportation decisions that   in all areas of the City so that residents can
          reduce driving and increase rates of transit use, walking and    safely walk to their destinations.
          biking, recognizing that local and regional transportation deci-
          sions impact the health of South Gate’s residents and workers.   Policies
    P.2	 The potential positive and negative health impacts of new         P.1	 Creating a continuous, safe, and attractive pedestrian environ-
          transportation projects should be considered prior to ap-             ment should be a key strategy for improving community health.
          proval by the City Council.
                                                                           P.2	 The policies and actions in the Mobility and Community
    P.3	 The City will actively promote the goals, objectives, policies         Design Element that create an improved pedestrian environ-
          and actions in the Mobility Element that encourage positive           ment will be implemented.  
          health outcomes.  These include the following:
                                                                           P.3	 Walking will be considered an integral mode of transporta-
            xx Creating a connected, balanced and integrated transpor-          tion for the City’s circulation network.
               tation system
            xx Improving local transit                                     P.4	 The City will balance the needs of pedestrians and cyclists
            xx Working with regional transit authorities to improve             with the needs of motor vehicles in decisions made about the
               service and access                                               transportation network.
            xx Encouraging walking, biking and transit use
            xx Updating street standards to include, where necessary,      P.5	 To the extent that funding is available, the City will maintain
               sidewalks, bicycle facilities, landscaping, safe crosswalks      sidewalks to protect public safety and create a visually attrac-
               and other design features that promote walking, biking           tive environment.
               and transit use                                             P.6	 The City will improve unsafe and unattractive pedestrian areas,
                                                                                as resources become available. The City will promote streets
    P.4	 The City will promote transit- and pedestrian- oriented devel-
                                                                                as public, pedestrian oriented places through the appropriate
          opment throughout the City.
                                                                                placement of new buildings, parked cars and garages.
    P.5	 The City will implement policies and programs that encour-
                                                                           P.7	 New development projects and public infrastructure projects
          age the use of bicycles and walking as alternatives to driving
                                                                                will be required to provide safe and direct pedestrian connec-
          and as a means of increasing levels of physical activity.
                                                                                tions to transit stops.
    (See Table HC 1 for a list of key policies in the Mobility Element
    that impact health outcomes)                                           P.8	 Private development on street frontages that do not currently
                                                                                include sidewalks will be required to install sidewalks in front
                                                                                of the property when new development occurs.
                                                                           P.9	 The City will allow sufficient pedestrian cross times, particularly
                                                                                for the elderly and strollers, when setting traffic light timing.
284 South Gate General Plan 2035

Objective HC 3.2:                                                        Goal HC 4:
Create a citywide bicycle network that                                   A safe transportation system
enables cycling to be used for both
recreation and transportation.                                           Objective HC 4.1:
Policies
                                                                         Reduce traffic crashes in the City.
P.1	 Creating a continuous, safe, and attractive cycling network         Policies
      that connects all the City’s neighborhoods and districts will
      be an important strategy for improving community health.           P.1	 The City should strive to maintain and improve the safety of
                                                                              the transportation system through implementation of the poli-
P.2	 The City will implement the policies and programs in the                 cies in the Mobility Element and other actions, as necessary.
      Mobility Element that provide for an extensive, safe and com-
      plete bicycle network that connects all the City’s neighbor-       P.2	 The City should monitor and, to the extent feasible, improve
      hoods and districts.                                                    traffic safety and reduce the potential for traffic accidents
                                                                              through design and education improvements.
P.3	 The City will balance the needs of bicycles with the needs of
      motor vehicles in all transportation and public works decisions.   P.3	 The City should work to improve areas with a high incidence
                                                                              or risk of pedestrian/vehicle and bicycle/vehicle collisions.
P.4	 The City’s bicycle network should be safely and directly
      connected to the regional bicycle network and the bicycle          P.4	 The City will encourage and support education campaigns on
      networks of adjacent jurisdictions.                                     traffic and bicycle pedestrian safety.
P.5	 Where feasible, bicycle lanes and other bicycle facilities will
      be included as part of street improvement projects.
P.6	 The City will support regional efforts to increase cycling as a
      transportation alternative.
P.7	 The City will encourage or require a sufficient quantity of
      well-placed bike parking in all new development.
(See Table HC 1 for a list of key policies on walking and cycling in the
Mobility and Community Design Elements that impact health outcomes.)
                                                                         Improving safety around schools by reducing traffic
                                                                         volumes and speeds is an important part of creating a
                                                                         healthier city.
The General Plan is recommending a network of bi-
cycle facilities, such as the one pictured above, across
the City. These would include multi-use trails, bicycle
boulevards and dedicated bicycle lanes.
                                                                                          Healthy Community Element 285

     Objective HC 4.2:                                                      Goal HC 5:
     Improve pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle                                Safe, convenient access to healthy
     safety around schools in South Gate.
                                                                            foods for all residents
     Policies
     P.1	 The City will pursue and support Safe Routes to Schools programs. Objective HC 5.1:
     P.2	 The City will work to implement traffic calming in areas im-
                                                                            Encourage safe, convenient opportunities
          mediately around schools.                                         to purchase fresh fruits, vegetables and
     P.3	 The City will, where feasible, work with the Los Angeles          healthy foods in all neighborhoods.
          Unified School District (LAUSD) and the East Los Angeles
          College (ELAC) District to improve transportation safety          Policies
          around schools.
                                                                            P.1	 The attraction and retention of high quality grocery stores
     P.4	 The City will encourage the creation of “Walking School                and other healthy food purveyors should be pursued as an
          Bus”/“Biking School Bus” programs, where parents take turns            economic development strategy for the City. Healthy food
          accompanying a group of children to school on foot or via bike.        outlets include full-service grocery stores, regularly-held
                                                                                 farmer’s markets, fruit and vegetable markets, and conve-
     P.5	 To the extent possible, the City will prioritize safety and road-
                                                                                 nience stores or corner stores that sell a significant propor-
          way improvements around schools as funding is available.
                                                                                 tion of healthy food.
                                                                            P.2	 The City, to the extent possible, will seek to increase city-wide
                                                                                 access to healthy food choices, such that every residential
                                                                                 parcel is within ¼ -mile of a healthy food outlet.
                                                                            P.3	 The City should expand access to certified farmers markets.  
                                                                                 This includes working to expand the hours of the existing
                                                                                 farmer’s market, pursuing new farmers markets in transit-
                                                                                 accessible locations, supporting expanded transit service
                                                                                 to bring residents to and from the famer’s markets, and
                                                                                 allowing farmers markets on public property at minimal cost
                                                                                 to the vendors.
                                                                            P.4	 Partnerships between local merchants and farmers’ markets
                                                                                 to increase the availability of healthy food choices in South
                                                                                 Gate’s stores will be supported and encouraged by the City.
    “Walking school buses” have the co-benefits of increas-
     ing the physical activity levels of students, reducing the
     amount of driving, and reducing sources of air pollution.
                                                                            Farmer’s markets are just one way of increasing access
                                                                            to health foods.
286 South Gate General Plan 2035

Objective HC 5.2:                                                   Objective HC 5.3:
Encourage and support healthy eating                                Avoid concentrations of unhealthy food
habits and healthy eating messages.                                 retailers and liquor stores within the City.
Policies                                                            Policies
P.1	 The City should provide healthy food options at all mu-        P.1	 The City will encourage LAUSD, ELAC and others to provide
     nicipal buildings and at city events where food is made             healthy food choices within schools and to minimize the
     available by the City.                                              sale of carbonated beverages, processed foods, and foods
                                                                         containing partially hydrogenated oils (e.g., transfats).
P.2	 The City should explore partnering with the local school
     districts to create or implement educational programs for kids P.2	 New drive-through restaurants should be discouraged from
     about healthy eating, such as edible school yards and healthy       locating near public and private schools.   
     cooking classes.
                                                                    P.3	 The City will avoid concentrations of liquor stores in all areas
P.3	 The City should encourage local employers to provide healthy        of the City.
     food options for employees in vending machines and at
     private events.                                                P.4	 The City will continue to update or enforce tobacco control
                                                                         laws that pertain to location and retailing practices, smoking
                                                                         restrictions and smoking-free home and workplace laws.
                                                                    P.5	 The City will encourage the expansion of tobacco and alcohol
                                                                         abuse cessation and treatment services for South Gate
                                                                         residents.  This may include building partnerships, educating
                                                                         the public about local services and working to locate these
                                                                         services in appropriate areas of the City.
                                                                    Objective HC 5.4:
                                                                    Provide opportunities for community
                                                                    gardens and local food production.
                                                                    Policies
Unhealthy food sources, such as fast-food restaurants,              P.1	 The City will support the use of public and private vacant
should be limited and healthy food sources, such as the                  lots, including school yards, for community gardens, as
                                                                         feasible or appropriate.  
farmers’ market pictured earlier, should be encouraged.
                                                                    P.2	 The City will strive for community gardens to be evenly
                                                                         distributed throughout the City.
                                                                    P.3	 Residents will be allowed to grow food (fruits and veg-
                                                                         etables) in rear yards so long as there are not significant
                                                                         negative impacts to adjacent property owners.
                                                                    P.4	 New residential and non-residential buildings will be encour-
                                                                         aged to use “green roofs,” which allow for growing plants,
                                                                         stormwater retention, and reduced heat island effect.
                                                                                     Healthy Community Element 287

    Goal HC 6:                                                              Objective HC 6.3:
    Affordable and high-quality health                                      Increase the number and distribution of
                                                                            childcare facilities throughout the City.
    care and social services for City
    residents and employees                                                 Policies
                                                                            P.1	 The City will encourage the development of a range of child
                                                                                 care facilities including family day care homes and public and
    Objective HC 6.1:                                                            private childcare centers in order to fulfill the needs of South
    Improve access to health care for all.                                       Gate residents and employees.
                                                                            P.2	 The City should periodically work with local and regional agen-
    Policies                                                                     cies to assess child care supply and demand in South Gate,
    P.1	 To the extent feasible, the City should support efforts that            and will encourage and cooperate, where feasible, with the
         increase the number of residents with health care coverage              implementation of programs to address childcare shortfalls.
         over the time horizon of the General Plan.
                                                                            P.3	 The City will consider allowing density bonuses for develop-
    P.2	 The City will encourage health care service providers in South          ment projects that provide childcare facilities.
         Gate to provide services in a way that is culturally sensitive and
                                                                            P.4	 The City may provide child care providers with reduced city
         linguistically appropriate for the members of the community.
                                                                                 fees and taxes, such as the business license fee.
                                                                            P.5	 The City should coordinate and integrate childcare programs
    Objective HC 6.2:                                                            with housing and social programs, wherever feasible.
    Encourage a wide range of health care                                   P.6	 The City will strive to have an equitable distribution of child-
    facilities throughout the City.                                              care facilities throughout the City.
                                                                            P.7	 Childcare facilities should be considered as part of the rede-
    Policies                                                                     velopment of the Gateway Transit Village, the Civic Center
    P.1	 The City will actively pursue the development of one or more            District and the Community College District.
         hospitals or other major medical facilities in the City, and may   P.8	 As a means of reducing vehicle trips, childcare facilities
         provide economic incentives to attract them.  Such facilities           should be located in or near major new employment centers
         should be seen as part of the City’s overall economic devel-            with office and R&D jobs, wherever feasible.
         opment strategy. If possible, the City should pursue relation-
         ships with training and research institutions.                     P.9	 The City will incorporate child care programs into City-spon-
                                                                                 sored recreation activities, wherever feasible.
    P.2	 The City should explore the development of mobile or
         neighborhood-based health care facilities and services in
         South Gate. (e.g. E-Health Care, Clinics on Wheels, etc.)
    P.3	 The provision of accessible mental health care facilities and
         services should be supported by the City.
    P.4	 The co-location of health care facilities and related services in
         “health care hubs” should be supported and encouraged.
                                                                            South Gate will pursue the development of a hospital
                                                                            in the City. This will provide a needed regional re-
                                                                            source and contribute to the City’s long-term econom-
                                                                            ic development strategy.
288 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goal HC7:                                                              Objective HC 7.2:
High levels of air quality and                                         Encourage and enable transportation
                                                                       behavior that improves air quality and
improved respiratory health                                            respiratory health.
throughout the City
                                                                       Policies
Objective HC 7.1:                                                      P.1	 The City will implement strategies in the Mobility Element
                                                                            that improve air quality through transportation. These include
Establish land use patterns that reduce                                     multi-modal transit, reduction of Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT)
driving, enhance air quality, and improve                                   through Transportation Demand Management (TDM), and
respiratory health.                                                         improved bicycle and pedestrian facilities.  
                                                                       P.2	 For special events at South Gate Park and other community-
Policies                                                                    wide events that draw large numbers of visitors from outside
                                                                            of the City, event sponsors will be encouraged to create
P.1	 Strategies in the Community Design Element that reduce driv-           off-site park and ride options to reduce driving and traffic
     ing rates and improve air quality through land use and urban           congestion around the event.  The City will work with the
     design will be implemented by the City and other responsible           event sponsor to identify an appropriate location of the off-
     parties. These strategies include transit-oriented development,        site parking facility and may provide city-owned facilities at
     compact development, an appropriate mix of land uses, a                little or no cost.  
     jobs/housing balance, transit oriented development, and
     walkable streets.                                                 P.3	 The City should support federal, state, and regional agencies
                                                                            in their efforts to reduce exposure to emissions from railroad,
P.2	 The City will discourage development of sensitive land uses            truck, and industrial diesel emissions.
     – defined as schools, hospitals, residences, and elder and
     childcare facilities – near air pollution sources – including     P.4	 The City will not designate new truck routes on primarily
     freeways and polluting industrial sites.                               residential streets.
P.3	 Locating new homes, schools, childcare and elder care facili-     P.5	 The state regulation that requires school buses and other
     ties and health care facilities within 500 feet of freeways            heavy-duty vehicle operators to turn off their engines if they are
     should be avoided.                                                     idling within 100 feet of a school will be enforced by the City.
P.4	 If new development of sensitive land uses is proposed within      P.6	 The City will collaborate with transportation agencies, utili-
     1,000 feet of potential air pollution sources, or if new devel-        ties, and developers to minimize fugitive dust and emissions
     opment of potential air sources is proposed within 1,500 feet          from construction and maintenance activities.
     of sensitive receptors, the City will consult the California Air
     Resources Board’s Land Use and Air Quality Handbook, or a         P.7	 The City will pursue funding for transportation projects that
     similar guidebook, and seek compliance with its standards.             improve air quality. Potential sources include AB 2766 “Local
                                                                            Government Match Program” grants for projects that reduce
(See Table HC 1 for a list of key policies that impact air quality and      mobile source emissions and federal Congestion and Air
transportation behavior in the Mobility, Community Design and
Green City Elements that impact health outcomes.)
                                                                            Quality (CMAQ) Improvement funds.
                                                                       P.8	 The City will promote and support transit improvements or
                                                                            facilities that are powered by electricity, alternative fuels (i.e.
                                                                            CNG or LNG), or that meet or exceed SULEV (Super Ultra Low
                                                                            Emissions Vehicle) emission standards.
                                                                                         Healthy Community Element 289

    Objective HC 7.3:                                                        Objective HC 7.5:
    Reduce air pollution from stationary sources.                            Promote measures that will be effective
                                                                             in reducing emissions during construction
    Policies
                                                                             activities.
    P.1	 The City will implement strategies in the Green City Element
         that improve outside and inside air quality. These include          Policies
         green building techniques that improve indoor air quality, en-
         ergy efficiency and conservation in buildings, and utilization      P.1	 The City will ensure that construction activities follow existing
         of renewable energy sources.                                             South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) rules
                                                                                  and regulations.
    P.2	 The City should promote and retain non-polluting industry and
         clean green technology companies to the City’s industrial lands.    P.2	 All construction equipment for public and private projects will
                                                                                  also comply with CARB’s vehicle standards.  For projects that
    P.3	 New multi-family residential buildings and other sensitive               may exceed daily construction emissions established by the
         land uses along designated truck routes or in areas with high            SCAQMD, Best Available Control Measures will be incorporat-
         levels of localized air pollution should be designed to achieve          ed to reduce construction emissions to below daily emission
         good indoor air quality through landscaping, ventilation                 standards established by the SCAQMD.  
         systems, or other measures.
                                                                             P.3	 Project proponents will be required to prepare and imple-
    P.4	 The City shall minimize stationary source pollution through              ment a Construction Management Plan which will include
         the following:                                                           Best Available Control Measures among others. Appropriate
           xx Ensure that industrial and commercial land uses are                 control measures will be determined on a project by project
               meeting existing South Coast Air Quality Management                basis, and should be specific to the pollutant for which the
               District air quality thresholds by adhering to established         daily threshold is exceeded. Such control measures may
               rules and regulations.                                             include the following, among others:
           xx Encourage the use of new technology to neutralize                     xx Minimizing simultaneous operation of multiple construc-
               harmful criteria pollutants from stationary sources.                    tion equipment units.
           xx Reduce exposure of the City’s sensitive receptors to poor             xx Implementation of SCAQMD Rule 403, Fugitive Dust
               air quality nodes through smart land use decisions.                     Control Measures.
                                                                                    xx Watering the construction area to minimize fugitive dust.
    Objective HC 7.4:                                                               xx Require that off-road diesel powered vehicles used for
    Improve air quality and respiratory health                                         construction shall be new low emission vehicles, or use
                                                                                       retrofit emission control devices, such as diesel oxidation
    through city programs and operations.                                              catalysts and diesel particulate filters verified by the
                                                                                       California Air Resources Board.
    Policies                                                                        xx Minimizing idling time by construction vehicles.
    P.1	 The City will manage the municipal vehicle fleet to achieve
         the highest possible number of fuel-efficient and low emis-
         sions vehicles commercially available.
    P.2	 The City should encourage local businesses to use alternative
         fuel vehicles that reduce local air pollution emissions, particu-
         larly Particulate Matter 10 and 2.5 (PM10 and PM2.5).
290 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goal HC 8:                                                            Objective HC 8.2:
Reduced risks to the community                                        Establish and maintain an effective emergency
                                                                      response program to respond to disasters and
from earthquakes and other                                            maintain continuity of life-support functions
natural and manmade hazards                                           during an emergency.
Objective HC 8.1:                                                     Policies
Regulate new development to prevent the                               P.1	 The City will follow the policies in the most recently adopted
                                                                           City of South Gate Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan. This plan
creation of new geologic and seismic hazards.                              will be periodically updated by the City.  
Policies                                                              P.2	 Maintain and improve emergency services outlined in the
                                                                           Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan.
P.1	 New underground utilities, particularly water and natural
     gas lines, will be designed to meet the most current seismic     P.3	 The City will continue its participation in the Standardized
     resistant design standards.                                           EMS (SEMS) program and Los Angeles County Emergency
                                                                           Survival Program.
P.2	 Soil and/or geologic reports will continue to be required, as
     appropriate, for development in potentially seismic areas.       P.4	 The City will continue, to the extent possible, to enhance
                                                                           and strengthen communication and coordinate participation
P.3	 The City will consider information about geologic hazards             among and within public agencies, citizens, school districts,
     whenever making decisions influencing land use, building              non-profit organizations, business, and industry to gain a
     density, building configurations or infrastructure.                   vested interest in implementation.
P.4	 The City will continue to require or encourage the retrofitting  P.5	 The City will pursue funding resources to assist in implement-
     of existing structures, where appropriate or required by law.         ing hazard mitigation activities.
P.5	 All new construction will conform to the Uniform Building        P.6	 Policies to address hot weather emergencies should be incor-
     Code, which specifies requirements for seismic design, foun-          porated into the Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan.
     dations and drainage.
                                                                      P.7	 The City will maintain and regularly update the evacuation
P.6	 To the extent funds are available, structural and non-structur-       routes in the City.
     al hazards will be abated in city-owned structures.
P.7	 The City will consider the use of Redevelopment funds, if
     available and legally applicable, to help reconstruct or replace
     seismically unsafe structures.
P.8	 The Redevelopment Agency should explore financial and
     other incentives to help private entities replace or upgrade
     seismically unsafe structures.
                                                                                       Healthy Community Element 291
    Goal HC 9:                                                              Goal HC 10:
    To protect the community from                                           Improved social capital and
    the harmful effects of hazardous                                        community cohesion
    materials and waste
                                                                            Objective HC 10.1:
    Objective HC 9.1:                                                       Increase participation in community events.
    Minimize South Gate residents’ and                                      Policies
    employees’ exposure to hazardous
                                                                            P.1	 The City will strive to preserve and strengthen social capital
    materials and waste.                                                         by supporting formal and informal social networks in the
                                                                                 community.
    Policies
                                                                            P.2	 The City will strive to increase rates of participation in com-
    P.1	 The City will regularly update Hazardous Waste Management               munity events such as voting, youth activities, adult educa-
         procedures and actively implement appropriate Hazardous                 tion, senior activities and family-oriented programs.
         Waste Management policies recommended by the Los Ange-
                                                                            P.3	 Information about community events should continue to be
         les County Emergency Survival Program.
                                                                                 distributed to a wide range of community organizations in-
    P.2	 The City will enforce state and local codes that regulate the use,      cluding churches, senior facilities, schools, etc. using existing
         storage and transportation of hazardous materials in order to           city-sponsored platforms such as the City website.
         prevent, contain and effectively respond to accidental releases.
                                                                            P.4	 The City should pursue the following cross-cutting strategies
    P.3	 The City should monitor the use and release of hazardous                to support social capital:
         materials in the City.
                                                                                   xx  Implement land use policies that reduce commute times.
    P.4	 The City should, to the extent possible, ensure on a case by              xx  Support policies and programs to beautify neighborhoods.
         case basis that new development near known locations of                   xx  Create public gathering places, such as parks and plazas.
         hazardous waste or materials is suitable for human habita-                xx  Take actions to reduce crime and violence across the City.
         tion and does not pose higher than average health risks from              xx  Support neighborhood watch or policing programs.
         exposure to hazardous material.                                           xx  Support neighborhood associations throughout the City.
                                                                                   xx  Actively enforce code violations.
                                                                                   xx  Reduce conditions of blight and poverty across the City.
                                                                            Objective HC 10.2:
                                                                            Strive to reduce poverty throughout the City.
                                                                            Policies
                                                                            P.1	 Across all levels of city activity, the City should continue to
                                                                                 develop and implement programs that reduce poverty and
                                                                                 income disparities.
                                                                            P.2	 The City will actively encourage the provision of employment
                                                                                 training, rental assistance, financial training, and other sup-
                                                                                 portive services that enable households to be self-sufficient.
                                                                            P.3	 The City should work collaboratively with non-profits,
                                                                                 government agencies and community groups to identify and
                                                                                 ameliorate the symptoms and causes of blight and poverty.
292 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goal HC 11:                                                           Objective HC 11.2:
An involved citizenry that                                            Create partnerships with key stakeholder
                                                                      to achieve the vision of the General Plan.
participates in implementing
the General Plan’s vision                                             Policies
                                                                      P.1	 The City should develop partnerships with businesses,
                                                                           property owners, non-profits and foundations to improve the
Objective HC 11.1:                                                         physical and social character of the community.
Provide opportunities for participation
                                                                      P.2	 The City should pursue private investments in the City
in the City’s planning process.                                            through programs such as the Community Reinvestment Act
                                                                           or other similar programs.
Policies
P.1	 The City should encourage every individual, organization
     and business in the community to participate in the plan-
     ning process.
P.2	 Sponsors of development or other major projects in the
     City should initiate early and frequent communication with
     the community.
P.3	 The City will work collaboratively with neighborhood associa-
     tions and other similar organizations to address issues of
     concern in neighborhoods.
P.4	 The City will provide regular updates about the progress of
     the General Plan implementation and other planning-related
     activities through a variety of mechanisms such as the City
     web site, flyers in water bills or the South Gate Vista.
P.5	 The City should sponsor a bi-annual“town-hall” meeting to
     provide updates on major city activities that implement the
     General Plan as well as other city activities as provided for in
     the Community Design Element (Action CD 16).
                                                                                      Healthy Community Element 293

     Table HC1: Highlighted Health-Improving General Plan Objectives, Policies and Actions
     Community Design Element
     Implementing policies and actions in the Community Design Element will have many positive health benefits. New develop-
     ment in South Gate will be compact and infill, and many policies promote a mix of uses. A compact mix of uses improves
     local access to goods, services, and jobs increasing walkability and decreasing trip distances. This increases physical activity,
     which has wide-ranging positive health impacts.
     Various policies and actions seek to create an enhanced pedestrian environment and urban fabric, which encourages
     walking and physical activity. Policies to control the impact of parking on the pedestrian environment can also improve the
     pedestrian environment and encourage physical activity, as can enhanced bicycle and public transit infrastructure.
     Enhancements and improved access to parks, open space, community gardens, and public space will increase physical activ-
     ity, mental health, and social capital. They also decrease heat islands, which can have a negative impact on health. Active
     community gardens increase access to nutritious food, as does increased access to grocery stores and other vendors offering
     healthy food. Limiting residents’ exposure to hazardous material, particulate matter and other air pollution from mobile
     sources like freeways and stationary sources like industrial uses preserves respiratory health, especially among children and
     the elderly. Finally, green building techniques increase indoor air quality, decrease exposure to toxic materials, and provide
     increased mental health for inhabitants and users.
     Goals/Objectives                           Policy Content
     Objective CD 1.1 Enhance South             P.4 calls for city-sponsored or approved projects to be reviewed for, among other
     Gate’s role, participation and leader-     things, their public health impact.
     ship in the region.
     Goal CD 2: A complete, integrated          All Objectives and Policies within Goal CD 2 encourage a complete, integrated and
     and balanced mix of residential and        balanced mix of residential and non-residential uses, including a clearly defined
     non-residential uses that meets the        urban form of “Neighborhoods,” “Districts,” and “Corridors.”
     needs of existing and future residents
     Objective CD 2.2: Maintain a jobs-         P.1 to P.3 set a target of 1.5 jobs for every housing unit, calls for a match between
     housing balance in the City.               residents and appropriate job types, and limits conversion of non-residential land to
                                                residential uses.
     Objective CD 2.4: Provide land for         P.1 to P.4 call for preserving land for a diversity of job-producing uses.
     a diversity of job-producing uses
     throughout the City.
     Objective CD 2.7: Allow increased          P.1 to P.3 define density bonuses available for various public improvements and public
     densities for projects that provide        amenities.
     public amenities and improvements
     beyond those required by code.
     Objective CD 3.1: Support transit-         P.1 requires the City to encourage multi-modal transportation, including public
     oriented development in the City.          transit, walking, and biking.
                                                P.2 to P.6 commit the City to pursuing higher intensity, pedestrian oriented, transit
                                                oriented development near areas well-served by high frequency bus transit, and iden-
                                                tifies several of these areas, including new transit villages at Firestone and Atlantic
                                                and in Hollydale.
     Objective CD 3.2: Minimize the             P.1 to P.12 include policies to prevent parking from encroaching on the pedestrian
     impact of parking on the pedestrian        environment and the urban fabric, including placing parking behind buildings,
     environment and residential neigh-         reducing parking heat islands, and discouraging large uncovered lots.
     borhoods.
     Objective CD 4.5: Locate services and      P.1 encourages “complete” neighborhoods, including parks, community gardens,
     amenities within walking distance of       and the availability of nearby goods and services
     neighborhoods.                             P.2 and P.3 encourage pedestrian connections between neighborhoods and neigh-
                                                borhood centers with neighborhood-serving retail, services, and public gathering
                                                places.
294 South Gate General Plan 2035

  Community Design Element
  Goals/Objectives                          Policy Content
  Objective CD 5.4: Maintain and            P.1 to P.8 include guidelines and requirements for enhancing the pedestrian environ-
  enhance the pedestrian-oriented           ment along Tweedy Mile.
  character of the area.
  Objective CD 6.2: Design landscap-        P.2 requires parks and open space in any new development over 5 acres.
  ing, buildings and sites to enhance       P.3 and P.5 require new development to enhance the pedestrian environment,
  the pedestrian environment and            including minimizing blank walls and providing entrances and interesting building
  enhance the urban character of the        facades along sidewalks, integrating sidewalks and plazas, incorporating first-floor
  City’s Districts.                         uses that encourage pedestrian traffic, minimizing setbacks, and providing street
                                            trees and landscaping.
  Objective CD 7.1: Create attractive       P.1 to P.8 identify corridors as areas that should be re-developed with a mix of uses
  corridors with a mix of uses through-     and housing types and a reduced number of single-use retail parcels.
  out the City of South Gate.
  Objective CD 7.2: Design landscap-        P.2 and P.4 require new development to enhance the pedestrian environment,
  ing, buildings and sites to enhance       including minimizing blank walls and providing entrances and interesting building
  the pedestrian environment.               facades along sidewalks, integrating sidewalks and plazas, incorporating first-floor
                                            uses that encourage pedestrian traffic, minimizing setbacks, and providing street
                                            trees and landscaping.
  Objective CD 8.1 Ensure high qual-        P.1 to P.8 require high quality, pedestrian-friendly, durable architecture and urban
  ity architecture and urban design         design in new development.
  throughout the City.
  Objective CD 8.4: Reduce the impact       P.7 calls for truck and employee traffic generated by industrial uses to be restricted
  of Manufacturing/ Distribution and        to designated truck routes.
  Light Industrial/Flex businesses on       P.8 prohibits truck parking on public streets in non-industrial areas
  adjoining land uses.
                                            P.9 limits industrial development that produces or deals with toxic substances, or
                                            that produces air or other pollution.
  Community Design Element – Specific Districts and Corridors
  District or Corridor                      Policy Content
  Civic Center District                     P.1 and P.2 specifically encourage pedestrian safety and pedestrian connections
                                            across California Street, given the high level of foot traffic expected in the Civic
                                            Center District.
                                            P.10 the City commits to including public amenities such as parks, plazas and other
                                            public spaces.
  South Gate College District               P.4 encourages all new buildings to be certified green buildings.
  Gateway District                          P.1 and P.2 require the City to create specific plan identifying uses to support transit
                                            use, and to work with regional transit agencies to promote multi-modal transit.
                                            P.3 to P.5 polices call for additional through-streets and pedestrian connections
                                            within the district.
                                            P.8 discourages expansion of industrial uses in the Gateway District.
  El Paseo/South Gate Towne Center District P.7 discourages new truck traffic in the District.
  Imperial District                         P.5 encourages development of a supermarket.
                                            P.9 allows for a potential high-density transit village near Imperial Boulevard.
  South Gate Triangle District              P.3 and P.4 encourage increased access to the Los Angeles River and Rio Hondo.
  Hollydale Industrial District             P.3 and P.4 prohibit truck parking and require mitigation of negative effects of truck traffic.
  Tweedy Educational District               P.4 and P.5 encourage enhancement of and increased access to the Los Angeles
                                            River.
                                            P.6 encourages a park, open space, and joint-use athletic facilities.
                                                                                        Healthy Community Element 295

     Community Design Element – Specific Districts and Corridors
     District or Corridor                       Policy Content
     Ardine Industrial District                 P.2 and P.3 require physical buffers from truck traffic and air pollution, and encour-
                                                age use of rail over trucks to move freight.
     Rayo Industrial District                   P.4 and P.5 encourage increased accessed to the Los Angeles River and the regional
                                                trail system.
     Firestone Corridor                         P.9 encourages development of a supermarket.
     Tweedy Mile Corridor                       Objectives and policies include specific guidelines and requirements for enhancing
                                                the pedestrian environment along Tweedy Mile.
     Garfield Corridor                          P.2 encourages creation of a business assessment district for streetscape beautifica-
                                                tion.
                                                P.1 and P.6 commit the City to completing an in-progress mixed use project.
     Actions                                    Action CD 2: Create Citywide Design Guidelines and/or Streetscape Plans. Planned ac-
                                                tions include detailed streetscape plans for Corridors, implementing street cleaning and
                                                improvement programs, and identifying streetscape and pedestrian facility improve-
                                                ments.
                                                Action CD 3: Create a Density Bonus Program. This program would define ways for
                                                project developers to achieve increased density for their projects.
                                                Action CD 8: Undertake a Citywide Parking Management Study. Planned topics to
                                                be explored include parking pricing and shared parking.
                                                Action CD 17: Create a Riverfront Enhancement Plan. Enhancements to the river
                                                would encourage its use as an open space and recreational area.
     Mobility Element
     Transportation policies and actions have a major impact on health. An enhanced pedestrian, bicycle, transit and automobile
     environment – including improved transit service, increased bicycle and pedestrian access across barriers, and other safety
     and facility improvements – can allow for shorter vehicle trips, more walking to transit and other destination, and more bicy-
     cling, all of which provide physical activity. An increase in mixed use and transit-oriented development supports transit and
     walking, and limiting the negative effects of parking on the pedestrian environment also encourages walking and physical
     activity. Street widenings could increase automobile or transit levels of service but decrease pedestrian, bicycle or automobile
     safety. Finally, reducing transportation pollution – through general VMT reductions and targeted reductions in diesel particu-
     late matter from trucks – can increase air quality and respiratory health.
     Goals/Objectives                           Policy Content
     Objective ME 1.1: Balance the roadway      P.2 calls for establishing multi-modal arterial corridor design standards, including for
     system with the planned uses in the        transit, bikes and pedestrians.
     City.
     Objective ME 1.2: Fully develop the        P.1 calls for a more connective street grid, with additional connections over barriers
     street system, and maximize its op-        such as the Los Angeles River and I-710 freeway.
     erational efficiency.                      P.2 and P.3 call for consideration of all modes, including transit, bicycles and pedes-
                                                trians, in design, operation and maintenance of arterials.
     Objective ME 2.1: Provide a con-           P.1 to P.3 call for developing a citywide bicycle network, including on- and off-street
     nected, balanced, and integrated           bike paths, bike lanes, widespread bike parking, and centralized bike hubs near
     transportation system of bicycle and       transit facilities and commercial uses.
     pedestrian networks that enable            P.4 and P.5 call for developing a citywide pedestrian network, including connections
     residents to walk and bike, as alterna-    to schools, neighborhoods, open space, and other major destinations, and including
     tives to use of the car.                   facilities such as benches and street trees throughout the City.
                                                P.6 encourages enhanced pedestrian and bike access to regional transit.
                                                P.7 encourages publication of bike and pedestrian maps and resource materials.
                                                P.8 encourages coordination with neighboring jurisdictions in provision of bike and
                                                pedestrian facilities.
                                                P.9 encourages office, industrial, institutional, and multi-family projects to provide
                                                bike parking and facilities.
296 South Gate General Plan 2035

  Mobility Element
  Goals/Objectives                      Policy Content
  Objective ME 2.2: Improve local and   P.1, P.2 and P.4 encourage the City to work with Metro (LACMTA) to provide more
  regional transit service in the City. direct transit routes to neighborhoods, provide additional routes, and increase the
                                        frequency of routes.
                                        P.3 calls for supporting Metro’s expansion of Rapid Bus Service.
                                        P.5 encourages the City to work with Metro to provide attractive and convenient bus stops.
                                        P.6 encourages development of a bus transit hub at Firestone and Atlantic, with
                                        potential expansion.
                                        P.7 calls for the City to support all potential rail transit serving the City, including
                                        high-speed rail.
  Objective ME 2.3: Encourage           P.1 encourages land use and architecture that promotes safety, transit access, and
  walking, biking and use of transit,   pedestrian orientation.
  through a variety of supportive land  P.2 to P.4 call for the City to require office, retail, industrial, and multi-family devel-
  use development and urban design      opment to install transit, bike, and pedestrian amenities, and to develop Transporta-
  measures.                             tion Demand Management (TDM) programs.
                                        P.7 encourages providing parking without oversupplying.
  Objective ME 3.2: Reduce adverse      P.1 calls for truck traffic only on appropriate arterials.
  impacts from truck traffic.           P.2 calls for truck traffic and new truck ramps to be focused on industrial areas, in
                                        such a way as to avoid adverse impacts on neighborhoods.
                                        P.4 calls for coordination with regional planning agencies to encourage use of rail
                                        along the I-710 corridor.
                                        P.5 calls for appropriate signage to direct trucks to truck routes.
  Objective ME 4.1: Manage parking      P.2 calls for revision of the City’s parking guidelines to allow reduced parking for
  demand and supply in the City.        new development in areas with high mixed uses, along major mixed use corridors,
                                        and near high-frequency transit service.
                                        P.3. calls for “Park Once” programs to encourage walking within commercial dis-
                                        tricts.
                                                                                    Healthy Community Element 297

     Mobility Element
     Actions                 Action ME 1: Implement various street improvements for general circulation. Guide-
                             lines include public transit and other transportation modes.
                             Actions ME 7 Maintain and install truck directional signage throughout the City.
                             Signage is intended to direct trucks to truck routes and limit the negative air quality
                             and safety impacts of truck traffic.
                             Action ME 8: Work with Caltrans to install appropriate signage on the I-710 free-
                             way. Signage is intended to direct trucks to truck routes and limit the negative air
                             quality and safety impacts of truck traffic.
                             Action ME 9: Explore Alternate truck route to Firestone Boulevard. An alternate
                             truck route could limit the negative air quality and safety impacts of truck traffic.
                             Action ME 12: Create a Firestone/Atlantic transit station. The Firestone/Atlantic sta-
                             tion would be a hub for multiple transit modes.
                             Action ME 13: Create an Imperial/Atlantic transit station. The Imperial/Atlantic sta-
                             tion would be a hub for multiple transit modes.
                             Action ME 15: Initiate local transit service. This action calls for initiation of a local
                             bus service in the City and defines its desired characteristics and types of service.
                             Action ME 16: Build park and ride lots. This action commits the City to building park
                             and ride lots, which decrease VMT.
                             Action ME 17: Provide enhanced bus stop amenities. This action commits the City to
                             certain bus stop improvements.
                             Action ME 18: Promote the use of transit. This action defines activities to promote
                             transit use throughout the City.
                             Action ME 19: Conduct a citywide bicycle study and develop a bicycle plan. A
                             bicycle plan would include planned improvements to the bike network as well as
                             specific plans for things like traffic controls and push buttons for bicycles to cross
                             arterial roadways.
                             Action ME 21: Improve bicycle access to the regional bike paths on the Los Angeles
                             River and the Rio Hondo Channel. Connection to the existing regional bike path
                             would increase its utilization by residents.
                             Action ME 22: Install bicycle “hubs.” Hubs would be important destinations provid-
                             ing goods, services, and interesting resting points along the bicycle network.
                             Action ME 23: In conjunction with other agencies and developers the City should
                             develop and implement an ongoing bicycle amenities program. Bicycle amenities
                             would be installed at various publicly-owned locations.
                             Action ME 24: Modify the city code for bicycle parking. Planned modifications
                             include requiring provision of bike parking and showers.
                             Action ME 26: Promote the use of bicycles. Bicycle use would be promoted by the
                             preparation and distribution of bike route maps and facilities information.
                             Action ME 27: Develop procedures for incorporating bike facilities into new develop-
                             ment projects. Procedures would define requirements for including bike infrastruc-
                             ture in new development.
                             Action ME 28: Conduct a citywide pedestrian study to develop a pedestrian plan
                             and program. The planned Pedestrian Amenities Program would involve comprehen-
                             sive improvements to streetscapes and the walking network.
                             Action ME 29: Develop procedures for new development to support and promote
                             walking and contribute to enhancing supporting facilities and amenities. Procedures
                             would define requirements for including pedestrian infrastructure in new development.
                             Action ME 30: Promote walking in the City. Walking would be promoted by the
                             preparation and distribution of walking route maps and facilities information.
                             Action ME 33: Implement a city education program on safe travel speeds. This pro-
                             gram would be designed to improve traffic safety.
                             Action ME 34: Develop parking policies and modify parking requirements to restrict
                             the over-provision of on-site parking for private developments.
                             Action ME 35: Explore the establishment of parking districts in commercial areas.
                             This would implement the “park once” program.
298 South Gate General Plan 2035

  Public Facilities and Services Element
  A mix of land uses and enhancements to biking and walking facilities encourage physical activity through more walking
  and biking, and joint-use agreements for recreational facilities increase opportunities for recreational physical activity. Ad-
  ditionally, improving treatment of stormwater decreases exposure of City and region residents to toxics and pollution from
  stormwater run-off.
  Goals/Objectives                        Policy Content
  Objective PF 3.2: Assist educational    P.1 encourages joint-use agreements of recreational facilities
  providers in the location and design    P.2 encourages safe routes to schools
  of school sites to prevent negative
  impacts on the health, safety and wel-  P.3 calls for a mixed use campus for the proposed new high and middle schools on
  fare of students and nearby residents.  Tweedy Boulevard.
  Objective PF 7.2 Encourage coordina-    P.1 to P.6 call for improving the quality of stormwater runoff and treating stormwa-
  tion between land use planning, site    ter on-site when possible.
  design and stormwater control.
  Actions                                 Action PF 3: Pursue Safe Routes to School Grand Funding. Safe Routes to Schools is
                                          a proven source of funding with clear benefits for safety and increasing walking and
                                          bicycling.
                                          Action PF 16: Revise the Building Code to Allow Technologies that Reduce Stormwa-
                                          ter Runoff. Revisions to the building code would allow new technologies that reduce
                                          stormwater runoff but may be currently disallowed.
                                                                                     Healthy Community Element 299
    Implementation Actions
    Action HC 1:	
    Review City codes and ordinances for
    their impact on health.
    Following adoption of the General Plan, the Community Development
    Department and other relevant departments will review the City’s exist-
    ing codes and ordinances (including the Zoning Code and the Building
    Code) and make recommendations on how they can be improved to
    create more positive health outcomes in the City. Topics that should be
    addressed include:
          xx Minimum clearances.
          xx Location of fast food restaurants and liquor stores.
          xx Standards for improved indoor air quality resulting from pollution such as tox-
              ics, VOCs, mold, paint, asbestos, smoking, and other chemicals.
          xx Encouragement for HVAC systems that achieve high levels of indoor air quality.
          xx Reduction of dust and other emissions from construction sites and unpaved
              industrial areas of the City.
          xx Standards for multi-family buildings that locate along freeways or truck routes
              or near hazardous materials.
          xx Standards and regulating mechanisms to limit concentrations of liquor stores.
          xx Allowances to grow food on parcels within the City.
          xx Allowances to operate farmers’ markets on parcels within the City.
          xx Internal circulation within buildings to encourage inhabitants to use stairs
              between floors whenever feasible.
          xx Reducing barriers to childcare facilities and allowing licensed childcare centers
              or family childcare facilities by right in all appropriate areas of the City.
    Action HC 2:	
    Create a land development review checklist.
    Develop or adopt a land development review checklist to ensure that
    projects enhance public health outcomes. The checklist should address
    topics such as the pedestrian environment, building siting, access to
    transit, access to parks, proximity to healthy food sources and proximity
    to existing or potential sources of pollution (such as freeways and land
    uses that use hazardous materials).
300 South Gate General Plan 2035

Action HC 3:	                                             Action HC 7:	
Create guidelines for healthy food at                     Update the Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan.
city buildings and events.                                Implement the actions of the plan maintenance
Develop guidelines for the types of foods that should     chapter of the Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan and
be served at city-sponsored events and in City vend-      incorporate modifications to the Natural Hazards Miti-
ing machines. At minimum, the guidelines should           gation Plan recommended by FEMA Region IX.
require that there are healthy food options available.
                                                          Action HC 8:
Action HC 4: 	                                            Create an inventory of health
Create City-sponsored programs to                         resources in the City.
address employee health.                                  Work with the Los Angeles County Department of
Develop and continually implement a series of health      Public Health and other service providers to create
programs and activities for city employees. Such pro-     and regularly update a list of health resources in the
grams could include weight loss challenges, exercise      City. The information should be both available in
challenges, lunchtime exercise programs, sponsoring       print form and included on the City website.
bike and walk to work days, and providing transit
passes for employees.                                     Action HC 9:
                                                          Hold an annual health fair.
Action HC 5:	                                             Host an annual Health Day Fair with information,
Develop a business attraction strategy to                 health care screenings and services, and activities
bring more healthy food choices to the City.              celebrating an active lifestyle. The event should be
The City’s Economic Development Director will develop     sponsored by the City and involve a wide range of
a program of incentives to locate, establish and expand   service providers. The health fair should have a strong
new and maintain existing grocery stores and other        focus on preventative health care, healthy eating and
healthy food purveyors. Part of this strategy will be to  active living.
strive, to the extent possible, for an equal distribution
of healthy food stores throughout the City.               Action HC 10:
                                                          Analyze unsafe pedestrian and
Action HC 6:	                                             cycling areas.
Develop a business attraction strategy targeted           The Public Works Department and the Police Depart-
towards hospitals and health care facilities.             ment will analyze the locations of crashes involving
The City’s Economic Development Director will pursue      pedestrians or cyclists over the last several years, at-
a program of incentives and outreach to attract a         tempt to identify the causes of the collisions and de-
hospital and/or health care facilities to the City.       velop a priority list of future physical improvements.
                                                          The City should also include on the priority list areas
                                                          where it deems there to be a high risk of pedestrian
                                                          or cyclist danger, even if collisions with cars have not
                                                          yet occurred. This priority list should be incorporated
                                                          into the City’s Capital Improvement Plan.
                                                                        Healthy Community Element 301

    Action HC 11:                                               Action HC 13:
    Establish bike parking standards.                           Create a streamlined process for
    The City’s Community Development Department will            childcare permits.
    establish standards for bike parking to be included as      Upon adoption of the General Plan, the City will
    part of new commercial, mixed use and multi-family          amend and simplify the procedures for obtaining a
    development. The standards should include incentives        childcare permit. As part of this effort, the City will
    or requirements for a minimum number of short-term          create a brief guide for opening a childcare center
    and long-term bike parking spaces, guidance on how          or home childcare facility in South Gate. The docu-
    bike parking requirements should interact with car          ment should include a checklist of the relevant state,
    parking requirements, and guidelines or requirements        county, and local planning, building, safety, fire and
    for the location of bike parking.                           business license requirements that are needed to
                                                                open a childcare facility in the City.
    Action HC 12:
    Adopt a city ordinance to limit
    diesel truck idling.
    The City will adopt an ordinance that limits diesel
    truck idling in certain circumstances and locations. In
    addition to reinforcing the statewide regulation that
    prohibits heavy vehicles to idle within 100 feet of a
    school, the ordinance could pursue such strategies
    as establishing truck routes to minimize diesel truck
    idling, limiting idling by construction vehicles, or limit-
    ing idling by transit vehicles.
302 South Gate General Plan 2035

8
  Public Facilities and
  Services Element
    INTRODUCTION
    The Public Facilities and Services Element provides information and
    policy guidance to ensure the provision of public facilities and services
    will support existing and new development in the City of South Gate. It
    addresses the changing public service and infrastructure needs of South
                                                                               The topics addressed here
    Gate and provides for their logical and timely expansion to keep pace
    with growth. Policies supporting quality schools, excellent police and     are an integral part of the
    fire services, and well-maintained infrastructure are essential to achieve
    broader development objectives and support the future envisioned by        City’s overall planning strat-
    the residents of South Gate. The Element covers the following topics:
    •	 Police Services                                                         egy and a basic consideration
    •	 Fire Services
                                                                               of setting growth and devel-
    •	 Schools and Educational Facilities
    •	 Solid Waste and Recycling                                               opment policy.
    •	 Water Service
    •	 Wastewater
    •	 Stormwater
    Each topic is addressed in its own section. Each section contains a brief
    description of the relevant existing conditions as well as goals, objec-
    tives, policies and actions for each topic area.
    Throughout its history, public facilities and services in South Gate have
    supported broad development objectives and ensured a high quality of
    life for residents.
304 South Gate General Plan 2035

STATUTORY
REQUIREMENTS
Further, the topics addressed here are an integral part of the City’s over-
all planning strategy and a basic consideration of setting growth and
development policy.
State Law requires the General Plan to include “the proposed general
distribution and general location and extent of the uses of land for …
solid and liquid waste disposal facilities,” and requires information on
“the general location and extent of existing and proposed … public
utilities and facilities.” These components are included in this Element
                       Public Facilities and Services Element 305

    KEY ISSUES AND
    CHALLENGES
    During the General Plan update process, key issues and challenges
    related to the provision of public services and facilities were identified.
    This section outlines the areas of concern identified in that process.
    Keeping pace with development
    As the City grows, so does the need for additional buildings to ac-
    commodate City personnel and infrastructure to provide capacity for
    everything from educational services to wastewater management. It is
    imperative to coordinate the timing of new development with the pro-
    vision of adequate infrastructure, public facilities, and public services
    so that services can keep pace with demand. At the same time, some
    existing facilities in the City of South Gate are in need of upgrades and/
    or replacement.
    Equitable distribution of the costs of service provision
    New development adds to use of existing services and facilities, but the
    City of South Gate currently does not impose fees on development to
    fund the provision of these additional services. Additionally, existing fa-
    cilities are costly to maintain and update, and reliable revenue sources
    are required to maintain or replace aging infrastructure.
    Adequate school facilities
    Approximately 30,000 students, almost 1 in 3 of the South Gate popu-
    lation, attend some type of educational facility in the City. More attend
    schools outside the City limits. The existing school facilities in the City
    are insufficient to accommodate this large population of students
    and the Los Angeles Unified School District is looking for several sites
    for new schools in South Gate. Siting these schools will be an issue,
    because the City is largely built out and there is strong competition for
    the few sites that might be appropriate for new educational facilities.
306 South Gate General Plan 2035
Water use, storage, recycling and distribution          Stormwater management
Water use and management is a serious issue. South      The City of South Gate will need to continue to cre-
Gate, like most communities in Southern California,     ate innovative approaches to managing stormwater
has limited water resources. Homes and businesses       flows to meet existing and expected future storm-
have become accustomed to having access to inex-        water regulations.
pensive and plentiful water delivered to them from
other parts of the state, but increasing development
and demand for water resources has diminished the
water available per capita. In recent years, water use,
storage, recycling and distribution have become ma-
jor issues for California, particularly in the southern
part of the state.
                                                          Public Facilities and Services Element 307
    KEY CONCEPTS
    The City’s facilities and public services sustain and support the smooth
    functioning and long-term health of the community. It is vitally impor-
    tant to implement effective, transparent government policies to guide
    the planning, construction and maintenance of a wide range of public
    facilities and services. As South Gate grows over the next two decades,
    the City will need to make substantial infrastructure investments to
    keep pace with growing demand and maintenance of existing systems.
    The following are strategies for maintaining and expanding educational
    institutions, police and fire service, solid waste and recycling, water
    service, wastewater and stormwater systems.
    A partnership with the community
    The City of South Gate is committed to working in partnership with
    the community to provide a high level of service and to meet the
    needs of City residents. Together we will identify and address com-
    munity needs and concerns through a commitment to honest, ethical,
    and professional service. Decision-making should be transparent and
    include mechanisms for everyone to contribute to the planning and
    policymaking process.
    High quality services
    South Gate is committed to pursuing and allocating sufficient funds to
    maintain a high level of quality in all the services and facilities provided
    by the City. The City will partner with residents and businesses to find
    sources of revenue to maintain or improve the level of service required
    by the community. The City is also determined to be a responsible
    steward of the community’s resources and to strive for an efficient and
    effective allocation of limited funds.
308 South Gate General Plan 2035

Equitable distribution of costs and benefits
Infrastructure decisions have widespread impact on
housing, development, investment patterns, and
quality of life and the outcomes of those decisions
must be fair and beneficial to all. Services and oppor-
tunities should be available and accessible to every-
one in the community. At the same time, employ-
ment and economic benefits associated with building
and maintaining infrastructure should be shared as
well. The means for collecting revenues to support
infrastructure improvements should be determined
and applied in ways that are fair and do not dispro-
portionately burden those with lower incomes. New
development should not negatively impact existing
residents and should contribute to city coffers so that
the current level of services can be maintained.
                                                        Public Facilities and Services Element 309
    POLICE SERVICES
    Existing Conditions
    The South Gate Police Department provides police protection services in
    the City of South Gate. The Department operates out of its headquarters
    at 8620 California Avenue, as well as a substation at the El Paseo Shop-
    ping Center. The City is considering a “City Hall Annex” to include a
    Police Department substation adjacent to the proposed Gateway Devel-
    opment near the intersection of Atlantic and Firestone Boulevards and is
    considering remote facilities on the west side and in the Hollydale areas
    of the City. The existing Police Department headquarters are out of date
    and inadequate for the size of the department. A new police headquar-
    ters is planned as part of the proposed Civic Center redevelopment.
    The South Gate Police Department has 97 sworn officers, including 1        In 2006, the average response
    chief, 3 captains, 5 lieutenants, 11 sergeants and 77 police officers.
    Currently, the ratio of police per thousand people is 0.9. The national    time for non-emergency calls
    average target staffing ratio is 2.0 officers per thousand. The Police
    Department has a goal of achieving a ratio of 1.0 officers per thou-       was 17 minutes and 22 seconds.
    sand residents. The Department also has 45 unsworn positions, which
    includes administrators, dispatchers, and public safety officers. The City
                                                                               The average response time for
    does not currently have a development or public safety impact fee to
                                                                               emergency calls was 3 minutes
    fund additional police services necessitated by growth.
    The Department runs an Explorer Program, which is designed to offer        and 48 seconds.
    youth the opportunity to interact with police personnel and to develop
    an understanding of law enforcement. A separate volunteer program
    also provides substantial staff assistance. In 2006, the department had 19
    volunteers who contributed over 3,500 hours of staff time. In addition
    to its regular programs, the Police Department also runs a Tweedy Mile
    Patrol, Substance Abuse and Narcotics Education (SANE) program, and a
    Family Violence Prevention and Education Program. The Department ad-
    dresses gang-related problems through a Crime Impact Team (CIT), which
    conducts arrests, serves arrest and search warrants, and works with patrol
    officers and detectives to solve gang-related crimes.
310 South Gate General Plan 2035

The South Gate Police Department divides calls into
two categories, Emergency and Non-Emergency.            Goals, Objectives
Emergency calls are those from the 911 system, while
non-emergency calls are received via normal business
                                                        and Policies
phone lines. In 2006, the average response time for
non-emergency calls was 17 minutes and 22 seconds.
                                                        Goal PF 1:
The average response time for emergency calls was 3     Excellent law enforcement and
minutes and 48 seconds.                                 improved public safety
The South Gate Police Department tracks crime using
COMPSTAT, a computer-based system that provides         Objective PF 1.1:
real time data on crime and quality of life. In 2006    Provide courteous, responsive and
there were 3,617 “Part 1” offences reported, which      efficient police services.
include grand theft auto, homicide, rape, burglary
and larceny. Grand Theft Auto was the most common       Policies
crime, accounting for 34.6% of all offences. The sec-   P.1	 The City will strive to continuously improve the performance
ond most common crime was larceny, which includes            and efficiency of the Police Department.
car break-ins, auto accessory theft or shoplifting, and P.2	 To the extent feasible, the City should raise the ratio of
accounted for 30.4% of all offences in the City. Part        police officers to residents to a minimum of 1.0 officers
1 Crime in South Gate decreased 4% from 2005 to              per 1,000 residents, and maintain personnel and facilities
                                                             in the Police Department necessary to provide the best
2006, and has gone down more than 17% since 2003.
                                                             response time feasible.
The Department has mutual aid agreements with all       P.3	 The Police Department will maintain adequate police staff-
surrounding police agencies, including the Los Ange-         ing, performance levels and facilities to serve the existing
les Sheriff’s Department and Downey Police Depart-           South Gate population as well as its future growth.
ment. In addition, the Department’s Crime Impact        P.4	 To the extent feasible, the City will replace the city’s exist-
Team (CIT) has a working relationship with the Los           ing, police facility with a new facility that is adequate to
                                                             serve the existing and expected future police force.
Angeles Regional Gang Information Network (LAR-
GIN). The Police Department is responsible for animal   P.5	 As the need arises, new police substations may be located
services and the City has an agreement with the              throughout the City, wherever feasible and possible.
Southeast Area Animal Control Association to provide    P.6	 The Police Department will monitor crime data using
24-hour on-call services.                                    COMPSTAT and other systems, as needed, and prepare
                                                             annual reports on the status of crime in South Gate.
                                                          Public Facilities and Services Element 311

    Objective PF 1.2:
    Promote coordination between land-use
                                                                              Implementation Actions
    planning and urban design, and law                                        Action PF 1:
    enforcement.                                                              Install traffic signal pre-emption technology.
                                                                              The Police, Fire and Public Works Departments
    Policies                                                                  shall coordinate to install traffic signal pre-emption
    P.1	 The Police Department will continue to work with the                 technology for emergency response vehicles in ap-
         Community Development Department to review and modify                propriate locations in the City, as funding and capital
         development proposals to incorporate “defensible space”
         concepts and other public safety design concepts into new            programming allow.
         development.
    P.2	 The Police Department will work with the Community Devel-
         opment Department during the revision of the zoning code to
         incorporate a variety of safety concerns such as fence heights
         in front yards, requiring off-street parking of vehicles, visibility
         of the property from the street and night lighting.
    P.3	 New development in the City will be required to mitigate
         project-related impacts to police services. Individual develop-
         ment projects will pay any fees required by a Public Safety
         Impact Fee, once established by the City.
312 South Gate General Plan 2035

                               FIRE SERVICES
                               Existing Conditions
The Los Angeles County Fire    The Los Angeles County Fire Department provides fire protection and
                               first responder emergency medical services to the City of South Gate.
Department provides fire       There are two fire stations within the City of South Gate. Fire Station
                               54 is located at 4867 Southern Avenue and is staffed at all times by
protection and first responder one captain, one engineer, one firefighter, and three paramedics. Fire
                               Station 57 is located at 5720 Gardendale Street, and is staffed by one
emergency medical services to  captain, one engineer and two firefighters. A battalion chief oversees
                               both fire stations. In total, there are 35 fire department personnel
the City of South Gate.        spread out over three shifts. This includes an Assistant Chief, Commu-
                               nity Service Representative, Public Information Officer, and a secretary.
                               The average response time is 4 minutes and 58 seconds for emergency
                               calls, and 7 minutes and 6 seconds for non-emergency calls.
                               Goals, Objectives and Policies
                               Goal PF 2:
                               Increased fire safety and high quality
                               Emergency Medical Services (EMS)
                               Objective PF 2.1:
                               Provide professional, efficient fire protection
                               and EMS services.
                               Policies
                               P.1	 The City should work with the County of Los Angeles Fire Department to continu-
                                     ously improve the performance and efficiency of fire protection services for the City
                                     of South Gate.
                               P.2	 The City should work with the County of Los Angeles Fire Department to ensure ad-
                                     equate fire-fighting and EMS infrastructure, equipment, and personnel to provide a high
                                     level of fire and emergency medical service in South Gate to meet growing demands.
                               P.3	 The City should work with the County of Los Angeles Fire Department to maintain
                                     its current distribution of fire stations, seeking to maintain goals of a maximum of
                                     3 miles between stations and 5 minute response times.
                                                         Public Facilities and Services Element 313
    P.4	 In coordination with the County of Los Angeles County Fire
         Department and surrounding cities, South Gate will support
         the replacement of old facilities and outdated fire facilities
                                                                         Implementation Actions
         with new facilities containing the necessary infrastructure     Action PF 2:
         and design features to adequately support fire and emer-
         gency functions for the area.                                   Install traffic signal pre-emption technology.
                                                                         The Police, Fire and Public Works Departments
    P.5	 The City will ensure that sufficient water service and pressure
         is available throughout the City for use in fire fighting.      shall coordinate to install traffic signal pre-emption
                                                                         technology for emergency response vehicles in ap-
    P.6	 The City will work with the County of Los Angeles Fire
         Department to explore funding sources, such as impact fees      propriate locations in the City, as funding and capital
         from development or parcel taxes, to ensure a high level of     programming allow.
         fire services for the City.
    P.7	 The City will work with the Fire Department to proactively
         plan for increases in population and employment growth and
         changes in the use and types of buildings in South Gate.
    Objective PF 2.2:
    Ensure that all new development includes
    adequate provision for fire safety.
    Policies
    P.1	 All new development will comply with fire safety require-
         ments of the California Building Fire Code and California
         Building Code as adopted by the City of South Gate.
    P.2	 All new development will provide water mains and hydrants
         as necessary to create adequate fire service.
    P.3	 All new development will provide adequate access for fire
         service vehicles and personnel.
    P.4	 While seeking to maintain access, fire safety, and adequate
         response times, the City and the Fire Department will work
         together to develop creative solutions that allow for mixed-
         use and compact development, pedestrian-friendly streets,
         and other elements of a walkable, bikeable, and safe city.  
314 South Gate General Plan 2035
                               SCHOOLS AND
                               EDUCATIONAL
                               FACILITIES
                               Existing Conditions
                               This section provides background information about the schools serving
                               the City of South Gate, including Los Angeles Unified School District cam-
                               puses, the East Los Angeles Community College and private schools.
                               Unified School Districts Serving South Gate
                               The Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD) operates 19 schools in
The Los Angeles Unified School South Gate, including one primary center, 11 elementary schools, three
                               middle schools, two high schools, one continuation school, and one
District (LAUSD) operates 19   adult education center. With the exception of the Hollydale Elemen-
                               tary School (which is administered by the Paramount Unified School
schools in South Gate, includ- District), all of the schools located in South Gate are administered
                               and operated by the LAUSD. South Gate also has a limited number
ing one primary center, 11 el-
                               of residents that attend schools in the Downey Unified School District
                               (DUSD), Paramount Unified School District (PUSD) and the Lynwood
ementary schools, three middle
                               Unified School District (LUSD). A summary of LAUSD facilities in the
schools, two high schools, one City of South Gate is presented in Table PF 1.
                               Preliminary estimates of the student population in South Gate are ap-
continuation school, and one   proximately 30,000-32,000 students, or about one-third the City’s current
                               population.  This number includes the East Los Angeles Community Col-
adult education center.
                               lege and the two adult/continuation schools, while estimating the student
                               census at Hollydale Elementary School. It does not account for any South
                               Gate students attending schools outside the City.   LAUSD accounts
                               for 25,000 students alone and maintains 19 existing campuses spread
                               throughout the community.  LAUSD is also proposing three to four new
                               campuses, bringing its total of schools to 22 or 23 campuses.  When
                               including schools in Paramount Unified, Lynwood Unified, and Downey
                               Unified School Districts, the City estimates there may be 28 or 29 cam-
                               puses serving the student population. The LAUSD and the DUSD assess
                               development fees against new development to mitigate impacts resulting
                               from associated increases in demand for school related services.
                                                      Public Facilities and Services Element 315

    East Los Angeles Community College                                 Private Schools
    The East Los Angeles College (ELAC) leases a facility in           There are a number of private schools serving the City
    South Gate on Firestone Boulevard near Alameda Street,             of South Gate, including Faith Christian Academy,
    which currently serves approximately 5,000 students.               Redeemer Lutheran, and St. Helen Elementary. In ad-
    This 50,000 square foot facility contains 24 classrooms,           dition, most of the pre-schools in the City are private.
    a bookstore, a library and student support services. The           (The exceptions are the Paramount Unified School
    ELAC is in escrow to purchase the former Firestone Plant           District’s Hollydale Preschool located in South Gate
    (across the street from their current facility) for conver-        and the LAUSD’s Stanford Primary Center.) Private
    sion into a new campus that would serve up to 30,000               pre-schools include the Kids Forum Preschool, Lol-
    students, and include student housing and additional               lypop Lane Preschool and Kindergarten, and Ruiz and
    support facilities. As part of this expansion the ELAC             Rivera Family Child Care.
    may transition their existing 50,000 square foot facil-
    ity into a technology center. Funding and resources
    allocated to public colleges are determined by the State
    based on population projections and other factors.
    Table PF 1: LAUSD Facilities in South Gate
                  School                               Location                        Year Built            Enrollment
     Primary Centers
     Stanford Primary Center                        3020 Illinois Ave.                    2004                     205
     Elementary Schools
     ES #4 (New School)                           Firestone & Dorothy                     2009               775 (capacity)
     ES #9 (New School)                     Firestone & Long Beach Blvd.                  2010               650 (capacity)
     Bryson Avenue                                4470 Missouri Ave.                      1931                     995
     Independence                                  8435 Victoria Ave.                     1997                     715
     Liberty Boulevard                             2728 Liberty Blvd.                     1932                     762
     Madison Avenue                               9820 Madison Ave.                       2005                     568
     Montara Avenue                              10018 Montara Ave.                       1998                     611
     San Gabriel Avenue                         8628 San Gabriel Ave.                     1932                     835
     San Miguel Avenue                           9801 San Miguel Ave.                     1989                     933
     Stanford Avenue                                2833 Illinois Ave.                    1924                     992
     State Street                                 3211 Santa Ana St.                      1932                    1,090
     Tweedy Boulevard                             9724 Pinehurst Ave.                     1931                     677
     Victoria Avenue                              3320 Missouri Ave.                      1925                     797
     Middle Schools
     International Studies                         2560 Tweedy Blvd.                      2004                     550
       Learning Center
     Southeast Middle School                       2560 Tweedy Blvd.                      2004                    1,367
     South Gate Middle School                     4100 Firestone Blvd.                    1941                    2,669
     New Middle School                             Tweedy & Atlantic                       Tbd                     Tbd
     High Schools
     New High School                               Tweedy & Atlantic                      2011                     Tbd
     South Gate High School                       3351 Firestone Blvd.                    1932                    3,214
     Southeast High School                         2720 Tweedy Blvd.                      2005                    2,812
     Other
     South Gate Adult School                      2525 Firestone Blvd.                     N/A                    3,625
     Odyssey High (Continuation)                  8693 Dearborn Ave.                      1973                     137
316 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goals, Objectives                                                     Objective PF 3.2:
                                                                      Assist educational providers in the
and Policies                                                          location and design of school sites to
                                                                      prevent negative impacts on the health,
Goal PF 3:                                                            safety and welfare of students and
Enhance the community with                                            nearby residents.
an educational infrastructure                                         Policies
that offers diverse, high-quality                                     P.1 The City will pursue and enhance mutually beneficial joint use
                                                                           agreements with the LAUSD to improve public access to the rec-
educational opportunities to                                               reational facilities, libraries and other facilities on its campuses.   
residents of all ages, and en-                                        P.2	 The City will create and enhance safe walking and cycling
hances community                                                           routes to schools through its transportation, land use, and de-
                                                                           sign decisions. This will improve safety, increase physical activity
                                                                           among youth, and reduce traffic congestion around schools.   
Objective PF 3.1:                                                     P.3	 The City will work with the LAUSD to create a mixed use
Ensure all residents have access to                                        campus for the proposed high and middle schools on its
                                                                           property on Tweedy Boulevard, east of Atlantic Boulevard.
high-quality education.
                                                                      P.4	 The City and the ELAC will cooperate on the renovation and
Policies                                                                   development of facilities to focus on energy efficiency and
                                                                           reduction of greenhouse gases.
P.1	 The City will work with the LAUSD and other school districts
      to provide a high level of public education to all residents in
      South Gate and to address issues of mutual concern.             Objective PF 3.3:
P.2	 The City will work with the LAUSD to anticipate potential        Support and enhance development of
      increases in the City’s population and the impact on school     the East Los Angeles Community College
      enrollment.  
                                                                      (ELAC) as an important community asset,
P.3	 The City will seek alternative institutional arrangements
      should student test scores continue to fall and drop-out rates
                                                                      while reducing its traffic impacts.
      continue to rise.
                                                                      Policies
P.4 	 Prior to issuance of any certificates of occupancy, the City
      will require project applicants to submit evidence that legally P.1	 The City will work with the ELAC to plan the expansion of the
      required school-related development fees have been paid per          campus in a way that meets the vision for the Community
      the current mitigation program established by the applicable         College District contained in the Community Design Element.
      school district.                                                P.2	 The City will support the continued use and expansion of
                                                                           the ELAC, recognizing the positive role that the college
                                                                           plays in the City.  
                                                                      P.3	 The City will maintain a collaborative relationship with the
                                                                           Los Angeles Community College District and the adminis-
                                                                           trators in the ELAC. The City will work with the College to
                                                                           maximize the use of college services and facilities by the
                                                                           public, particularly for young people, families and children.  
                                                                      P.4	 The City will work with the Los Angeles Community College
                                                                           District to rename the East Los Angeles Community College
                                                                           to “South Gate Community College.”
                                                                        Public Facilities and Services Element 317

    Objective PF 3.4:
    Enrich residents’ lives by encouraging and
                                                                       Implementation Actions
    enabling lifelong learning.                                        Action PF 3:
                                                                       Pursue Safe Routes to School grant funding.
    Policies
                                                                       In order to make South Gate streets safer for chil-
    P.1	 The City should reach out to, coordinate and develop partner- dren to travel on foot or by bicycle, the Community
         ships with institutions and educators to advance lifelong
                                                                       Development Department will actively seek out and
         learning in the City.   
                                                                       pursue grant funding for improved access, traffic and
    P.2	 The City should consider opportunities for lifelong learning
                                                                       pedestrian management, and safe routes to school.
         when making its land use, transportation, open space and
         design decisions.   
    P.3	 The City should provide easy public access to information
         about learning opportunities sponsored by the City or by
         other groups or organizations.   
    P.4	 The City should seek to overcome barriers to lifelong learn-
         ing, especially among underserved populations.   
    P.5	 The City should work with existing agencies, educators and
         businesses to expand “school-to-work” programs to assist
         non-college bound students to enter the workforce directly
         from high school.  
                                                                       South Gate should pursue safe routes to schools fund-
                                                                       ing to increase safety around schools in the City.
    A number of new schools, such as the one pictured
    above, were recently constructed in South Gate by the
    LAUSD. Over the horizon of the General Plan, several
    additional new schools are planned for the City.
318 South Gate General Plan 2035

                             SOLID WASTE AND
                             RECYCLING
                             Existing Conditions
                             This section describes the existing solid waste and recycling services
                             available to South Gate residents and businesses. These are under the
                             supervision of the Department of Public Works.
                             The City has a Refuse Collection and Recycling Services Franchise Agree-
                             ment with USA Waste of California, Inc., (Waste Management) that ex-
The City diverted 47 percent pires in 2017. A majority of solid waste is disposed at either Class III land-
                             fills (municipal solid waste facilities), which are facilities for non-hazardous
of its solid waste in 2002.
                             household waste, or unclassified (inert) landfills that accept materials such
                             as soil, concrete, asphalt, and other construction and demolition debris.
                             Waste Management operates a transfer station in South Gate and uses
                             specific landfills for residential and commercial/industrial wastes: Com-
                             merce Refuse-To-Energy Facility, Bradley Landfill, Downtown Diversions,
                             Inc., El Sobrante Landfill, Nu-Way Live Oak Reclamation, Inc., Southeast
                             Recovery Resource Facility City of Long Beach-Energy Recovery Bureau,
                             and Synagro Regional Composting Facility.
                             The City of South Gate is a member of the Los Angeles Integrated
                             Waste Management Authority a regional agency, also known as LARA,
                             which is a consortium of 16 cities in Los Angeles County. In 2004, the
                             California Integrated Waste Management Board (CIWMB) approved
                             the formation of LARA as a regional agency whose mission is to assist
                             members in meeting and exceeding the 50% waste diversion man-
                             dates of State Assembly Bill 939.
                             The City has approved a number of private sector businesses that
                             recycle materials including Interior Removal Specialists, Pacific Coast
                             Metals, Hanson Aggregates, Inc., and the Sanitation Districts South
                             Gate Transfer Station.
                             The City has several programs to divert solid waste from landfills
                             including composting, facility recovery, policy incentives, household
                             hazardous waste management, and public education about recycling
                             and waste reduction. The City diverted 47 percent of its solid waste in
                             2002 and LARA, in which the City is a member, had a diversion rate of
                             59 percent in 2006.
                                                    Public Facilities and Services Element 319
    Goals, Objectives                                                      Implementation Actions
    and Policies                                                           Action PF 4:
                                                                           Implement and update the Recycling and
    Goal PF 4:                                                             Diversion Plan.
    A reduction in the volume of solid                                     The Public Works Department shall implement and
                                                                           update the Recycling and Diversion Plan to meet the
    waste generated by the City                                            waste reduction targets identified in the above poli-
                                                                           cies. The plan currently provides recycling programs
    Objective PF 4.1:                                                      such as recycling electronic waste, recycling of bever-
    Reduce the volume of solid waste                                       age containers, a used oil program and industrial
    generated in South Gate through                                        recycling. The plan also encourages collecting and
    recycling and resource conservation.                                   composting green waste and food scraps.
    Policies                                                               Action PF 5:
    P.1	 The City will meet or exceed the State’s goal of diverting 50     Expand public education programs about
         percent of all solid waste from landfills by 2010 and adjust
         the percentage of diversion as mandated by the State.             waste reduction and diversion strategies.
                                                                           The Public Works Department shall designate an
    P.2	 The City will encourage the use of recycled paper and other
         recycled materials in all City operations.                        individual or individuals to coordinate with State and
                                                                           County agencies and the City’s franchise waste hauler
    P.3	 The City will encourage local businesses to expand their
         recycling efforts, buy and use recycled products and encour-      to expand public education programs about waste
         age the use of reduction packaging of products manufac-           reduction and diversion strategies, including recycling
         tured in the City.                                                and semiannual residential bulky item removal.
    P.4	 Public and private buildings will be designed or improved
         with on-site storage facilities for recycled materials.
    P.5	 The City should expand its special waste collection and
         recycling services including bulk trash items, electronic waste,
         household hazardous waste, food scraps, green waste and
         other programs as necessary.
    P.6	 The City will proactively advertise it bulk item trash collection
         service to discourage illegal dumping and improve the visual
         appearance of the City.
    P.7	 Disposal, salvage and reuse of construction and demoli-
         tion materials and debris are required for all construction
         projects in the City.
320 South Gate General Plan 2035

                                  WATER SERVICE
                                  Existing Conditions
                                  Water Service Area
                                  The City of South Gate operates a municipal water utility (Utility) located
                                  in an adjudicated water basin (the Court retains jurisdiction to assure a
                                  balanced Central Basin aquifer through a Judgment awarding ground-
The City of South Gate uses       water pumping rights to water producers and the Court appointed
                                  Watermaster – the Department of Water Resources – assists the Court
groundwater from the City wells   in the administration and enforcement of the Judgment). The Utility has
                                  annual pumping rights of 11,183 acre-feet of water (one foot of water
as its primary source. Water gen- covering a surface area of one acre, or 325,851 gallons). The City man-
                                  ages and operates wells, conduits, pipes, fire hydrants, and reservoirs.
erated from wells is chlorinated
                                  The water system in South Gate is regulated through federal law, state
                                  law, the South Gate Municipal Code, and court decisions. The exception
and distributed to City customers
                                  is the Hollydale area which is served by Golden State Water Company,
or stored in reservoirs.          an investor-owned water utility. The City has a total of 16,218 metered
                                  connections. Seventy-six percent of water is used by residential users, ten
                                  percent commercial, seven percent industrial, three percent public/insti-
                                  tutional, and three percent other users.
                                  Water Supply
                                  The City of South Gate uses groundwater from the City wells as its
                                  primary source. Water generated from wells is chlorinated and distrib-
                                  uted to City customers or stored in reservoirs. The total capacity of
                                  both active and stand-by wells is 32.97 million gallons per day (MGD),
                                  or 101.19 acre-feet per day. This represents a surplus over the City’s
                                  average daily demand of 9.32 MGD, and the City’s maximum daily de-
                                  mand of 16.78 MGD. Because the total capacity of these existing wells
                                  exceeds maximum daily demand, additional wells are not required.
                                  However, reservoir storage capacity needs to be improved and addi-
                                  tional reservoirs or storage capacity needs to be developed.
                                  In addition to its own sources, the City also has agreements to pur-
                                  chase water from other agencies including the Metropolitan Water
                                  District of Southern California (MWD), the City of Downey and the
                                  Golden State Water Company. These secondary sources are generally
                                  for emergencies only, and the City has not used purchased water dur-
                                                       Public Facilities and Services Element 321

    ing the last ten years. The City is allowed to pump     Approximately 24 miles of main lines consist of 4-inch
    11,183 acre-feet per year, and has leased water rights  unlined pipes which are gradually being replaced with
    of about 2,000 acre-feet per year to other agencies     6-inch ductile iron pipes. Approximately 8 miles of
    from 1991 through 2001. The City is working with        piping replacement work has been completed.
    other agencies to develop a “conjunctive use” pro-
    gram (water storage in the underground aquifer) and
                                                            Water Recycling
    may be able to convert unused water to underground
    water storage. This plan requires cooperation with      Water recycling is the reuse of treated wastewater for
    other water purveyors as well as court approval.        non-potable (non-drinking) purposes, including indus-
                                                            trial uses and irrigation for public landscaping, such as
                                                            medians, parks and golf courses. Using recycled water
    Water Facilities                                        can increase the availability of potable water supplies.
    The City of South Gate’s water system consists of 145
                                                            The City of South Gate does not own or operate any
    miles of main lines, fourteen groundwater wells (11
                                                            water recycling facilities. The City purchases recycled
    of which are active), and 13.1 million gallons of water
                                                            water from the Central Basin Municipal Water District
    storage capacity. This storage includes two elevated
                                                            (CBMWD), which is offered to industrial users at a
    tanks, four ground level tanks, and one underground
                                                            15 percent discount. CBMWD obtains recycled water
    concrete storage tank. Based on regulatory, fire flow
                                                            from the San Jose Creek Water Reclamation Plant
    and emergency requirements, the City should have
                                                            in Whittier and the Los Coyotes Water Reclamation
    total storage capacity of 26.9 million gallons. There-
                                                            Plant in Cerritos, which are owned and operated by
    fore, the City currently has a storage deficit of 13.8
                                                            the Sanitation District of Los Angeles County.
    million gallons. To respond to this need, the City is
    planning the development of two reservoirs.             From 1996 to 2005, South Gate purchased 1,707 acre
                                                            feet of recycled water from the CBMWD. Over that
    The distribution system consists mostly of cement-
                                                            period the amount of recycled water purchased in a
    lined cast iron piping and about 10 percent asbestos-
                                                            given year has ranged from 144 acre feet in fiscal year
    cement pipes. There are also some steel and polyvinyl-
                                                            1995-96 to 213 acre feet in fiscal year 2004-05. The
    chloride (PVC) and ductile iron pipes in the system.
                                                            City itself uses approximately 250 acre feet per year
                                                            of recycled water for irrigation in Hollydale Park and
                                                            Circle Park. There are also two carwash facilities in the
                                                            City that recycle their own water. CBWMD operates
                                                            a recycled water pipeline on Atlantic Avenue that has
                                                            enough capacity to provide for most of the industrial
                                                            uses in that area, but despite the reduced cost the
                                                            potential customers have not been motivated to use
                                                            this resource. CBMWD may extend additional recycled
                                                            water pipeline to the Westside of the City.
    New water storage facilities will need to be construct-
    ed in the City to mitigate the current storage deficit.
322 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goals, Objectives and                                                 P.3	 Recycled and reclaimed water should be used in City-owned
                                                                           parks, plazas, landscaped medians and other public spaces
                                                                           and in privately-owned open spaces, where feasible.
Policies                                                              P.4	 The City should encourage potential customers for reclaimed
                                                                           or recycled water by providing and/or publicizing incentives
Goal PF 5:                                                                 for using reclaimed or recycled water instead of potable water,
                                                                           where appropriate.
A water system that meets the                                         P.5	 The City will consider requiring new non-residential and
projected demand for all users and                                         multi-family projects with 25 or more units to be built in such
                                                                           a way that they are able to use reclaimed water whenever it
seeks ways to reduce demand                                                becomes available in the future.
                                                                      P.6	 The City will promote water conservation in its own opera-
Objective PF 5.1:                                                          tions and through public education, incentive programs, and
                                                                           standards for new and retrofitted development. The City will
Ensure that a reliable water supply can                                    work with other agencies such as the Central Basin Municipal
be provided within the City’s service area,                                Water District, the Water Replenishment District, the Metro-
                                                                           politan Water District and Golden State Water Company to
while remaining sensitive to the climate.                                  promote water conservation.
Policies                                                              P.7	 New development projects should seek opportunities for
                                                                           rainwater capture and reuse.
P.1	 The City will maintain water storage, distribution and treat-
     ment infrastructure in good working condition in order to        P.8	 The City will promote water conservation through site design,
     supply domestic water to all users with adequate quantities,          use of efficient systems, xeriscape and other techniques.
     flow and pressure.                                               P.9	 New City facilities should use xeriscape, native plant species,
P.2	 The City will promote water conservation by implementing              low flow plumbing and other water conserving techniques, to
     the recommendations of the Urban Water Management Plan.               the greatest extent feasible.
P.3	 The City will support the efforts of the Central Basin Municipal
     Water District to expand the use of recycled water in the City.  Objective PF 5.3:
P.4	 Water distribution infrastructure will be replaced as needed     Promote coordination
     to improve water delivery and fire flow as well as to maintain   between land use planning and water
     healthy and safe drinking water for all residents and busi-
     nesses.  To the extent feasible, the replacement should be
                                                                      facilities and service.
     concurrent with major infrastructure or development projects
     within the City.                                                 Policies
                                                                      P.1	 The City will be responsible for replacing new distribution
Objective PF 5.2:                                                          water lines, as necessary, to meet future needs. Individual
                                                                           development projects will be responsible for the construction
Promote water conservation and increase                                    of all necessary on-site water improvements and connecting
the use of reclaimed and recycled water.                                   to the water mains.
                                                                      P.2	 The City will collect water impact fees for new development.
Policies
                                                                      P.3	 The availability of sufficient, reliable water will be taken into
P.1	 The City will seek to build an integrated, extensive system of        account when considering the approval of new development.
     reclaimed and recycled water.
                                                                      P.4	 The City will manage energy use for all water facilities and
P.2	 As existing water distribution infrastructure is replaced,            upgrade water system pumps, motors and other devices to
     the City should consider adding recycled water distribution           improve energy efficiency to reduce costs.
     systems to minimize construction costs.
                                                                        Public Facilities and Services Element 323

    Implementation Actions                                 Action PF 11:
                                                           Explore an infrastructure impact fee.
    Action PF 6:                                           In order that new development pay its share of the
    Amend the Building Code to allow                       costs of water supply infrastructure, the Public Works
                                                           Department will work in coordination with the Com-
    water-conserving technologies.
                                                           munity Development Department to explore the
    Amend the Building Code to allow for and encourage
                                                           creation of an infrastructure impact fee.
    a variety of water-conserving technologies such as:
    low flow and dual-flush toilets, waterless urinals, as
    well as water reuse technologies such as: cisterns for Action PF 12:
    rainwater capture, along with any other water conser-  Explore an energy efficiency evaluation
    vation technologies deemed feasible.                   program for the water system.
                                                           In order to improve energy efficiency and reduce
    Action PF 7:                                           emission of greenhouse gases, the City will create a
    Update the Urban Water Management Plan.                program to evaluate current energy consumption of
    The Public Works Department will make it a priority to the water system and to improve efficiencies through-
    update the Urban Water Management Plan to make it      out the system.
    consistent with the General Plan.
    Action PF 8:
    Update the Water Master Plan.
    The Public Works Department will make it a priority to
    update the Water Master Plan to make it consistent
    with the General Plan.
    Action PF 9:
    Replace the existing above-ground
    storage tanks.
    The Public Works Department will replace the existing
    above-ground storage tanks with new below-grade
    tanks to provide more open space for parks or for      The use of recycled water for activities such as irriga-
    development of above-ground parking facilities when    tion of parks and open spaces is a component of the
    financially feasible.                                  City’s water conservation efforts.
    Action PF 10:
    Adopt the Reclaimed Water Usage Plan.
    The Public Works Department will create a long-term
    plan on the potential uses of reclaimed water and the
    locations for reclaimed water infrastructure.
324 South Gate General Plan 2035

                              WASTEWATER
                              Existing Conditions
                              The City’s sanitary sewer collection system is managed by the City’s Public
                              Works Department. The collection system consists of about 116 miles of grav-
The sewer transportation      ity sewer lines, no pump/lift stations, and about 100 sewer siphons within the
                              system. Approximately 99 percent of flows from local sewers discharge into
system consists of 98 miles   the County Sanitation Districts’ (LACSD’s) facilities for transportation, treat-
                              ment, and disposal. The remaining one percent of total sewage generated
(84%) of unreinforced con-    within the City passes into the City of Paramount system and is then dis-
                              charged into CSD facilities. There are 21 LACSD trunk lines that run through
crete pipe and 18 miles of    various portions of the City. These trunks convey sewage from South Gate
                              and other communities to the Joint Water Pollution Control Plant in Carson.
sewer is vitrified clay pipe.
                              The sewer transportation system consists of 98 miles (84%) of unreinforced
                              concrete pipe and 18 miles of vitrified clay pipe. In 2002 and 2003, concrete
                              sewer facilities were repaired and re-lined and in 2008 the vitrified clay pipe
                              portion of the system was checked and repaired. As deteriorated lines are
                              discovered during preventive maintenance these lines are either immediately
                              repaired by Public Works or emergency contractors are retained to repair lines.
                              Goals, Objectives and Policies
                              Goal PF 6:
                              A wastewater system that is adequate to
                              protect the health and safety of all South Gate
                              residents, businesses and institutions
                              Objective PF 6.1:
                              Provide high-quality wastewater services to residents and
                              ensure enforcement of wastewater regulations.
                              Policies
                              P.1	 The City will maintain wastewater infrastructure in good condition.  
                              P.2	 The approval of new development will be conditional on the availability of adequate,
                                   long-term capacity of wastewater treatment, conveyance and disposal sufficient to
                                   service the proposed project.
                              P.3	 The City will follow current environmental best practices in the treatment of wastewater.
                                                           Public Facilities and Services Element 325

    P.4	 The City will continue to work with the Los Angeles County
         Sanitation District to ensure the use of Best Management
         Practices in the City.
                                                                         Implementation Actions
                                                                         Action PF 13:
    Objective PF 6.2:                                                    Update the Sewer Master Plan.
    Require steps to ensure sufficient waste-                            The Public Works Department will make it a priority
    water capacity for new development.                                  to update the Sewer Master Plan to make it consis-
                                                                         tent with the General Plan.
    Policies
    P.1	 Prior to issuance of a wastewater permit for any future de-     Action PF 14:
         velopment project the City will require that project applicants Evaluate the capacity of the existing
         pay applicable connection and or user fees to the the County
         sanitation Districts of Los Angeles County.                     wastewater collection system.
                                                                         Upon adoption of the General Plan, the City should
    P.2	 Prior to issuance of a building permit for any future devel-
         opment project the City will require that project applicants    initiate an evaluation of the existing capacity of the
         prepare and submit for review an engineering study to de-       wastewater collection system in collaboration with the
         termine the adequacy of the sewer systems to accommodate        Los Angeles County Sanitation District to determine if
         the proposed project.
                                                                         the existing wastewater collection systems are ade-
    P.3	 Prior to issuance of a building permit for any future devel-    quate to meet existing and anticipated future demand.
         opment project the City will require that project applicants
         provide evidence that the County Sanitation District of Los
         Angeles County has sufficient wastewater transmission and       Action PF 15:
         treatment plant capacity to accept sewage flows from build-
         ings for which building permits are requested.                  Explore an infrastructure impact fee.
                                                                         In order that, new development pay its share of the
                                                                         costs of wastewater infrastructure, the Public Works
                                                                         Department will work in coordination with the
                                                                         Community Development Department to explore an
                                                                         Infrastructure Impact Fee.
326 South Gate General Plan 2035
                                STORMWATER
                                Existing Conditions
                                The main purpose of a storm drainage system is to control stormwa-
                                ter runoff in order to prevent flood damage, reduce inconvenience
                                from excessive flows and to minimize pollution to service, groundwa-
                                ter and the ocean.
The LACPD storm drain system    South Gate’s stormwater system is managed by the City’s Department
                                of Public Works and the Los Angeles County Department of Public
generally collects water from   Works (LACDPW). Most stormwater drains through street curb and
                                gutters to LACDPW storm drains, but there are a limited number of
streets, pipelines and Caltrans circular storm drains maintained by the City. The LACPD storm drain
                                system generally collects water from streets, pipelines and Caltrans
drains and either transports it drains and either transports it south towards Paramount and directly
                                into the Los Angeles River or south and west towards Lynwood, where
south towards Paramount and     the runoff discharges into Compton Creek and ultimately the Los An-
                                geles River further downstream.
directly into the Los Angeles
                                South Gate is part of the lower Los Angeles River Drainage basin, and
River or south and west towards is a co-permittee with the County of Los Angeles in a five-year Na-
                                tional Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES). As part
Lynwood, where the runoff       of compliance with this Permit, the 84 co-permittees of Los Angeles
                                County developed a post-construction development mitigation plan.
discharges into Compton Creek   This plan outlines best management practices which must be incor-
                                porated into design plans for certain types of development, including:
and ultimately the Los Angeles  ten or more units (including single family homes, multi-family homes,
                                condominiums and apartments), automotive service facilities, restau-
River further downstream.
                                rants, one acre or more square-feet of impervious surface in industrial/
                                commercial development, retail gasoline outlets, and parking lots of
                                5,000 square feet or more of surface area or with 25 or more parking
                                spaces. Local jurisdictions, such as South Gate, are required to adopt
                                the Best Managements Practices contained in the post-construction
                                development mitigation plan. Local jurisdictions can adopt additional
                                Best Management Practices, but they must be at least as stringent as
                                those contained in the Los Angeles County post-construction develop-
                                ment mitigation plan.
                                                    Public Facilities and Services Element 327

    Goals, Objectives and                                                Objective PF 7.2:
                                                                         Encourage coordination between land use
    Policies                                                             planning, site design and stormwater control.
    Goal PF 7:                                                           Policies
                                                                         P.1	 The City will comply with the Best Management Practices
    To collect, store and dispose of                                          contained in the Los Angeles County Standard Urban Storm-
                                                                              water Mitigation Plan (SUSMP).
    stormwater in a way that is safe,
                                                                         P.2	 The City will seek to reduce the amount of stormwater that
    sanitary, and environmentally                                             leaves the City, and will seek to improve the quality of storm-
                                                                              water that does leave the City. 	
    acceptable                                                           P.3	 Where feasible, new development projects should handle all
                                                                              stormwater on site.  Exceptions may be made where the de-
    Objective PF 7.1:                                                         sign of such on-site stormwater faciliites will have a negative
                                                                              impact on the urban quality of the development.
    Maintain stormwater collection infrastruc-
    ture in good condition.                                              P.4	 A watershed management approach should be used in ad-
                                                                              dressing, planning and managing stormwater issues.
    Policies                                                             P.5	 Existing property owners will be encouraged to reduce
                                                                              stormwater runoff by modifying their properties and reducing
    P.1	 Stormwater infrastructure will be maintained in good condition.      impermeable surfaces.
    P.2	 The City should provide sufficient funds to maintain necessary  P.6	 Parking lots should be paved with permeable materials,
         stormwater infrastructure.                                           whenever possible.
    P.3	 The City’s stormwater infrastructure will comply with the
         National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Act
         and all other legal and environmental requirements.
                                                                         Implementation Actions
                                                                         Action PF 16:
                                                                         Revise the Building Code to allow technol-
                                                                         ogies that reduce stormwater runoff.
                                                                         The Community Development Department will revise
                                                                         the Building Code to allow for new and innovative tech-
                                                                         niques that reduce the quantity and improve the quality
                                                                         of stormwater runoff. Such techniques could include
                                                                         green roofs, vegetative swales, detention and infiltration
                                                                         basins, permeable paving and other techniques.
    Innovative stormwater management techniques, such
    as this rain garden built into the street, will help the
    City reduce overall stormwater rates.
328 South Gate General Plan 2035

9
  Noise Element
    INTRODUCTION
    The Noise Element examines noise sources in the City with a view
    toward indentifying and appraising the potential for noise conflicts and
    problems and identifies ways to reduce existing and potential noise
    impacts. The Element addresses noise that affects the community
    at large, rather than noise associated with site-specific conditions. It
    contains policies and actions to achieve and maintain noise levels com-
    patible with various types of land uses. The actions in this Element do
    address effective strategies to reduce and limit community exposure to
    loud noise sources. The City’s Noise Ordinance (Municipal Code Chap-
    ter 11.29) prohibits such noise generated within the City and attempts
    to minimize noise levels and mitigate the effects of noise to provide a
    safe and healthy living environment.
    This Element includes the following sections:
    •	 Introduction
    •	 Statutory Requirements
    •	 Understanding Noise and How It Affects Us
    •	 Health Effects of Noise
    •	 Noise Definitions
    •	 Noise Regulations
    •	 Existing Noise Conditions
    •	 Future Noise Conditions
    •	 Key Issues and Challenges
    •	 Key Concepts of the Noise Element
    •	 Goals, Objectives and Policies
    •	 Implementation Actions
    The State of California and the City of South Gate have adopted legis-
    lation and plans intended to minimize exposure of people to loud noise
    sources. These include:
    •	 California Noise Insulation Standards (Title 24 of the Health and Safety Code)
    •	 California Multi-Family Residential Insulation Standards (Title 25, Section 1092 of the
       California Code of Regulations)
    •	 City of South Gate Noise Ordinance (Municipal Code Chapter 11.29, Noise Emissions)
330 South Gate General Plan 2035

  STATUTORY
  REQUIREMENTS
  The State of California, in recognition of the relationship between
  noise and noise-sensitive uses and the public health concerns associat-
  ed with noise, has adopted very specific guidelines for Noise Elements
  in both the Government Code (Section 65302[f]) and the Health and
  Safety Code (Section 46050.1). These guidelines include a requirement
  for defining projected future noise conditions in the form of noise
  exposure contours, which present information in a manner similar to
  topographic map contours. This noise information serves as the basis
  for developing guidelines for identifying compatible land uses, identify-
  ing the proper distribution of land uses in the General Plan Community
  Design Element, and establishing appropriate development standards.
  Specifically, Government Code Section 65302(f) requires that a Gen-
  eral Plan include:
           “... a noise element which shall identify and appraise
           noise problems in the community. The Noise Element
           shall recognize the guidelines established by the Office
           of Noise Control in the State Department of Health
           Services and shall analyze and quantify…current and
           projected noise levels for all of the following sources:
           (1) highways and freeways; (2) primary arterials and
           major local streets; (3) passenger and freight on-line
           railroad operations and ground rapid transit systems;
           (4) commercial, general aviation, heliport, and military
           airport operations, aircraft overflights, jet engine test
           stands, and all other ground facilities and mainte-
           nance functions related to airport operation; (5) local
           industrial plants, including but not limited to, railroad
           classification yards; (6) other ground stationary noise
           sources identified by local agencies as contributing to
           the community noise environment.”
                                                         Noise Element 331

    UNDERSTANDING
    NOISE AND HOW IT
    AFFECTS US
    Noise often is defined as annoying or unwanted sound. Health studies
    have shown that excessive noise can cause adverse psychological or
    physiological effects on human beings.
    Defining noise problems and establishing a regulatory scheme to deal
    with noise that is both fair and effective requires an understanding of
    some of the basic characteristics of sound and how it affects people
    and their activities. Some of the most important characteristics are
    outlined in Table N-1, which also provides general comments about
    how these characteristics affect people. Table N-2 describes common
    noise sources for indoor and outdoor peak noise levels.
    While sound levels can be easily measured, the variability in subjective and
    physical responses to sound complicates the analysis of its impact on people.
    Sound is created when an object vibrates and radiates part of its energy as
    acoustic pressure waves through a medium such as air, water or a solid. The
    ear, the hearing mechanism of humans and most animals, receives these
    sound pressure waves and converts them to neurological impulses which
    are transmitted to the brain for interpretation. The interpretation by the
    auditory system and the brain depends on the characteristics of the sound
    and on the characteristics of the person hearing it. Scientists and engineers
    use two parameters to technically describe the sound environment at any
    instant in time: amplitude (or sound power) and frequency (or pitch). These
    two characteristics affect the way people respond to sound.
    Amplitude of a sound is a measure of the pressure or force that a
    sound can exert. Subjectively, we say a sound is louder if it has a
    greater amplitude than another sound. Thus, the amplitude of sounds
    can be described either in measurable magnitude or in relative terms
    of loudness. Physically, sound pressure is measured in units of deci-
    bels (dB). The sound pressure scale is based on the ratio of the sound
    energy to a reference pressure which is approximately the least sound
    pressure that people can perceive. Zero dB means the lowest level
    normally audible, but does not mean zero sound pressure.
332 South Gate General Plan 2035
Frequency of a sound is expressed in units of cycles per           cal energy at frequencies above the range of human
second or Hertz (Hz), referring to the number of times             hearing is referred to as ultrasonic, or ultrasound. At
per second the acoustic pressure wave peaks. Subjec-               frequencies below the range of human hearing, acous-
tively, a sound that has more cycles per second than               tical energy is referred to as infrasonic, or infrasound
another is higher pitched. The human hearing system                and is experienced as vibration.
is not equally sensitive to sound at all frequencies and
                                                                   Noise-Sensitive Land Uses. The term “noise-sensitive
is most sensitive to sounds in the frequency range of
                                                                   land uses” refers to land uses that are particularly sensi-
human speech, from four hundred to two thousand
                                                                   tive to noise at levels commonly found in the urban
cycles per second. The most sensitive people can hear
                                                                   environment. This category includes residential uses,
sounds ranging from a little below twenty Hz to some-
                                                                   schools, hospitals, churches, outdoor speculative sports
what above twenty thousand Hz. As people age, their
                                                                   facilities, performing arts facilities and hotels and motels.
sensitivity to high frequencies tends to fall. Acousti-
 TABLE N-1: CHARACTERISTICS OF NOISE
 Noise Characteristic     What Is Measured and Units                   Effects on People and Human Activities
                          of Measurements
 Loudness or Sound        Energy content of sound waves in the         Noise distracts attention from tasks, interferes with
 Pressure                 air. Unweighted sound pressure level in      verbal communication and prevents or disturbs sleep.
                          decibels (dB).                               At high levels or for long periods, noise causes tem-
                                                                       porary or permanent hearing loss. At very high levels,
                                                                       noise causes pain. Louder sounds have greater effects,
                                                                       subject to the further considerations below.
 Frequency of Pitch       Frequency (cycles per second, or Hertz (Hz) The human ear is most sensitive to sounds in the range
                          of pressure waves. Frequency distribution of human speech, less sensitive to high or low frequen-
                          by octave or 1/3 octave band. Overall        cies at the same sound energy.
                          sound pressure level weighted by frequen-
                          cy, such as A-weighting (dB(A)).
 Tonal content            Pure tones or energy distribution by octave  High tonal content means identifiable whines or hums,
                          or 1/3 octave frequency band. Special        which can be particularly annoying com-pared to ran-
                          weightings such as Effective Perceived       dom noise of the same sound energy.
                          Noise Level in decibels (EPNDB), or simple
                          penalty weightings for pure tones.
 Information content Judgment that sound includes voice,               Information content draws attention to sounds com-
 (music, voice, sirens, music, etc. No standard measurement            pared to more random noise of the same sound energy.
 etc.)                    scheme or weighting.
 Impact noise             Rapid increase in sound pressure or re-      Impact noise (helicopter rotor blade noise, jackham-
                          petitive impacts. Fast response on sound     mers, etc.) can be more annoying than other noises of
                          meters used to measure impact noise.         the same sound energy.
 Duration of noise        Hourly or other time-averaged energy level   A noise which lasts longer or is constant has more
 events as percentage (Leq) or statistical sound levels identifying    impact than one of the same sound energy that occurs
 of 24-hour or other      the level exceeded a given percentage of     only occasionally or for a short period of time.
 period.                  the time (L10, L50).
 Degree of intrusion      Difference between peak and ambient noise    Individual distinct noise events such as aircraft overflights
 of noise events over levels. Statistical sound levels, peak noise     or loud vehicle pass-by events of a given noise level are
 background noise         levels compared to average or ambient.       more intrusive if they occur in a quiet environment.
 levels
 Time of day              24-hour or annual average level with         People and their activities are generally more sensi-
                          weightings for evening and night noise       tive to noise during the nighttime hours because (1)
                          such as CNEL or Ldn.                         background noise is generally lower, making noise of
                                                                       a given noise level more intrusive and (2) sleep is easily
                                                                       interrupted by noise.
 Importance of noise      Judgment of social value of noise source.    People are generally willing to accept more disturbance
 source                                                                from noise they consider necessary, such as from trash col-
                                                                       lection, emergency vehicle sirens, police helicopters, etc.
                                                                                                           Noise Element 333

    Peak Noise Level (dB(A)                Common Indoor Noise Sources           Common Outdoor Noise Sources
    Greater than 110                       Rock Band
    105-110
    100-105                                                                      Military jet flyover at 1,000 feet
    95-100                                 Inside subway train                   Gas lawn mower at 3 feet
    90-95                                                                        Diesel truck at 50 feet
    85-90                                  Food blender at 3 feet                Trash truck load/compact cycle at 50 feet
    80-85                                  Garbage disposal at 3 feet            Noisy urban daytime
    75-80                                  Shouting at 3 feet
    70-75                                  Vacuum cleaner at 10 feet             Gas lawn mower at 100 feet Car accelerat-
                                                                                 ing at 50 feet
                                           Inside automobile on freeway
    65-70                                  Normal speech at 3 feet               Commercial area
    60-65                                                                        Heavy traffic at 300 feet
    55-60                                  Large business office                 Dogs barking at 150 feet
    50-55                                  Dishwasher in next room               Birds singing at 150 feet
    45-50                                  Small theater, conference room        Quiet urban daytime
                                           (background noise level)
    40-45                                  Small theater, conference room
                                           (background noise level)
    35-40                                                                        Quiet urban nighttime
    30-35                                  Library
    25-30                                  Bedroom at night, ventilation off     Quiet rural nighttime
                                           Concert hall (background noise level)
    20-25
    15-20                                  Broadcast and recording studio
                                           (background noise level)
    10-15
    5-10
    0-5                                    Threshold of hearing
    Source: Caltrans Noise Manual, March, 1980, pg. 1-1-4
334 South Gate General Plan 2035
  HEALTH EFFECTS
  OF NOISE
  Human response to sound is highly individualized. Annoyance is the
  most common issue regarding community noise. The percentage of
  people claiming to be annoyed by noise generally increases with the en-
  vironmental sound level. However, many factors also influence people’s
  response to noise. The factors can include the noise character, variability
  of the sound level, presence of tones or impulses, and time of day of the
  occurrence. Additionally, non-acoustical factors, such as a person’s opin-
  ion of the noise source, ability to adapt to the noise, attitude towards the
  source and those associated with it, and predictability of the noise, all
  influence a person’s response. As such, response to noise varies widely
  from one person to another and with any particular noise, individual
  responses range from “not annoyed” to “highly annoyed.”
  When the noise level of an activity rises above 70 dBA, the chance of
  receiving a complaint is possible, and as the noise level rises, dissatis-
  faction among the public steadily increases. The effects of noise are
  often only transitory, but adverse effects can be cumulative with pro-
  longed or repeated exposure. The effects of noise on the community
  can be organized into six broad categories:
  •	 Noise-induced hearing loss
  •	 Interference with communication
  •	 Effects of noise on sleep
  •	 Effects on performance and behavior
  •	 Extra-auditory health effects
  •	 Annoyance
  Although it often causes discomfort and sometimes pain, noise-in-
  duced hearing loss usually takes years to develop. Noise-induced hear-
  ing loss can impair the quality of life through a reduction in the ability
  to hear important sounds and to communicate with family and friends.
  Hearing loss is one of the most obvious and easily quantified effects of
  excessive exposure to noise. While the loss may be temporary at first,
  it could become permanent after continued exposure. When com-
  bined with hearing loss associated with aging, the amount of hearing
  loss directly caused by the environment is difficult to quantify. Al-
                                                        Noise Element 335

    though the major cause of noise-induced hearing loss     Recent research indicates that more moderate noise
    is occupational, substantial damage can be caused by     levels can produce disruptive after-effects, commonly
    non-occupational sources.                                manifested as a reduced tolerance for frustration,
                                                             increased anxiety, decreased incidence of “helping”
    According to the United States Public Health Service,
                                                             behavior and increased incidence of “hostile” behav-
    nearly ten million of the estimated 21 million Ameri-
                                                             ior. Noise has been implicated in the development or
    cans with hearing impairments owe their losses to
                                                             exacerbation of a variety of health problems, rang-
    noise exposure. Noise can mask important sounds
                                                             ing from hypertension to psychosis. As with other
    and disrupt communication between individuals in a
                                                             categories, quantifying these effects is difficult due to
    variety of settings. This process can cause anything
                                                             the amount of variables that need to be considered in
    from a slight irritation to a serious safety hazard,
                                                             each situation. As a biological stressor, noise can in-
    depending on the circumstance. Noise can disrupt
                                                             fluence the entire physiological system. Most effects
    face-to-face communication and telephone commu-
                                                             seem to be transitory, but with continued exposure
    nication, and the enjoyment of music and television
                                                             some effects have been shown to be chronic in labo-
    in the home. It can also disrupt effective communica-
                                                             ratory animals.
    tion between teachers and pupils in schools, and can
    cause fatigue and vocal strain in those who need to      Annoyance can be viewed as the expression of nega-
    communicate in spite of the noise.                       tive feelings resulting from interference with activities,
                                                             as well as the disruption of one’s peace of mind and
    Interference with communication has proved to be
                                                             the enjoyment of one’s environment. Field evalua-
    one of the most important components of noise-
                                                             tions of community annoyance are useful for predict-
    related annoyance. Noise-induced sleep interference
                                                             ing the consequences of planned actions involving
    is one of the critical components of community an-
                                                             highways, airports, road traffic, railroads, or other
    noyance. Sound level, frequency distribution, dura-
                                                             noise sources. The consequences of noise-induced
    tion, repetition, and variability can make it difficult
                                                             annoyance are privately held dissatisfaction, publicly
    to fall asleep and may cause momentary shifts in the
                                                             expressed complaints to authorities, and potential
    natural sleep pattern, or level of sleep. It can produce
                                                             adverse health effects, as discussed above. In a
    short-term adverse effects on mood changes and
                                                             study conducted by the United States Department of
    job performance, with the possibility of more serious
                                                             Transportation, the effects of annoyance to the com-
    effects on health if it continues over long periods.
                                                             munity were quantified. In areas where noise levels
    Noise can cause adverse effects on task performance
                                                             were consistently above 60 dBA CNEL, approximately
    and behavior at work, and non-occupational and
                                                             nine percent of the community was highly annoyed.
    social settings. These effects are the subject of some
                                                             When levels exceeded 65 dBA CNEL, the percentage
    controversy, since the presence and degree of effects
                                                             rose to 15 percent. Although evidence for the vari-
    depends on a variety of intervening variables. Most
                                                             ous effects of noise have differing levels of certainty,
    research in this area has focused mainly on occupa-
                                                             it is evident that noise can affect human health. Most
    tional settings, where noise levels must be sufficiently
                                                             of the effects are, to a varying degree, stress related.
    high, and the task sufficiently complex for effects on
    performance to occur.
336 South Gate General Plan 2035

   NOISE DEFINITIONS
  Noise often is defined as annoying or unwanted sound. Health studies
  have shown that excessive noise can cause adverse psychological or
  physiological effects on human beings.
  Defining noise problems and establishing a regulatory scheme to deal
  with noise that is both fair and effective requires an understanding of
  some of the basic characteristics of sound and how it affects people
  and their activities. While sound levels can be easily measured, the
  variability in subjective and physical responses to sound complicates
  the analysis of its impact on people. Sound is created when an object
  vibrates and radiates part of its energy as acoustic pressure waves
  through a medium such as air, water, or a solid. The ear, the hear-
  ing mechanism of humans and most animals, receives these sound
  pressure waves and converts them to neurological impulses which are
  transmitted to the brain for interpretation. The interpretation by the
  auditory system and the brain depends on the characteristics of the
  sound and on the characteristics of the person hearing it.
                                                       Noise Element 337
    Standard Unit of
    Measurement
    Sound is described in terms of the loudness (am-                                 a sound ten dBA higher than another is perceived to
    plitude) of the sound and frequency (pitch) of the                               be twice as loud, and 20 dBA higher is perceived to
    sound. The standard unit of measurement of the                                   be four times as loud, and so forth. Everyday sounds
    loudness of sound is the decibel (dB). Since the                                 normally range from 30 dBA (very quiet) to 100 dBA
    human ear is not equally sensitive to sound at all                               (very loud). Examples of various sound levels in differ-
    frequencies, a special frequency-dependent rating                                ent environments are illustrated on Figure N-1.
    scale has been devised to relate noise to human sensi-
                                                                                     Various methods have been developed for evaluating
    tivity. The A-weighted decibel scale (dBA) performs
                                                                                     community noise to account for, among other things:
    this compensation by differentiating among frequen-
    cies in a manner approximating the sensitivity of the                            •	 The variation of noise levels over time;
    human ear.                                                                       •	 The influence of periodic individual loud events; and
    Decibels are based on the logarithmic scale. The                                 •	 The community response to changes in the community noise
                                                                                        environment.
    logarithmic scale compresses the wide range in sound
    pressure levels to a more usable range of numbers in                             Table N-3 lists various methods to measure sound
    a manner similar to the Richter scale used to measure                            over a period of time.
    earthquakes. In terms of human response to noise,
     Table N-3: Noise Descriptors
     Term                                                   Definition
     Decibel (dB)                                           The unit for measuring the volume of sound equal to 10 times the logarithm
                                                            (base 10) of the ratio of the pressure of a measured sound to a reference pressure
                                                            (20 micropascals).
     A-Weighted Decibel (dBA)                               A sound measurement scale that adjusts the pressure of individual frequencies
                                                            according to human sensitivities. The scale accounts for the fact that the region
                                                            of highest sensitivity for the human ear is between 2,000 and 4,000 cycles per
                                                            second (hertz).
     Equivalent Sound Level (Leq)                           The sound level containing the same total energy as a time varying signal over
                                                            a given time period. The Leq is the value that expresses the time averaged total
                                                            energy of a fluctuating sound level.
     Maximum Sound Level (Lmax)                             The highest individual sound level (dBA) occurring over a given time period.
     Minimum Sound Level (Lmin)                             The lowest individual sound level (dBA) occurring over a given time period.
     Community Noise Equivalent Level                       A rating of community noise exposure to all sources of sound that differentiates
     (CNEL)                                                 between daytime, evening, and nighttime noise exposure. These adjustments are
                                                            +5 dBA for the evening, 7:00 PM to 10:00 PM, and +10 dBA for the night, 10:00
                                                            PM to 7:00 AM
     Day/Night Average (Ldn)                                The Ldn is a measure of the 24-hour average noise level at a given location. It
                                                            was adopted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for developing
                                                            criteria for the evaluation of community noise exposure. It is based on a measure
                                                            of the average noise level over a given time period called the Leq. The Ldn is cal-
                                                            culated by averaging the Leq’s for each hour of the day at a given location after
                                                            penalizing the “sleeping hours” (defined as 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM), by 10 dBA to
                                                            account for the increased sensitivity of people to noises that occur at night.
     L01, L10, L50, L90                                     The fast A-weighted noise levels equaled or exceeded by a fluctuating sound level
                                                            for 1 percent, 10 percent, 50 percent and 90 percent of a stated time period.
     Source: Cyril M. Harris, Handbook of Noise Control, 1979.
338 South Gate General Plan 2035

Figure N-1: Examples of various sound levels in different environments
                                                                      Noise Element 339
    Noise Scales                                                      The A-weighted filter significantly de-emphasizes
                                                                      those parts of the total noise that occur at lower fre-
    and Definitions                                                   quencies (those below about 500 Hz) and also those at
                                                                      very high frequencies (above 10,000 Hz) the frequen-
    Sound pressure level is a measure of the sound pres-              cies that we do not hear as well. The filter has very
    sure of a given noise source relative to a standard               little effect, or is nearly “flat,” in the middle range of
    reference value. The reference pressure is typical of             frequencies (between 500 and 10,000 Hz), where our
    the quietest sound that a young person with good                  ears are most sensitive. Because this filter generally
    hearing is able to detect. Sound pressure levels are              matches our ears’ sensitivity, sounds having a higher
    measured in decibels (dB). Decibels are logarithmic               A-weighted sound level are usually judged to be loud-
    quantities, relating the sound pressure level of a noise          er than those with lower A-weighted sound levels, a
    source to the reference pressure level.                           relationship that otherwise might not be true.
    An important characteristic of sound is frequency.
    This is the rate of repetition of sound pressure oscilla-         Community Noise Equivalent
    tions (waves) as they reach our ears; frequency is ex-            Level (CNEL)
    pressed in hertz (Hz). When analyzing the total noise
                                                                      Cumulative noise metrics were developed to assess
    of any source, the frequency components are some-
                                                                      community response to noise. They are useful be-
    times analyzed to determine the relative amounts of
                                                                      cause they attempt to take into account the loudness
    low-frequency, middle-frequency, and high-frequency
                                                                      and duration of the noise, the total number of noise
    noise. This breakdown is important for two reasons:
                                                                      events, and the time of day these events occur in
    •	 Our ear is better equipped to hear mid- and high-range fre-
                                                                      one single-number rating scale. They are designed
       quencies than lower frequencies.  Thus, we find mid- and high-
       frequency noise to be more annoying.  High-frequency noise is  to account for the known health effects of noise on
       also more capable of producing hearing loss.                   people. The community noise equivalent level (CNEL)
    •	 Engineering solutions to a noise problem are different for     is a 24-hour, time-weighted energy-average noise
       different frequency ranges.  Low-frequency noise is generally  level based on dBA that measures the overall noise
       harder to control.
                                                                      during an entire day. Noise that occurs during certain
     The normal frequency range of hearing for most peo-              sensitive time periods is penalized for occurring at
    ple extends from a low frequency of about 20 Hz to a              these times (by adding decibels to its Leq measure-
    high frequency of about 10,000 to 15,000 Hz. People               ment). On the CNEL scale, noise between 7:00 AM
    respond to sound most readily when the predominant                and 10:00 PM is penalized by approximately five dB,
    frequency is in the range of normal conversation, typi-           to account for the greater potential for noise to inter-
    cally around 1,000 to 2,000 Hz. Several filters have              fere during these hours, as well as the typically lower
    been developed that match the sensitivity of our ear              ambient (background) noise levels during these hours.
    and thus help us to judge the relative loudness of                Noise during the night (from 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM)
    various sounds made up of many different frequen-                 is penalized by 10 dB to attempt to account for our
    cies. The so-called “A” filter is the best measure for            higher sensitivity to noise in the nighttime and the
    most environmental noise sources. Sound pressure                  expected further decrease in ambient noise levels that
    levels measured through this filter are referred to as            typically occur in the night.
    A-weighted levels, and are measured in A-weighted
    decibels or (dBA).
340 South Gate General Plan 2035

Equivalent Noise Level (LEQ)                              Other Noise Matrices
The equivalent sound level, abbreviated Leq, is a mea-    As previously mentioned, people tend to respond to
sure of the exposure resulting from the accumulation      changes in sound pressure in a logarithmic manner.
of A-weighted sound levels over a particular time pe-     In general, a 1 dBA change in the sound pressure
riod (e.g., 1 hour, 8 hour, a school day, nighttime, or a levels of a given sound is detectable only under labo-
full 24-hour day). However, because the length of the     ratory conditions. A 3 dBA change in sound pressure
period can be different depending on the time frame       level is considered a detectable difference in most
of interest, the applicable period should always be       situations. A 5 dBA change is readily noticeable and
identified or clearly understood when discussing the      a 10 dBA change is considered a doubling (or halving)
metric. Such durations are often identified through a     of the subjective loudness. It should be noted that a
subscript, for example, “Leq (24)”.                       3 dBA increase or decrease in the average traffic noise
Conceptually, Leq may be thought of as a constant         level is realized by a doubling or halving of the traffic
sound level over the period of interest that contains as  volume; or by about a 7 mile per hour (mph) increase
much sound energy as the actual time-varying sound        or decrease in speed.
level with its normal peaks and valleys. It is important
                                                          For each doubling of distance from a point noise
to realize, however, that the two signals (the constant
                                                          source, the sound level will decrease by 6 dBA. In
one and the time-varying one) would sound very differ-
                                                          other words, if a person is 100 feet from a machine,
ent from each other if compared in real life. Variations
                                                          and moves to 200 feet from that source, sound levels
in the “average” sound level suggested by Leq is not
                                                          will drop approximately 6 dBA. For each doubling of
an arithmetic value, but a logarithmic (“energy-aver-
                                                          distance from a line source, like a roadway, noise lev-
aged”) sound level. Thus, loud events clearly dominate
                                                          els are reduced by 3 to 5 decibels, depending on the
any noise environment described by the metric.
                                                          ground cover between the source and the receiver.
Day Night Average (Ldn)                                   Noise barriers can provide approximately a 5 dBA CNEL
                                                          noise reduction (additional reduction may be provided
Another commonly used noise metric is the day/night       with a barrier of appropriate height, material, location,
average noise level (Ldn). The Ldn is a measure of        and length). A row of buildings provides up to 5 dBA
the 24-hour average noise level at a given location.      CNEL noise reduction with a 1.5 dBA CNEL reduction
It was adopted by the EPA for developing criteria to      for each additional row up to a maximum reduction
evaluate community noise exposure. Ldn is based           of approximately 10 dBA. The exact degree of noise
on a measure of the average noise level over a given      attenuation depends on the nature and orientation of
time period. The Ldn is calculated by averaging the       the structure and intervening barriers.
Leq for each hour of the day at a given location after
penalizing the sleeping hours (from 10:00 PM to 7:00
AM) by 10 dBA to take into account the increased
sensitivity of people to noises that occur at night.
The sound level exceeded over a specified time frame
can be expressed as Ln (i.e., L90, L50, L10, etc.). L50
equals the level exceeded 50 percent of the time;
L10, 10 percent of the time; etc.
                                                                                             Noise Element 341

    NOISE REGULATIONS
    Noise and Land Use
    Compatibility Matrix
    The State of California Office of Planning and Research (OPR) Noise
    Element Guidelines include recommended interior and exterior level
    standards for local jurisdictions to identify and prevent the creation of
    incompatible land uses due to noise. The OPR Guidelines describe the
    compatibility of various land uses with a range of environmental noise
    levels in terms of dBA CNEL (Community Noise Equivalent Level).
    A noise environment of 50 dBA CNEL to 60 dBA CNEL is considered
    to be “normally acceptable” for residential uses. The State indicates
    that locating residential units, parks, and institutions (such as churches,
    schools, libraries, and hospitals) in areas where exterior ambient noise
    levels exceed 65 dBA CNEL is undesirable. The OPR recommendations
    also note that, under certain conditions, more restrictive standards than
    the maximum levels cited may be appropriate. As an example, the
    standards for quiet suburban and rural communities may be reduced
    by 5 to 10 dB to reflect their lower existing outdoor noise levels in
    comparison with urban environments.
    In addition, Title 25, Section 1092 of the California Code of Regula-
    tions, sets forth requirements for the insulation of multiple-family
    residential dwelling units from excessive and potentially harmful noise.
    Whenever multiple-family residential dwelling units are proposed in
    areas with excessive noise exposure, the developer must incorporate
    construction features into the building’s design that reduce interior
    noise levels to 45 dBA CNEL.
    Table N-4 illustrates the State guidelines established by the State De-
    partment of Health Services for acceptable noise levels for each county
    and city. These standards and criteria are incorporated into the land use
    planning process to reduce future noise and land use incompatibilities.
    This table is the primary tool that allows the City to ensure integrated
    planning for compatibility between land uses and outdoor noise.
342 South Gate General Plan 2035

 Table N-4: Noise and Land Use Compatibility Matrix
 Land Use Category                                                                      Community Noise Exposure (Ldn or CNEL, dBA)
                                                                                    Normally         Conditionally        Normally               Clearly
                                                                                   Acceptable         Acceptable Unacceptable               Unacceptable
 Residential - Low Density, Single-Family, Duplex,
                                                                                      50 - 60            55 - 70             70-75                 75-85
 Mobile Homes
 Residential - Multiple Family                                                        50 - 65            60 - 70            70 - 75               70 – 85
 Transient Lodging - Motel, Hotels                                                    50 - 65            60 - 70            70 - 80               80 – 85
 Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing Homes                               50 - 70            60 - 70            70 - 80               80 – 85
 Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters                                              NA               50 - 70               NA                 65 – 85
 Sports Arenas, Outdoor Spectator Sports                                                NA               50 - 75               NA                 70 – 85
 Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                                                      50 - 70              NA              67.5 - 75             72.5 – 85
 Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation,
                                                                                      50 - 70              NA               70 - 80               80 – 85
 Cemeteries
 Office Buildings, Business Commercial and Professional                               50 - 70          67.5 - 77.5          75 - 85                  NA
 Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture                                    50 - 75            70 - 80            75 - 85                  NA
 NA: Not Applicable
 Source: Office of Planning and Research, California, General Plan Guidelines, October 2003.
 Normally Acceptable – Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional construction,
 without any special noise insulation requirements.
 Conditionally Acceptable – New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements is made
 and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional construction, but with closed windows and fresh air supply systems or air condition-
 ing, will normally suffice.
 Normally Unacceptable – New construction or development should be discouraged. If new construction or development does proceed, a detailed analysis of
 the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
 Clearly Unacceptable – New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.	
City of South Gate                                                                   is in excess of the specified levels presented in Table
                                                                                     N-5, except as expressly provided otherwise. At the
Noise Standards                                                                      boundary line between a residential property and a
                                                                                     commercial and manufacturing property, the noise
The City of South Gate maintains a comprehensive
                                                                                     level of the quieter zone is required to be used.
Noise Ordinance within its Municipal Code that
establishes citywide interior and exterior noise level                                 Table N-5: South Gate Noise Ordinance Standards
standards. The City has adopted a number of policies                                                                              Noise Standards
                                                                                       Noise Zone
                                                                                                                             Noise Level Time Period
that are directed at controlling or mitigating envi-
                                                                                       1 – Noise Sensitive Area
ronmental noise effects. The City’s Noise Ordinance                                                                             45 dBA             Anytime
(Municipal Code Chapter 11.29, Noise Emissions)                                        2 – Residential Properties                                7:00 AM –
                                                                                                                                50 dBA
                                                                                                                                                  10:00 PM
establishes daytime and nighttime noise standards;
                                                                                                                                                 10:00 PM –
refer to Table N-5 for a summary of the City’s stan-                                                                            40 dBA
                                                                                                                                                   7:00 AM
dards. The ordinance is designed to control unneces-                                   3 – Commercial Properties
                                                                                                                                55 dBA             Anytime
sary, excessive and annoying sounds generated from
                                                                                       4 – Industrial Properties
a stationary source impacting an adjacent property. It                                                                          65 dBA             Anytime
differentiates between environmental and nuisance
noise. Environmental noise is measured under a time                                  Enforcing the Noise Ordinance includes requiring
average period while nuisance noise cannot exceed                                    proposed development projects to demonstrate
the established Noise Ordinance levels at any time.                                  compliance regarding site planning and construction
Chapter 11.29.160, Maximum permissible sound                                         activities. The Ordinance is reviewed periodically for
levels by receiving land use, prohibits any person                                   adequacy and amended as needed to address com-
within the City to make, cause, or allow noise that                                  munity needs and development patterns.
                                                                                                                                  Noise Element 343

    EXISTING NOISE
    CONDITIONS
    This section provides a synopsis of the current sources of noise in South
    Gate. It addresses transportation-related, stationary source and con-
    struction noise sources.
    Transportation-Related Noise
    Transportation activity represents the principal ambient noise source in
    South Gate. Transportation noise arises from vehicle traffic on major
    and primary arterial roadways within the City and from traffic on the
    I-710 freeway. Train movement on the railroad lines is another source
    of transportation related noise as is flight activity associated with Los
    Angeles International Airport.
    Local Roadway Traffic Noise
    During peak travel hours, heavy traffic on South Gate’s streets cause
    higher noise levels compared to noise levels during non-peak hours.
    The most heavily traveled roadways include:
    •	 Santa Ana Avenue
    •	 Firestone Boulevard
    •	 Southern Avenue
    •	 Tweedy Boulevard
    •	 Century Boulevard
    •	 Imperial Boulevard
    •	 Alameda Street
    •	 Long Beach Boulevard
    •	 California Avenue
    •	 Otis Street
    •	 Atlantic Avenue
    •	 Rayo Avenue
    •	 Garfield Avenue
    These roadways have been designed to specifically carry large volumes,
    although long-established land use patterns have placed residential
    uses along some portions of these streets.
344 South Gate General Plan 2035

Freeway Noise                                           Aircraft Noise
Freeways are a major noise source in many jurisdic-     There are no commercial or general aviation airports
tions. South Gate is traversed by the I-710 Free-       located within South Gate that contribute to the
way. Figure N-2 shows the existing noise contours       noise environment. However, flyover noise is gener-
in South Gate.                                          ated from air traffic into Los Angeles International
                                                        Airport (LAX), which is located to the west of the City.
More modern design and construction projects
                                                        As with most municipalities located in an urban area,
integrate sound walls and depressed configuration,
                                                        the community is subject to occasional noise intrusion
such as the I-210 through eastern Los Angeles and
                                                        from high flying aircraft. South Gate is directly under
western San Bernardino Counties and the I-5 wid-
                                                        the primary approach pattern for LAX so these events
ening through Orange County. To address freeway
                                                        occur on an average of every two to three minutes.
noise along long-established routes, the California
                                                        While the peak noise levels from these events are
Department of Transportation (Caltrans) has a priority
                                                        high, the frequency of occurrence increases the po-
program and a policy to put sound walls adjacent
                                                        tential for disturbance. The aircraft noise levels from
to residential properties. If a jurisdiction wishes to
                                                        these events are estimated to be less than 55 dBA.
mitigate freeway noise before scheduled and funded
                                                        And to a lesser degree, South Gate is also exposed to
Caltrans improvements are planned, the jurisdiction
                                                        noise emanating from helicopter operations.
can fund sound walls or other mitigating elements,
with Caltrans later providing reimbursement in accor-
dance with its priority plan.
                                                        Stationary Source Noise
While sound walls would reduce noise impacts, free-
way noise will remain an issue for noise-sensitive land Industrial Noise
uses, particularly residential uses.
                                                        Industrial uses are located throughout the City of South
                                                        Gate with the most concentrated industrial uses in the
Railroad Noise                                          eastern portion of the City between Atlantic Avenue
                                                        and the Rio Hondo River Channel. There are industrial
The Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR) currently operates
                                                        uses along Firestone Boulevard (between Alameda
two railroad lines through the City. The line that runs
                                                        Street and Santa Fe Avenue and between San Miguel
in the northwest to southeast direction in the eastern
                                                        Avenue and Atlantic Avenue), Alameda Street (between
portion of the City is the San Pedro Sub-division. A
                                                        Tweedy Boulevard and the southern City limits), Imperi-
second line (Spur Line) runs in an east-west direction,
                                                        al Highway (between Rio Hondo River Channel and the
north of Firestone Boulevard (and in the west half of
                                                        eastern City limits), and adjacent to the UPRR (between
the City between Independence Avenue and Ardmore
                                                        Gardendale Street and the southern City limits).
Avenue). Both lines provide local switching service,
with each line typically handling about 4 to 6 trains   Industrial businesses can have a varying degree of
per day. There are no grade separated crossings in      impact on adjacent uses. Industrial operations often
the City of South Gate, except for the grade separa-    involve use of mechanical equipment, generators,
tion of the railroad line and the I-710 Freeway.        and vehicles that contribute to noise levels at indus-
                                                        trial sites, particularly for outdoor activities. Many
The City has no control over railroad noise, which is
                                                        of South Gate’s neighborhoods have homes in close
preempted by the Federal Government.
                                                        proximity to industrial uses.
                                                                                             Noise Element 345

    Municipal Code Chapter 11.29 establishes noise          may include pure tones that make them audible at a
    performance criteria to guard against exposure of       substantial distance creates potential for conflict. The
    residential and other noise-sensitive uses to loud      City’s Zoning Code and Municipal Code provisions
    industrial-related noise. The noise/land use compat-    generally address these conflicts.
    ibility criteria in Table N-4 will be used in assessing
    siting of new industrial uses.
                                                            Portable Power Equipment
                                                            Leaf blowers, lawn mowers, portable generators,
    Commercial and Residential Re-                          electric saws and drills and other similar equipment
    lated Noise                                             that people use to maintain their properties create
                                                            frequent noise during daylight hours. Such disrup-
    South Gate’s commercial corridors are located along
                                                            tions to the ambient sound environment are ubiqui-
    Long Beach Boulevard (Santa Ana Avenue to South-
                                                            tous in the modern city and can produce very high
    ern Avenue), Firestone Boulevard (Alameda Street to
                                                            noise levels at the location of the work.
    Atlantic Avenue), Tweedy Boulevard (State Street to
    Hunt Avenue) and segments along Atlantic Avenue,
    Garfield Avenue, and Paramount Boulevard.               Amplified Sound
    A variety of stationary noise sources associated with   Amplified sound includes noise from personal or home
    commercial and residential activities exist throughout  audio equipment, automotive audio equipment, out-
    the City of South Gate. Commercial noise sources        door loudspeakers such as those used for paging and
    may include mechanical equipment and engines in         amplified sound at music or theatrical performances.
    non-moving motors such as power tools (i.e., au-        Because this sound typically includes music or speech,
    tomobile repair shops). Stationary noise sources        it is potentially more detectable and more annoying
    associated with residential areas are primarily due to  than other sounds of the same noise level. Municipal
    air conditioners and pool/spa equipment. Additional     Code Chapter 11.29 establishes limitations on time
    stationary noise sources include animals, stereos,      and magnitude of noise for these sources.
    musical instruments, sporting events, and horns.
                                                            Construction Noise
    These noise sources have the potential to temporarily
    disrupt the quietness of an area. Effective control of
    these noise sources cannot be accomplished through      Construction noise typically involves the loudest
    decibel standards, but instead may be accomplished      common urban noise events associated with building
    through provisions in the Noise Ordinance.              demolition, grading, construction, large diesel en-
                                                            gines and truck deliveries and hauling. Construction
    Mechanical Equipment Noise                              activity, although temporary at any given location,
                                                            can be substantially disruptive to adjacent uses during
    The motors, pumps, and fans that cool and heat          the construction period.
    our buildings produce point-source noise that most
    directly affects adjacent land uses. Frequently, this
    equipment includes components of pure tone noise
    from the rotational frequency of motors. Although
    noise levels are generally low from these sources, the
    fact that such sources may operate continuously and
346 South Gate General Plan 2035

  FUTURE NOISE
  CONDITIONS
  The most significant noise sources in South Gate – roadways, freeways,
  and railways – will continue generating noise in the future. Figure N-3
  identifies the projected noise contours for year 2035 largely attribut-
  able to roadway and freeway noise based on projected land uses and
  traffic volumes identified in the EIR. Noise levels from these surface
  sources are expected to increase with increased traffic levels anticipated
  within the City by 2035.
  The noise contours in Figure N-3 assist in setting policies for establish-
  ing new land use and appropriate mitigation for properties that will
  continue to be exposed to higher noise levels.
                                                        Noise Element 347

    KEY ISSUES AND
    CHALLENGES
    This section describes the key issues and challenges facing South Gate
    regarding the noise environment.
    Health Impacts of Noise
    Excessive noise can result in undesirable impacts to individuals and a
    community. The effects of noise are often transitory but adverse effects
    can be cumulative with prolonged and repeated exposure. The effects of
    noise fall into six broad categories: noise-induced hearing loss, interfer-
    ence with communication, effects of noise on sleep, effects on perfor-
    mance and behavior, extra-auditory health effects, and annoyance.
    Noise and Land Use Planning In-
    tegration
    Land use planning decisions have significant impacts on the noise
    environment. The City has adopted a comprehensive Noise Ordinance
    within its Municipal Code along with several polices that are directed at
    controlling and mitigating environmental noise effects. This ordinance
    must be reviewed periodically to ensure that is adequate for meeting
    the community’s needs and changing land use patterns.
    Noise Sensitive Receptors
    Human response to noise varies widely depending on the type of
    noise, time of day, and sensitivity of the receptor. The effects of noise
    on humans can range from temporary or permanent hearing loss to
    mild stress and annoyance due to such things as speech interference
    and sleep deprivation. Prolonged stress, regardless of the cause, is
    known to contribute to a variety of health disorders. Refer to Section
    5.6, Noise, of the General Plan EIR for a listing of some of the sensitive
    receptors within the City than can be affected by excess noise levels.
348 South Gate General Plan 2035


                    Figure N-2: Existing noise contours
Noise Element 349
350 South Gate General Plan 2035
                                    Figure N-3: Project noise contours for the year 2035
  Transportation Noise
  Transportation routes – arising from vehicles on primary arterials and
  freeways as well as from railroad and aircraft – is a major source of
  noise in South Gate. The most efficient and effective means of control-
  ling noise from transportation systems is to reduce noise at the source.
  However, the City has little direct control over source noise levels
  because of State and Federal preemption rules (for example, State mo-
  tor vehicle noise standards and Federal air regulations). In the absence
  of direct control on noise sources, the City can focus on reducing the
  impact of the noise on the community.
  Non-Transportation Noise
  Noise from non-transportation sources can contribute to an environ-
  ment of excessive noise. In South Gate, the major sources of non-
  transportation noise include: commercial and industrial centers, me-
  chanical noise, portable power equipment and amplified sound. These
  impacts are most effectively controlled through the application of the
  City’s Noise Ordinance.
                                                       Noise Element 351

    KEY CONCEPTS OF
    THE NOISE ELEMENT
    The following are key concepts for addressing the noise challenges and
    issues in the Noise Element. The Goals, Objectives, Policies and Imple-
    mentation Actions in this Element provide a foundation for implement-
    ing these noise mitigating measures.
    Attenuation of Noise
    Noise impacts can be mitigated in three basic ways: by reducing the
    sound level of noise generators, by increasing the distance between
    noise sources and receivers, and by insulating receivers. Policies in the
    Noise Element address all of these topics.
    Reducing the Sound Level of Noise Generators
    Perhaps the most efficient approach to controlling noise in a commu-
    nity is limiting the level of noise generation at the source. State and
    Federal statutes have largely preempted local control over vehicular
    noise emissions but commercial and industrial operations and certain
    residential activities provide opportunities for local government to assist
    in noise abatement. The City of South Gate will use local ordinances
    to establish maximum levels for noise generated on-site to the extent
    possible.
352 South Gate General Plan 2035
Increasing the distance between                                based on the sensitivity of specific land uses (Munici-
                                                               pal Code Chapter 11.29). The City will pursue proac-
noise sources and receivers                                    tive measures to limit additional exposure of sensitive
Noise impacts can be reduced by insulating noise sensitive     uses and to address longstanding noise issues.
uses, such as residences, schools, libraries, hospitals, nurs-
ing, and care homes and some types of commercial activities.   Residential Development
South Gate will use the policies of the Community Design Ele-
                                                               The City supports new residential development in
ment and the Noise Element to separate noise generators from
                                                               areas where ambient noise levels may be higher than
sensitive receptors.  
                                                               those experienced in existing single family neighbor-
                                                               hoods. Interior noise levels for new residential devel-
Insulating Receivers                                           opment, regardless of location within the City will be
Noise insulation can be accomplished through site              required to comply with standards set forth in Title
design techniques such as the placement of walls,              24 of the Health and Safety Code. New construction
landscaped berms, or a combination of the two,                 may need to incorporate special insulation, windows,
between noise sources and noise receivers. In addi-            and sealants in order to ensure that interior noise
tion to site design techniques, noise insulation can           levels meet Title 24 standards.
be accomplished through proper design of buildings
and the application of care in the actual construction
of buildings. The Noise Ordinance and policies in this
                                                               City Noise Control
Element address sufficient insulation of receivers from
sources of noise.
                                                               Ordinance
                                                               Application and enforcement of the City Noise Con-
                                                               trol Ordinance will continue to be the primary means
Minimize Community                                             of regulating and controlling so-called point-source
                                                               noise. During the preliminary stages of the develop-
Exposure to Noise                                              ment process, potential noise impacts and appropri-
The primary goal with regard to community noise is             ate mitigation will be identified.
to minimize the exposure of new residential develop-           Similarly, enforcement of the Noise Control Ordinance
ment, schools, hospitals, and similar noise-sensitive          will address nuisance noise such as loud animals or
uses to excessive or unhealthy noise levels to the             birds, loud audio equipment, domestic power tools,
greatest extent possible. Toward this end, this Ele-           vehicle repair and testing, powered motor vehicles
ment establishes the noise/land use compatibility              and construction activities.
guidelines set forth in Table N-4 for outdoor noise.
The compatibility guidelines recognize and respond to
the many different noise environments in South Gate.
These compatibility guidelines show a range of noise
standards for various land use categories. Depending
on the ambient environment of a particular communi-
ty, these basic guidelines may be tailored to reflect ex-
isting noise and land use characteristics. Additionally,
the City provides levels of acceptable noise exposure
                                                                                                  Noise Element 353
    Addressing Transportation Noise                            Goals, Objectives and
    The most efficient and effective means of control-
    ling noise from transportation systems is to reduce        Policies
    noise at the source. However, the City has no direct
    control over noise produced by trucks, cars and trains     Goal N 1:
    because State and Federal regulations preempt local
                                                               A reduction in noise levels created
    laws. Vehicular noise emissions standards are estab-
    lished at the State and Federal levels. However, local     by construction and maintenance
    agencies can play a significant part in reducing traffic   activities
    noise by controlling traffic volume and congestion.
    Given that the City cannot control this noise at the       Objective N1.1:
    source, City noise programs focus on reducing the
                                                               Minimize noise levels from construction
    impact of transportation noise along freeways, arte-
                                                               and maintenance equipment, vehicles, and
    rial roadways and rail corridors and on site planning,
    landscaping, topography and the design and con-
                                                               activities.
    struction of noise barriers to alleviate vehicular traffic Policies
    and train noise impacts. Noise-attenuating barriers
                                                               P.1	 Construction activities will be prohibited between the hours
    can and will be incorporated into new development               of 7:00 PM to 8: 00 AM Monday through Saturday and on
    projects to reduce noise exposure.                              Sundays and Federal holidays.  
                                                               P.2	 Construction noise reduction methods will be employed to
    I-710                                                           the maximum extent feasible.  These measures may include,
                                                                    but not limited to, shutting off idling equipment, installing
    Freeway noise associated with I-710 has largely been            temporary acoustic barriers around stationary construction
                                                                    noise sources, maximizing the distance between construction
    addressed to greatest extent practicable with re-               equipment staging areas and occupied sensitive receptor
    cent improvements. The I-710 improvement project                areas, and use of electric air compressors and similar power
    includes elements to shield freeway noise, particularly         tools, rather than diesel equipment.
    along areas of the freeways adjoining residential ar-      P.3	 Prior to approval of project plans and specifications by the
    eas. The City will continue to pursue mitigation with           City, project applicants and/or construction contractors will
                                                                    identify construction equipment and noise reducing mea-
    Caltrans for any remaining areas not addressed by               sures, and the anticipated noise reduction.  
    freeway enhancement projects.
                                                               P.4	 The City will require municipal vehicles and noise-generating
                                                                    mechanical equipment purchased or used by the City to
    Existing Railways                                               comply with noise standards specified in the City’s Municipal
                                                                    Code, or other applicable codes.
    Eliminating at-grade crossings for existing railways       P.5	 The City may exceed the noise standards on a case-by-case
    would significantly reduce noise impacts and solve              basis for special circumstances including emergency situa-
                                                                    tions, special events and expedited development projects.
    road/rail traffic conflicts, but this solution involves
    costs beyond the collective resources of the City,
    Federal agencies, and railroad owners/operators.
    Thus, City efforts will focus on minimizing noise
    associated with train horns and implementing noise
    reduction programs.
354 South Gate General Plan 2035

Goal N 2:	                                                                Objective N 2.2:
An effective land use planning and                                        Incorporate a review of noise impacts into
                                                                          the development review process.
development review process to en-
sure noise impacts are addressed                                          Policies
                                                                          P.1	 The City Community Development Department and/or City
                                                                               Council will consider noise impacts of proposed developments.
Objective N 2.1:	
Ensure noise impacts are considered in                                    P.2	 The City should establish a Development Review process,
                                                                               which considers noise impacts and applies to, but is not
land use planning decisions.                                                   limited to, the following:
Policies                                                                         xx  Specific Plans
                                                                                 xx  Tentative Tract Maps
P.1	 The City will adhere to the noise standards identified in Table N-4.        xx  Parcel Maps
                                                                                 xx  Precise Plans
P.2	 The City will incorporate noise considerations into land                    xx  Conceptual Development Plans
     use planning decisions and future City land use plans by                    xx  Design Review
     establishing acceptable limits of noise for various land uses               xx  Non-residential development
     throughout the community.                                                   xx  Significant remodels and redevelopment
P.3	 The City should fully integrate noise considerations into land
     use planning decisions to prevent new noise/land use conflicts.      P.3	 The City will require that project applicants for the above
                                                                               actions submit relevant plans and analysis that facilitate the
P.4	 The City will require that acoustical analysis be incorporated            review of the proposal for conformance with the General Plan
     into the environmental review process for the purposes of iden-           and applicable codes and regulations related to noise impacts.  
     tifying potential noise impacts and noise abatement procedures.  
                                                                          P.4	 All new development, significant remodels, and redevelopment
P.5	 The City will require that all new residential construction               adjacent to noise sensitive land uses will be required to prepare
     in areas with an exterior noise level greater than 55 dBA                 an acoustical analysis that evaluates potential noise impacts
     CNEL will include sound attenuation measures, as well as to               and recommends noise abatement mitigation to ensure compli-
     incorporate design measures to reduce interior noise levels               ance with the City’s General Plan and Noise Ordinance.
     to 45 dBA CNEL.
                                                                          P.5	 The City will require findings of consistency with the City of
P.6	 The City will require that all new non-residential development            South Gate’s General Plan’s goals, objectives, policies, and
     will demonstrate that ambient noise levels will not exceed an             implementation actions; Zoning Ordinance; Municipal Code;
     exterior noise level of 65 dBA CNEL.                                      and Building Code, and other local, Federal, State, and re-
P.7	 New development projects will provide buffers and/or appro-               gional regulations applicable to noise impacts as a condition
     priate mitigation measures to reduce potential noise sources              of project approval and entitlement.
     on noise-sensitive land uses.                                        P.6	 The City will require noise mitigation as conditions of ap-
P.8	 The City should avoid locating noise-sensitive land uses in               proval (COA) on major development projects, including a
     existing and future noise-impacted areas.                                 clear description of mitigation on subdivision maps, site
                                                                               plans, and building plans for inspection purposes.
P.9	 The City will work to ensure acceptable noise levels are main-
     tained near residential areas, schools, hospitals, convalescent      P.7	 The City will review development plans for the identification
     homes, churches, and other noise sensitive areas.                         of sound attenuation measures, including but not limited
                                                                               to, double-glazed windows, sound insulation, sound walls,
P.10	The City will consider land use compatible issues when devel-             landscaping, use of low walls and landscaped slopes, enclose
     oping and/or amending land use plans.                                     courtyards, rubberized asphalt, or relocation of driveways.
P.11	The City should work with adjacent jurisdictions to minimize
     noise impacts to South Gate from projects that occur out-
     side the City.
                                                                                                                      Noise Element 355

    Goal N 3:                                                            P.3	 The City will prohibit the development of new nightclubs
                                                                              and other high noise-generating entertainment uses directly
    A reduction of noise spillover or                                         adjacent to existing and/or planned residential uses, schools,
                                                                              health care facilities, or other noise-sensitive land uses.  Such
    encroachment from commercial/                                             uses may be permitted, at the direction of the City Council,
                                                                              if a noise analysis prepared by an acoustical expert recom-
    office/retail, research and develop-                                      mends effective mitigation that can ensure compliance with
                                                                              the City’s Municipal Code and that the project will incorpo-
    ment, manufacturing and distribu-                                         rate all identified recommendations.  
    tion, and industrial uses on adjoin-                                 P.4	 New mixed-use development projects should locate residen-
    ing residential areas and other                                           tial units be away from significant noise generating sources,
                                                                              such as mechanical equipment, entertainment uses, restau-
    noise sensitive land uses                                                 rant patios, gathering places, loading and delivery areas,
                                                                              parking lots, and trash enclosures.  
                                                                         P.5	 New mixed-use developments with residential components
    Objective N 3.1:                                                          will be required to install signs requesting patrons to be
    Improve ambient noise conditions in sensi-                                mindful of noise levels in outdoor commercial areas during
                                                                              nighttime hours.
    tive land use areas.
    Policies                                                             Objective N 3.3:	
    P.1	 The City will identify and work with property owners to reduce  Minimize noise impacts on residential or
         or eliminate excessive or loud noise near noise sensitive areas other noise-sensitive land uses located
         to meet the noise standards in the City’s Municipal Code.
                                                                         adjacent to non-residential uses.
    P.2	 The City should encourage the retrofitting of existing homes
         to reduce interior noise impacts.
                                                                         Policies
    P.3	 The City should encourage the use of noise absorbing materi-
                                                                         P.1	 Truck deliveries to non-residential uses abutting residential or
         als in existing and future development to reduce interior
                                                                              noise sensitive uses will be limited to the hours between 7:00
         noise impacts to sensitive land uses.
                                                                              AM and 10:00 PM.
                                                                         P.2	 New non-residential projects adjacent to residential uses will
    Objective N 3.2:	                                                         be required to incorporate noise reducing features into the
    Minimize noise impacts to residential                                     project design to minimize impacts to nearby residential uses
                                                                              and other noise sensitive land uses.  
    dwelling units located above ground floor
                                                                         P.3	 The City will prohibit the location of uses characterized by
    commercial/office/retail or civic/institution-                            excessive noise, such as industrial uses and fast food res-
    al uses in mixed-use development projects.                                taurants with drive-through speakers, directly adjacent or in
                                                                              close proximity to existing or planned residential uses.
    Policies
                                                                         P.4	 The City will prohibit the siting of loading and shipping
    P.1	 New mixed-use structures with commercial/office/retail               facilities for commercial and industrial operations adjacent to
         or civic/institutional and residential uses will incorporate         existing or planned residential uses.
         techniques that prevent the transfer of noise and vibration
                                                                         P.5	 New buildings being developed adjacent to existing and/or
         through design and construction technology.
                                                                              planned residential uses or other noise-sensitive land uses
    P.2	 The City should encourage commercial uses in mixed-use               will be required to site and operate heating, ventilating, and
         developments that are not noise intrusive to on-site or sur-         air conditioning generators in a manner that limits adverse
         rounding noise sensitive land uses.                                  noise impacts to the greatest extent feasible.
                                                                         P.6	 Wherever feasible, parking areas for new or redeveloped
                                                                              non-residential uses should be buffered and shielded by, but
                                                                              not limited to, walls, fences, and/or adequate landscaping.
356 South Gate General Plan 2035

P.7	 The City should encourage existing noise sensitive uses, includ-     Objective N 4.2:	
     ing schools, libraries, health care facilities, and residential uses
     in areas where existing or future noise levels exceed 65 dBA         Minimize noise levels created by the Union
     CNEL to incorporate fences, walls, landscaping, and/or other         Pacific, Southern Pacific, and any future rail
     noise buffers and barriers, where appropriate and feasible.
                                                                          systems located in close proximity to resi-
P.8	 The City should encourage school districts or other educa-
     tional facilities to locate outdoor activity areas, such as play
                                                                          dential and other noise-sensitive land uses.
     grounds and sport fields, away from residential areas.
                                                                          Policies
Goal N 4:	                                                                P.1	 The City will work with rail operators to install and maintain
Minimize transportation noise                                                  noise mitigation features where operations adversely impact ex-
                                                                               isting or planned residential and other noise-sensitive land uses.
impacts from motor vehicles and                                           P.2	 The City will work with rail operators to ensure noise impacts
trains adjacent to residential and                                             are considered and mitigated through proper design, siting,
                                                                               and construction.
other noise sensitive land uses
                                                                          P.3	 Future rail projects under the City’s control will be required to
                                                                               analyze noise impacts and to identify and incorporate noise
Objective N 4.1:	                                                              reducing features into the project design.
Work towards the reduction of                                             P.4	 The City should encourage the construction of noise barriers
transportation noise.                                                          for residential uses near active rail corridors.
                                                                          P.5	 The City should encourage rail operators to schedule rail train
Policies                                                                       activity during daytime hours.  
P.1	 The City should minimize transportation noise through the            P.6	 The City will require that noise attenuation measures be
     proper design of street circulation, coordination of routing,             incorporated into all new development, renovations, and re-
     and other traffic control measures (e.g., shifting travel lanes           models of residential, health care facilities, schools, libraries,
     away from impacted units, adding bike ways, etc. to relieve               senior facilities, and churches in close proximity to existing or
     traffic congestion).                                                      known planned rail lines.  Sound attenuation measures will
                                                                               reduce interior noise to a maximum of 45 dBA CNEL.
P.2	 Businesses in industrial areas will be required to manage
     heavy truck and vehicle access to minimize noise and vibra-
     tion impacts on adjoining uses.
P.3	 The City should discourage through traffic on residential local
     streets to reduce noise impacts.
P.4	 The City will coordinate and work with California Department of
     Transportation (Caltrans) to minimize freeway noise levels from
     Interstate 710 (I-710) on nearby noise-sensitive land uses to a
     level below the State standard of 65 dBA CNEL for exterior noise
     levels and 45 dBA CNEL for interior residential noise levels.
                                                                                                                      Noise Element 357

    Goal N 5:	                                                               Implementation Actions
    Maximize efficiencies in noise
    abatement through clear and effec-                                       Action N 1:
    tive policies and ordinances                                             Review City Plan, Codes, and Ordi-
                                                                             nances Relevant to Noise Impacts
    Objective N 5.1:	
                                                                             Following adoption of the General Plan, the Com-
    Continuously review and modify City Plans,
                                                                             munity Development Department and other relevant
    Codes, and Ordinances, as appropriate,
                                                                             departments will review the City’s existing codes and
    to ensure noise generating uses are ad-                                  ordinances (including the Municipal Code, Zoning
    equately addressed.                                                      Ordinance, and Building Code) and make recommen-
                                                                             dations on how they should be modified to com-
    Policies
                                                                             prehensively address various noise sources, land use
    P.1	 The City will modify and update the City’s Noise Ordinance,         types and compatibility issues. Topics to be addressed
         land use plans, guidelines, and other regulations regularly
         and as needed in response to new Federal, State, and County         include, but are not limited to:
         standards and guidelines, as needed.                                •	 Ambient noise levels
    P.2	 The City should review and update the City’s policies and           •	 Mixed-use developments
         regulations affecting noise, as needed.  
                                                                             •	 Light Industrial/Flex land uses
    Goal N 6:		                                                              •	 Transportation (such as freeways and railroads) and stationary
                                                                                noise standards
    Enforce all City noise standards                                         •	 Interior and exterior noise standards
                                                                             •	 Change in ambient noise levels
    Objective N 6.1:	
                                                                             •	 Cumulative noise impacts
    Ensure residents, businesses, and visitors know
                                                                             •	 Construction noise
    and comply with the City’s noise standards.
                                                                             •	 Construction hours of operation
    Policies
                                                                             •	 Vibration noise standards
    P.1	 The City should make information available to the public
                                                                             •	 Consistency with the City’s adopted General Plan goals, objec-
         regarding the City’s noise regulations, the health effects of
                                                                                tives, and policies
         high noise levels, means of mitigating such levels, as well as
         abatement and enforcement procedures.  
                                                                             The City should periodically review and update the
    P.2	 The City will enforce all City, State, and Federal noise standards. City’s noise standards to address any significant
    P.3	 The City should enforce established speed limits to control         changes in noise contours, new technologies, effec-
         noise levels.                                                       tiveness of mitigation, or other pertinent areas.
358 South Gate General Plan 2035

Action N 2: 	                                            rary noise attenuation fences, preferential location of
                                                         equipment, use of current technology and types of
Monitor and Inventory Existing                           noise suppression equipment), the amount of noise
Noise Complaints.                                        reduction each produces, and how to combine them
                                                         to meet City requirements.
The City will create and maintain an inventory of
existing noise levels and noise complaints in the        The City should work to ensure that residents and
South Gate. This information can be obtained from        businesses are aware of the City’s Noise Ordinance
site-specific information contained in project environ-  and enforcement procedures. Information could be
mental documentation (such Environmental Impacts         transmitted through the City’s website, City Hall, City
Reports and [Mitigated] Negative Declarations), public   Department(s), public library, and/or utility bills.
meetings, and noise complaints. The City should
regularly update the list of noise complaints received   Action N 4: 	
by the City. The information should be used to moni-
tor changes in noise in the City and to monitor the ef-
                                                         Examine the Feasibility of Imple-
fectiveness of noise mitigation. The inventory should    menting Sound Attenuation Mea-
be updated regularly (i.e., once each two years) to      sures along the City’s Arterial Streets.
reflect current conditions.
                                                         The City should examine the feasibility of implement-
The City should consider establishing a Noise Re-        ing sound attenuation measures along the City’s
duction Plan to address noise complaints received.       arterial streets. Areas in need of sound attenuation
The Plan should identify areas with heavy noise          should be prioritized based on the degree of sensitivi-
complaints and recommend potential noise attenu-         ty, how far in excess of maximum allowable standards
ation measures to ensure compliance with the City’s      they are, the length of time the noise impact has
General Plan and Noise Ordinance. The City should        existed, and the number of residential uses or noise-
consider also establishing a Noise Violation Fee         sensitive land uses impacted.
ordinance to charge noise violators fees for multiple
violations after an initial warning is provided for each
alleged incident.
Action N 3:
Inform the Public of Noise Stan-
dards and Reduction Measures.
The City should develop and maintain a Noise
Mitigation Guide of effective noise attuning equip-
ment, techniques, materials, design features, and/
or preferred siting as a guiding tool for the City
Community Development staff, residents, business
owners, developers, builders, and construction equip-
ment operators. Technical resources should discuss a
variety of sound attenuation measures (e.g., tempo-
                                                                                            Noise Element 359


   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     Housing Element 
      
      
      
      
      
      
 
   
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                January 2014 
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                          City of South Gate 
                      8650 California Avenue 
                       South Gate, CA 90280 
   


 
    CONTENTS 
 
    Housing Element 
    INTRODUCTION                                                         1 
      Purpose of the Housing Element                                     1 
    COMMUNITY PROFILE                                                    7 
      Population Characteristics                                         7 
      Household Characteristics                                         10 
      Housing Problems                                                  14 
      Special Needs Groups                                              17 
      Housing Characteristics                                           25 
      Affordable Housing                                                32 
    HOUSING CONSTRAINTS                                                 39 
      Market Constraints                                                39 
      Governmental Constraints                                          44 
      Environmental Constraints                                         71 
      Service and Facility Infrastructure                               72 
    HOUSING RESOURCES                                                   75 
      Residential Development Potential                                 75 
      Financial Resources                                               83 
      Administrative Resources                                          84 
      Energy Conservation                                               86 
    HOUSING PLAN                                                        89 
      Goals And Polices                                                 89 
      Implementing Actions                                              92 
      Quantified Objectives                                             99 
     
    APPENDIX A: REVIEW OF PAST ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
    APPENDIX B: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION 
    APPENDIX C: SITES INVENTORY 
                                           South Gate General Plan 2035  i 

      LIST OF TABLES 
        Table HE‐1: Population Growth                                                    8 
        Table HE‐2: Comparative Population Growth                                        8 
        Table HE‐3: Age Distribution                                                     9 
        Table HE‐4: Comparative Age Distribution                                         9 
        Table HE‐5: Comparative Ethnic and Race Distribution                            10 
        Table HE‐6: Households by Type                                                  11 
        Table HE‐8: Major Employers ‐ 2013                                              13 
        Table HE‐9: Occupation and Wage Comparison                                      14 
        Table HE‐10: Overcrowding by Tenure                                             16 
        Table HE‐11: Housing Cost Burden by Tenure and Household Type                   17 
        Table HE‐12: Special Needs Groups                                               18 
        Table HE‐13: Large Households by Tenure                                         20 
        Table HE‐14: Disability Status                                                  21 
        Table HE‐15: Poverty by Household Type                                          23 
        Table HE‐16: Comparative Housing Growth                                         26 
        Table HE‐17: Changes in Housing Stock:  2000‐2011                               26 
        Table HE‐18: Year Units Built                                                   27 
        Table HE‐19: Annual Median Home Prices – (2011‐2013)                            28 
        Table HE‐20: Median and Average Market Rents by Number of Bedrooms              29 
        Table HE‐21: Estimated Affordable Housing Price by Income and Household Size    30 
        Table HE‐23: Rent Subsidies Required                                            35 
        Table HE‐24: Estimated Market Value of At‐Risk Units                            36 
        Table HE‐25: Estimated New Construction Costs                                   37 
        Table HE‐26: Disposition of Home Purchase and Improvement Loan Applications     41 
        Table HE‐27: Place Types                                                        46 
        Table HE‐28: Allowable Place Types by District                                  48 
        Table HE‐29:  Allowable Place Types by Corridor                                 49 
        Table HE‐31: Parking Standards                                                  56 
        Table HE‐31: Provisions for a Variety of Housing Types                          57 
        Table HE‐32: Comparison of Planning Fees                                        64 
        Table HE‐33: Planning and Development Impact Fees for Typical Projects          65 
        Table HE‐34: Permit Processing Time by Type of Application                      69 
        Table HE‐35: Planning Review and Processing Times by Type                       70 
        Table HE‐37:  Quantified Objectives by Income: 2013‐2021                        99 
         
ii  Housing Element                                                                    

 
    LIST OF FIGURES 
     Figure HE‐2: Median Home Sales Price – (March 2013)                28 
     Figure HE‐3: Income Needed to Afford Housing Compared with Income  32 
     Figure HE‐4: Neighborhoods                                         50 
     Figure HE‐5: Districts                                             51 
     Figure HE‐6: Corridors                                             52 
     Figure HE‐7: Conditional Use Permit Process                        67 
     Figure HE‐8: Variance Process                                      68 
                                          South Gate General Plan 2035  iii 


 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Purpose of the Housing Element  
 
The  State  of  California  identifies  the  provision  of  decent  and  affordable  housing  for  every 
Californian  as  a  statewide  goal.    To  that  end,  every  jurisdiction  in  California  must  prepare  a 
Housing  Element  that  identifies  and  addresses  the  housing  needs  in  its  community.    The 
Housing  Element  must  be  updated  periodically.    This  Housing  Element  for  the  City  of  South 
Gate covers the planning period of October 15, 2013 through October 15, 2021. 
 
Pursuant to State Housing Element law (Section 65580) of the Government Code, the Housing 
Element must contain local commitments to: 
 
        Provide sites with appropriate zoning and development standards and with services and 
             facilities to accommodate the jurisdiction’s Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) 
             for each income level. 
        
        Assist in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of low and moderate 
             income households. 
 
        Address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove governmental constraints 
             to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing, including housing for 
             all income levels and housing for persons with disabilities. 
 
        Conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock. 
 
        Promote  housing  opportunities  for all  persons regardless  of  race,  religion,  sex,  marital 
             status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status, or disability. 
 
        Preserve  the  affordability  of  assisted  housing  developments  for  lower  income 
             households. 
 
The Housing Element is an integral component of the General Plan and one of the two General 
Plan  elements  that  must  be  reviewed  for  compliance  with  State  law  by  a  State agency.1    The 
State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) is responsible for reviewing 
the Housing Element for compliance.   
 
                                                       
1
       The  State  General  Plan  law  mandates  seven  elements:  Land  Use;  Circulation;  Housing;  Conservation;  Open 
       Space; Noise; and Safety.  The Housing Element and Safety Element are the only two elements that must be 
       reviewed by a State agency for compliance with State law. 
                                                                  South Gate General Plan 2035    1 

Housing Element Contents 
 
State Housing Element law mandates specific topics and issues that must be addressed in the 
Housing Element.  These include: 
 
        An  analysis  of  population  and  employment  trends,  documentation  of  projections,  and 
             quantification of existing and projected housing needs for all income levels. 
 
        An analysis and documentation of household characteristics, such as the age of housing 
             stock,  tenancy  type,  overcrowded  conditions,  and  the  level  of  payment  compared  to 
             ability to pay. 
 
        An  analysis  and  documentation  of  special  needs,  such  as  female‐headed  households, 
             homeless individuals, persons with disabilities, large households, farmworkers, and the 
             elderly. 
 
        A regional share of the total regional housing need for all income categories. 
 
        An  inventory  of  land  suitable  for  residential  development,  including  vacant  and 
             infill/redevelopment opportunities.  This analysis also looks at potential residential sites 
             and their accessibility to adequate infrastructure and services. 
 
        Identifying  actual  and  potential  governmental  and  non‐governmental  constraints  that 
             could potentially impede the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing 
             for all income groups.    
 
        Identifying  and  analyzing  opportunities  for  energy  conservation  in  residential 
             developments. 
        
        An inventory of at‐risk units that have the possibility of converting to market rate.  
              
        A statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives, financial resources, and scheduled 
             programs for the improvement, maintenance, and development of housing.2 
 
                                                       
2
       State law recognizes that the total housing need may exceed available resources and a jurisdiction’s ability to 
       satisfy  identified  needs.    As  a  result,  quantified  objectives  do  not  need  to  match  the  total  housing  need.  
       However, a jurisdiction is required to establish the maximum number of housing units by income category that 
       can be constructed, rehabilitated, and conserved over a five‐year time period.  
2  Housing Element                                                                                                            

 
Community Outreach  
 
State  law  requires  that  adequate  opportunity  for  participation  be  solicited  from  all  economic 
segments  of  the  community  towards  preparation  of  the  Housing  Element.    Specifically,  the 
jurisdiction must proactively outreach to lower and moderate income persons and persons with 
special needs.   Preparation of the Housing Element must also be coordinated with other local 
jurisdictions within the regional housing market area.  
 
Planning Commission Study Session 
 
A study session was conducted on October 29, 2013 before the Planning Commission to discuss 
the  Draft  2013‐2021  Housing  Element.  The  meeting  was  advertised  in  the  Wave  and  special 
invitations  were  sent  out  to  a  number  of  agencies  serving  low  and  moderate  income 
households, as well as persons with special needs.  These agencies were invited to attend the 
meeting  to  discuss  housing  issues  and  offer  suggestions.    The  agencies  invited  to  the  Study 
Session are listed in Appendix B.  
 
Representatives from the Southern California Rehabilitation Services (SCRS) and Salvation Army 
Bell Shelter attended the meeting and provided comments on housing needs.  SCRS indicated 
that while the City has affordable housing, the below‐market rents are still not subsidized to the 
level  low  enough  for  persons  with  disabilities.    Most  persons  with  disabilities  rely  on 
Supplemental  Security  Income  (SSI),  which  is  not  adequate  to  pay  rent  (even  at  “affordable 
rents”)  and  other  daily  necessities.    City  staff  responded  that  the  only  program  that  provides 
rent  subsidies  based  on  the  tenant’s  ability  to  pay  is  the  Section  8  Housing  Choice  Voucher 
program.  The City is planning on reopening the waiting list in the next few months to take in 
additional  applicants.    Also,  the  City  recognizes  the  important  services  provided  by  SCRS  and 
has  been  allocating  CDBG  funds  to  support  the  program.    Representative  from  the  Salvation 
Army  expressed  appreciation  for  the  City’s  consistent  support  of  the  Bell  Shelter  operation.  
The City funds 15 emergency shelter beds at the Bell Shelter and staff works with the shelter to 
place people in need at the shelter. 
 
Comprehensive Zoning Code Update Workshop Series 
 
The City held a series of workshops to present and receive input on its comprehensive zoning 
code update. Three community workshops were held in December 2012 for residents: 
 
      December 7, 2012: Two workshops were held on this day at South Gate Park, in the Girls 
         Clubhouse, in the morning and evening.   
      December 8, 2012: An all day workshop was held at the South Gate Senior Center. 
 
Both venues were capable of seating at least 150 people. Sandwiches, beverages and desserts 
were offered at all three workshops. To promote the December workshops, the City distributed 
                                                             South Gate General Plan 2035    3 

30,000  flyers.    The  flyers  were  delivered  to  every  residence  and  business  in  the  City.    Flyers 
were also distributed to all plan check/license applicants and public counter visitors as well as 
made available at each of the City’s public facilities/venues accessible to the public.   
 
Summer  workshops  were  also  held,  with  the  Planning  Commission  and  City  Council  in 
attendance, during the summer of 2013: 
 
     June 18th Workshop ‐ An introductory meeting where the draft ordinance was presented 
         and all major changes were discussed. 
     August 20th Workshop ‐ Meeting solely focused on proposed new residential standards.   
     September 17th Workshop – Meeting focused on mixed use, commercial and industrial 
         standards.   
 
Public Review of Draft Housing Element  
 
The  Draft  2013‐2021  South  Gate  Housing  Element  was  available  for  public  review  at  the 
following locations beginning on October 17, 2013: 
 
     City’s website 
     Chamber of Commerce (3350 Tweedy Boulevard) 
     City Clerk’s Office 
     Hollydale Library (12000 Garfield Avenue) 
 
Public Hearings  
 
Public hearings will be conducted prior to adoption of the Housing Element by the City Council.   
 
Consistency with General Plan 2035 
 
The  2013‐2021  City  of  South  Gate  Housing  Element  was  prepared  to  ensure  internal 
consistency  with  the  General  Plan  2035.    As  such,  the  goals  and  policies  contained  in  this 
Housing Element are entirely consistent with other elements of the General Plan.  
 
When  updating  the  Housing  Element,  the  City  carefully  evaluated  the  vision  set  forth  in  the 
General Plan and augmented existing housing goals, policies, and programs to help achieve the 
General Plan vision.  Policies, programs, and actions were crafted to address specific constraints 
and maximize opportunities.  However, the Housing Element does not determine the intensity 
or  distribution  of  residential  growth.    Such  policy  directions  are  established  in  the  Land  Use 
Element of the General Plan.  Consistent with the Land Use Element, the Housing Element sets 
forth policies and programs to implement the residential component of the Land Use Element. 
As  portions  of  the  General  Plan  are  amended  in  the  future,  the  Housing  Element  will  be 
reviewed along with other elements to ensure internal consistency is maintained.   
4  Housing Element                                                                                        

 
The  General  Plan  was  comprehensively  updated  in  2010  and  includes  policies  and  analysis 
relating  to  flood  hazards  and  flood  management.  No  disadvantaged  unincorporated 
communities are located within the City’s planning area.    
                                                   South Gate General Plan 2035    5 


 
COMMUNITY PROFILE 
 
Residential  neighborhoods  in  South  Gate  are  at  a  crossroads.    The  City’s  primary  land  use  is 
single family residential – an essential component of the American Dream.  The comparatively 
small  size  of  many  of  the  homes  and,  in  some  cases,  proximity  to  former  industrial  areas, 
indicate that South Gate’s residential neighborhoods were primarily built to house blue collar 
and middle class workers in the adjacent industrial areas and other Southland locations.  This 
period of construction and occupation lasted from approximately 1920 to 1970.  More recent 
conditions  affecting  South  Gate  have  been  the  de‐industrialization  of  Los  Angeles,  including 
closure of many manufacturing plants, and strong immigration pressures.   
 
These trends call for a transformation of the City to respond not only to the changing economic 
structure and employment base in South Gate, but also a significant growth and diversification 
in  population.    The  Southern  California  Association  of  Governments  (SCAG)  projects  a 
population growth of 17 percent for South Gate between 2008 and 2035.  The housing needs of 
this  growing  and  diverse  population  can  no  longer  be  met  in  the  predominantly  single‐family 
residential neighborhoods.  General Plan 2025 introduces a new approach to housing the future 
residents of South Gate.  
 
The purpose of this Community Profile is to provide a technical overview of the socioeconomic 
and physical characteristics of the City of South Gate.  The data provide information regarding 
past and present population growth, socioeconomic conditions and housing characteristics that 
would influence existing and future housing needs in the community. 
 
Population Characteristics                                     
 
Growth Trends 
 
The 2010 Census reported a total population of 94,396 persons for the City of South Gate.  This 
represents a decrease of approximately two percent since 2000.  The City’s population growth 
over  the  last  fifty  years  is  displayed  in  Table  HE‐1.    Since  1960,  South  Gate’s  population  has 
almost  doubled;  however,  much  of  this  growth  occurred  in  the  1990s.  Since  2000,  the  City’s 
population growth has decreased slightly. 
 
Comparing  the  City’s  population  over  time  to  neighboring  cities  shows  not  only  the  growth 
patterns  of  each  community  but  also  allows  for  a  regional  analysis  of  population  growth  and 
trends.  Table HE‐2 compares growth in the City of South Gate, the County of Los Angeles and 
surrounding  municipalities.    Between  1990  and  2000,  the  cities  of  Downey,  Lynwood, 
Paramount, and South Gate reported double‐digit population increases.  However, during the 
decade  following  2000,  most  of  these  communities  actually  experienced  small  decreases  in 
                                                             South Gate General Plan 2035    7 

population.  During  this  same  time  period,  however,  the  County  of  Los  Angeles’  population 
increased by approximately three percent. 
 
                              Table	HE‐1:	Population	Growth (1960‐2010)
                              Year	                Population	          Percent	Change	
                              1960	                    53,831	                 ‐‐‐	
                              1970	                    56,909	               5.7%	
                              1980	                    66,784	              17.4%	
                              1990	                    86,284	              29.2%	
                              2000	                    96,375	              11.7%	
                              2010	                    94,396	               ‐2.1%	
                              Sources:	
                                    1. City	of	South	Gate	Housing	Element	of	the	General	
                                         Plan,	1989.	
                                    2. U.S.	Bureau	of	the	Census,	2000	and	2010.	
 
        Table	HE‐2:	Comparative	Population	Growth	(1990‐2010)	
                                                                                          Percent	Change	
        Jurisdiction	                   1990	           2000	         2010	
                                                                                    1990‐2000	 2000‐2010	
        South	Gate	                    86,284	        96,375	        94,396	          11.7%	         ‐2.1%	
        County	of	Los	Angeles	       8,863,164	     9,519,338	     9,818,605	          7.4%	          3.1%	
        Bell	Gardens	                  42,335	        44,054	       42,072	            4.1%	         ‐4.5%	
        Cudahy	                        22,817	         24,208	       23,805	           6.1%	         ‐1.7%	
        Downey	                        91,444	        107,323	      111,772	          17.4%	          4.1%	
        Huntington	Park	               56,065	        61,348	       58,114	           9.4%	          ‐5.3%	
        Lynwood	                       61,945	         69,845	       69,772	          12.8%	         ‐0.1%	
        Paramount	                     47,669	         55,266	       54,098	          15.9%	         ‐2.1%	
        Source:	 U.S.	Bureau	of	the	Census,	1990,	2000,	and	2010.
 
Age Characteristics 
 
A review of the population’s age distribution is an integral component of determining current 
and  future housing  needs  within  a jurisdiction.    Table  HE‐3  indicates  that  adults  between  the 
ages  of  25  and  54  and  children  (ages  five  to  19)  comprised  the  largest  portions  of  the  City’s 
population.  The Census reported a median age of 26 for South Gate in 2000. This median age 
had  increased  to  29  by  2010  but  was  still  well  below  the  County’s  median  age  of  35.    The 
relative youthfulness of the City’s population creates a unique set of issues to be addressed.  
 
While adults and children continue to make up a majority of South Gate’s population, only the 
City’s senior population grew in number during the last decade. The number of senior residents 
(aged 65 and above) increased by approximately 26 percent between  2000 and 2010.  
 
8  Housing Element                                                                                           

 
 Table	HE‐3:	Age	Distribution	(1990‐2010)
                              1990	                      2000	                   2010	              Percent	Change	
   Age	Range	                      Percent	                 Percent	                Percent	      1990‐        2000‐
                     Number	                    Number	                  Number 
                                   of	Total	                 of	Total	               of	Total      2010	       2010	
 Under	5	Years	       9,205	        11.5%	       9,692	        9.8%	       7,963	      8.4%	       5.3%	      ‐17.8%	
 5‐19	Years	         23,940	        29.9%	       27,954	     28.2%	       24,870	    26.3%	       16.8%	      ‐11.0%	
 20‐24	Years	         8,810	        11.0%	        8,719	       8.8%	       7,839	      8.3%	      ‐1.0%	      ‐10.1%	
 25‐54	Years	        27,305	        34.1%	       39,709	     40.0%	       39,233	    41.6%	       45.4%	       ‐1.2%	
 55‐64	Years	         6,447	         8.1%	        7,870	       7.9%	       7,868	      8.3%	      22.1%	       0.0%	
 65‐74	Years	         2,208	         2.8%	        2,818	       2.8%	       4,007	      4.2%	      27.6%	       42.2%	
 75+	Years	           2,047	         2.6%	        2,431	       2.5%	       2,616	      2.8%	      18.8%	        7.6%	
 Median	Age	           25.7	          ‐‐‐	        26.0	         ‐‐‐	       29.4	        ‐‐‐	        ‐‐‐	         ‐‐‐	
 Source:	U.S.	Bureau	of	the	Census,	1990,	2000,	and	2010.	
 
Table HE‐4 provides a comparison of the median age in South Gate, surrounding cities and the 
County  of  Los  Angeles.    Most  of  the  cities  in  the  region  exhibited  a  similar  age  profile:  low 
median age (youthful population) and a relatively small senior population.  The City of Downey 
and  the  County  as  a  whole,  however,  had  a  significantly  higher  median  age  and  larger  senior 
population. 
 
    Table	HE‐4:	Comparative	Age	Distribution	(2010)	
                                    Median	       Under	       %	of	     18‐64	      %	of	        65+	        %	of	
    	                                 Age	       18	Years	     Total	     Years	     Total	      Years	      Total	
    South	Gate	                       29.4	       29,374	     31.1%	     58,399	    61.9%	       6,623	      7.0%	
    County	of	Los	Angeles	            34.8	     2,402,208	    24.5%	   6,350,698	   64.7%	     1,065,699	    10.9%	
    Bell	Gardens	                     27.3	       14,308	     34.0%	    25,563	     60.8%	       2,201	       5.2%	
    Cudahy	                           27.0	        8,325	     35.0%	     14,258	    59.9%	        1222	       5.1%	
    Downey	                           33.3	       29,972	     26.8%	     70,221	    62.8%	      11,579	      10.4%	
    Huntington	Park	                  28.9	       18,439	     31.7%	     35,812	    61.6%	       3,863	       6.6%	
    Lynwood	                          27.8	       22,977	     32.9%	     43,025	    61.7%	       3,770	       5.4%	
    Paramount	                        28.6	       17,630	     32.6%	     33,052	    61.1%	       3,416	       6.3%	
    Source:	U.S.	Bureau	of	the	Census,	2010.	
 
Racial and Ethnic Characteristics 
 
The 2010 Census found that Hispanics were the dominant ethnic group residing within the City 
of South Gate.  A total of 89,442 South Gate residents (approximately 95 percent of the City’s 
population) identified themselves as being of Hispanic origin.  The City’s proportion of Hispanic 
residents is much higher than the County’s (48 percent).  Table HE‐5 provides a comparison of 
the racial and ethnic profile of the City of South Gate and the County of Los Angeles. 
 
                                                                    South Gate General Plan 2035    9 

Table	HE‐5:	Comparative	Ethnic	and	Race	Distribution (2010)
Racial	&		                                     City	South	Gate	                   Los	Angeles	County	
Ethnic	Composition	                       Persons	        %	of	Total	         Persons	           %	of	Total	
Hispanic	Origin	                          89,442	           94.8%	           4,687,889	            47.7%	
Non‐Hispanic		
					White	                                3,233	            3.4%	           2,728,321	            27.8%	
					African‐American	                      585	             0.6%	            815,086	              8.3%	
					Asian/Pacific	Islander	                716	             0.8%	           1,348,135	            13.7%	
					Native	American	                       110	             0.1%	             18,886	              0.2%	
					Other	                                 310	             0.3%	            220,288	              2.2%	
Total	Population	                         94,396	          100.0%	           9,818,605	           100.0%	
Source:	U.S.	Bureau	of	the	Census,	2010.	
   
  Household Characteristics 
   
  The  household  characteristics  of  a  community  provide  critical  information  regarding  housing 
  needs.    These  data  are  important  indicators  of  areas  where  intervention  and/or  housing 
  programs  may  be  needed.    Household  and  family  incomes  are  indicators  of  housing 
  affordability for a community just as the owner/renter ratio may determine the stability of the 
  housing  market.    The  household  characteristics  for  the  City  of  South  Gate  provide  important 
  information  to  assist  decision  makers  in  adopting  programs  and  policies  to  alleviate  specific 
  housing problems. 
   
  Composition and Size of Households 
   
  The Census Bureau definition of a “family” is a group of two people or more (one of whom is 
  the householder) related by birth, marriage, or adoption and residing together.  The definition 
  of a “household” is the total number of persons that occupy a housing unit whether related or 
  unrelated.    The  Census  Bureau  does  not  include  persons  living  in  convalescent  or  retirement 
  homes,  or  those  living  in  other  group  quarters,  as  living  within  a  household.    Analyzing 
  household  composition  and  size  trends  within  a  jurisdiction  helps  to  determine  the  type  and 
  number  of  housing  units  required  in  a  community.    Table  HE‐6  presents  a  comparison  of 
  households by type for the City of South Gate over the past two decades. 
   
  10  Housing Element                                                                                   

 
Table	HE‐6:	Households	by	Type	(1990‐2010)
                                                 1990	                      2000	                   2010	
  Household	&	Family	Type	
                                        Number	       Percent	     Number	        Percent	 Number	      Percent	
  Total	Population	                      86,284	      100.0%	       96,375	       100.0%	   94,936	     100.0%	
  					In	Group	Quarters	                  263	         0.3%	         141	          0.1%	      88	        0.1%	
  Total	Households	                      22,428	      100.0%	       23,213	       100.0%	   23,278	     100.0%	
  Family	Households	                     18,281	       81.5%	      20,063	         86.4%	   20,150	      86.6%	
  					Married	Couple	Families	          13,087	       58.4%	       13,843	        59.6%	   13,183	      56.6%	
  					Single	Parent	Households	          5,194	       23.2%	        3,714	        16.0%	    3,656	      15.7%	
  Average	Household	Size	                  3.84	         ‐‐‐	        4.15	           ‐‐‐	     4.05	        ‐‐‐	
  Average	Family	Size	                     4.19	         ‐‐‐	        4.37	           ‐‐‐	    4.24	         ‐‐‐	
  Non‐Family	Households	                  4,147	       18.5%	       3,150	         13.6%	    3,128	      13.4%	
  Householder	Living	Alone	               3,389	       15.1%	       2,414	         10.4%	    2,292	       9.8%	
  					Householder	65+	(Alone)	           1,784	        8.0%	        1,110	         4.8%	     996	        4.3%	
Sources:	U.S.	Bureau	of	the	Census,	1990,	2000,	and	2010	Census.	
 
Persons  residing  in  group  quarters  have  typically  comprised  a  negligle  proportion  of  South 
Gate’s  population  (less  than  one  percent).    Among  total  households  in  the  City,  most  were 
considered  family‐households;  the  proportion  of  family‐households  in  South  Gate  increased 
from 82 percent in 1990 to 87 percent in 2010.  The City’s average household size and family 
size  increased  noticeably  between  1990  and  2000  but  seemed  to  have  leveled  off  by  2010.  
Among  the  City’s  non‐family  households,  the  majority  were  single  persons  living  alone.  The 
numbers both of non‐family households and of single persons living alone  declined after 1990.   
Seniors comprised a significant portion (i.e., 49 percent) of these single‐person households, but 
the number of single‐person senior households is also declining.     
 
Household Income 
 
Income is the most important factor in determining whether a household or family is able to 
balance  housing  costs  with  basic  necessities  of  life  while  avoiding  housing  problems  such  as 
cost burden and overcrowding. Income levels can vary considerably among households, based 
upon tenure, household type, location of residence, and race/ethnicity, among others. 
 
According to the 2007‐2011 ACS, the estimated median household income for South Gate was 
$41,990.  Figure  HE‐1  compares  the  City's  median  household  income  with  that  of  nearby 
communities and Los Angeles County.  As shown, the median household income in the City was 
comparable to neighboring jurisdictions.  The  City of Downey was the only jurisdiction with a 
median income that exceeded the County median of $56,266. 
 
                                                                  South Gate General Plan 2035  11 

Figure	HE‐1:	Median	Household	Income	(2011)	
$70,000
$60,000
$50,000
$40,000
$30,000                                                          $59,773
                            $56,266
              $41,990                                                                  $43,782  $42,831
$20,000                                  $38,971    $39,338                    $36,788
$10,000
       $0
             South Gate        LA          Bell     Cudahy       Downey     Huntington Lynwood Paramount
                             County      Gardens                                Park
                                                                                                           
Source:	U.S.	Bureau	of	the	Census,	American	Community	Survey	(ACS),	2007‐2011.	
 
To  facilitate  the  analysis  of  income  distribution  among  households  in  communities,  the  State 
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) groups households into categories 
by  income.  Income  categories  are  determined  as  a  percentage  of  the  Area  Median  Income 
(AMI) and then adjusted for household size in the following manner: 
 
         Extremely Low Income – 0 to 30 percent AMI 
         Very Low Income – 31 to 50 percent of the AMI 
         Low Income – 51 to 80 percent of the AMI 
         Moderate Income – 81 to 120 percent of the AMI 
         Above Moderate Income – above 120 percent of the AMI 
 
The 2010 Census does not collect information on the number of households belonging to each 
of the income categories described above.  However, household income data were tabulated by 
SCAG  using  the  2005‐2009  ACS  (Table  HE‐7).    As  shown  below,  between  2005  and  2009, 
approximately  51  percent  of  the  City’s  households  were  in  the  lower  income  category  while 
approximately 49 percent had incomes of moderate or above. The proportion of lower income 
households in South Gate is noticeably higher than in Los Angeles County as a whole (i.e., 41 
percent),  indicating  that  the  need  for  affordable  housing  in  the  City  may  be  more acute  than 
elsewhere in the region. 
 
12  Housing Element                                                                                      

 
Table	HE‐7:	Income	Distribution	
                                                   Number	of	
Income	Group	                                                           Percent	of	Total	   LA	County	Percent	
                                                   Households		
Extremely	Low	(30%	or	less)	                          3,338	                  14.1%	              13.7%	
Very	Low	(31	to	50%)	                                 3,718	                  15.7%	              11.5%	
Low	(51	to	80%)	                                      5,089	                  21.4%	              15.6%	
Moderate	(81	to	100%)	                                4,999	                  21.1%	              16.8%	
Above	Moderate	(over	100%)	                           6,598	                  27.8%	              42.4%	
Total	                                               23,743	                 100.0%	             100.0%	
Source:	SCAG	(ACS,	2005‐2009).	
 
Employment 
 
Approximately  63  percent  of  South  Gate’s  working  age  population  was  in  the  labor  force, 
according  to  the  2007‐2011  American  Community  Survey  (ACS).    Countywide,  the  labor 
participation  rate  was  slightly  higher—at  approximately  65  percent.    Unemployment  among 
South Gate residents (8.4 percent) was higher than for the County (6.4 percent). 
 
The  City  of  South  Gate  is  home  to  a  range  of  employment  opportunities,  including 
manufacturing,  office,  and  service  jobs.    Table  HE‐8  lists  the  major  employers  in  the  City.    As 
shown, almost all of the major employers are manufacturing and distribution companies. 
 
Table	HE‐8:	Major	Employers	(2013)	
                    Employer                                        Product or Service               Employees
HUDD	Transportation	Services	                                     Trucking/Distribution	               654	
J.B.	Hunt	Transport,	Inc.	                                              Trucking	                      523	
World	Oil	Co.	                                                      Fuel	Distribution	                 450	
Koo’s	Manufacturing	                                                  Denim	Jeans	                     400	
International	Window	                                               Windows/Doors	                     250	
Shultz	Steel	Company,	Inc.	                                           Metal	Forging	                   232	
Armstrong	World	Industries	                                            Floor	Tiles	                    231	
Pan	Pacific	Petroleum	                                                Asphalt	Felts	                   230	
Sam’s	Club	                                               Wholesale/Retail	General	Merchandise	        200	
Source:	Market	Study	of	Calden	Court	Apartments,	March	6,	2013.	
 
Table  HE‐9  displays  the  occupational  characteristics  of  South  Gate  residents  from  the  2007‐
2011  ACS.  It  also  provides  the  mean  annual  wages  for  these  occupations  in  the  Los  Angeles 
metropolitan  area,  according  to  the  State  Employment  Development  Department.    As 
demonstrated  in  Table  HE‐9,  the  majority  of  employed  South  Gate  residents  held  sales  and 
office  (29  percent)  and  production,  transportation,  and  material  moving  (26  percent) 
occupations.    These  occupations  were  among  the  lowest  paid  occupations  in  Los  Angeles 
County in 2012.   
 
                                                                 South Gate General Plan 2035  13 

    Table	HE‐9:	Occupation	and	Wage	Comparison
                                                                                                   2012	Mean	
    Occupation	                                                   Employed	            Percent	   Annual	Wage	
                                                                                                    in	County	
    Management,	Business,	Science,	and	Arts	
                                                                     5,912	            15.5%	       $124,479		
    Occupations	
    Service	Occupations	                                             7,155	            18.8%	        $27,415		
    Sales	and	Office	Occupations	                                   10,999	            28.8%	        $40,620		
    Natural	Resources,	Construction,	and	Maintenance	
                                                                     4,230	             11.1%	       $52,784		
    Occupations	
    Production,	Transportation,	and	Material	Moving	
                                                                     9,840	             25.8%	       $32,269		
    Occupations	
    Total	                                                          38,136	            100.0%	       $52,381		
    Sources:		
        1.     U.S.	Bureau	of	the	Census,	American	Community	Survey	(ACS),	2007‐2011.	
        2.     State	Employment	Development	Department,	2012	Occupational	Employment	Statistics	(OES)	Survey.
 
Housing Problems 
 
Housing  problems  include  overcrowding  and  overpayment  (cost  burden).    Both  are  related 
either directly or indirectly to household income compared to housing costs. 
 
Estimates of Housing Needs 
 
The SCAG data estimating the number of households at each income level presented earlier do 
not  provide  any  detail  on  the  specific  housing  needs  and  problems  faced  by  the  City’s  lower 
income  households.  The  Comprehensive  Housing  Affordability  Strategy  (CHAS)  developed  by 
the  Census  Bureau  for  HUD,  however,  provides  detailed  information  on  housing  needs  by 
income level for different types of households in South Gate.  Detailed CHAS data based on the 
2005‐2009  ACS  data  is  displayed  in  (Table  HE‐11).    Housing  problems  considered  by  CHAS 
include: 
 
     Units with physical defects (lacking complete kitchen or bathroom);  
     Overcrowded conditions (housing units with more than one person per room);  
     Housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 30 percent of gross income; or  
     Severe housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 50 percent of gross income.  
 
The  types  of  housing  problems  faced  by  South  Gate  households  vary  according  to  household 
income, type, and tenure.  However, the following observations can be made about the City: 
 
     In  general,  renter‐households  had  a  higher  level  of  housing  problems  (71  percent) 
        compared to owner‐households (66 percent). 
 
14  Housing Element                                                                                             

 
        A larger proportion of very low income households had a housing problem (88 percent) 
         than extremely low (82 percent) and low income (65 percent) households. 
          
        Of  the  4,735  extremely  low  income  South  Gate  households  identified  in  2009, 
         approximately  80  percent  incurred  a  housing  cost  burden  exceeding  30  percent  of 
         monthly income and 66 percent incurred a housing cost burden exceeding 50 percent of 
         monthly income.   
 
        Projected housing needs for extremely low income households through the end of the 
         planning  period  include  a  need  for  additional  Housing  Choice  Vouchers  and  new  or 
         substantially  rehabilitated  rental  housing  of  adequate  size  and  at  affordable  rates  to 
         avoid or alleviate the problems of overcrowding and cost burden.   
 
Overcrowding 
 
HCD  defines  overcrowding  as  a  unit  that  is  occupied  by  more  than  one  person  per  room, 
including  living  and  dining  room  but  excluding  kitchen,  bathrooms  and  hallways.    Severe 
overcrowding occurs when a unit is occupied by more than 1.5 persons per room.  Generally, 
overcrowding  occurs  as  a  result  of  high  housing  costs  in  relation  to  income.    This  situation 
forces  families  to  live  together  in  a  housing  unit,  pooling  income  in  order  to  pay  the  rent  or 
mortgage.  However, some cultures (such as Hispanic and Asian households) tend to have larger 
household  size  either  because  of  the  number  of  children  in  the  family  or  the 
practice/preference of multi‐generation living or living with extended family members.  With a 
scarcity of units of sufficient size to accommodate large and very large families, overcrowding 
can result.   
 
The  City  of  South  Gate  is  essentially  a  built‐out  community  with  very  little  remaining  vacant 
residentially zoned land.  As a community with a significant number of large‐family households, 
the City of South Gate is especially vulnerable to overcrowding.  Significant overcrowding exists 
as families and extended family members live together in order to pool the money needed each 
month to pay for housing.  The intensity of use caused by this condition significantly reduces 
the useful life of the existing housing stock.  Seniors, in particular, are especially susceptible to 
increased  competition  for  available  housing  due  to  their  fixed  and  limited  incomes.  Illegal 
conversion  of  garages  into  living  units  and  doubling  up  of  families  are  also  common  in  the 
community.  
 
As shown in Table HE‐11, overcrowding in the City is severe.  Overall, 25 percent of South Gate 
households  were  living  in  overcrowded  units,  compared  to  just  12  percent  of  Los  Angeles 
County  households.    Overcrowding  disproportionately  affected  the  City’s  renter‐households; 
approximately  29  percent  of  renter‐households  experienced  overcrowding  compared  to  20 
percent of owner‐households.   
 
                                                             South Gate General Plan 2035  15 

Table	HE‐10:	Overcrowding	by	Tenure	
                                                       South	Gate	                     LA	County	
                    		                          Number	             %	of	Total	  Number	        %	of	Total	
Owner	Occupied	Units	                            10,503	              100.0%	   1,539,554	        100.0%	
Not	Overcrowded	
					0.50	or	Less	Occupants	Per	Room	             3,234	              30.8%	     943,714	         61.3%	
					0.51	to	1.00	Occupants	Per	Room	             5,146	              49.0%	     502,405	         32.6%	
Overcrowded	
					1.01	to	1.50	Occupants	Per	Room	             1,551	              14.8%	     70,469	           4.6%	
					>1.51	Occupants	Per	Room	                     572	                5.4%	     22,966	           1.5%	
Renter	Occupied	Units	                           13,215	              100.0%	   1,678,964	        100.0%	
Not	Overcrowded	
					0.50	or	Less	Occupants	Per	Room	             2,646	              20.0%	     717,054	         42.7%	
					0.51	to	1.00	Occupants	Per	Room	             6,763	              51.2%	     669,576	         39.9%	
Overcrowded	
					1.01	to	1.50	Occupants	Per	Room	             2,576	              19.5%	     158,151	          9.4%	
					>1.51	Occupants	Per	Room	                    1,230	               9.3%	     134,183	          8.0%	
Total	Overcrowded	                                   	                25.0%	         	            12.0%	
Source:		Bureau	of	the	Census,	American	Community	Survey	(ACS),	2007‐2011.	
   
  Cost Burden 
   
  Monthly housing payments for a considerable number of South Gate residents exceed the 30 
  percent  affordability  standard.    According  to  special  data  developed  for  HUD,  one‐half  of  the 
  City’s households spent more than 30 percent of their gross income on housing costs in 2009 
  (Table HE‐11). 
   
  Extremely  low  and  very  low  income  households  were  particularly  cost‐burdened,  with 
  approximately 80 percent of these households overpaying for housing.  Among the extremely 
  low and low income households, with the exception of senior homeowners, both owner‐ and 
  renter‐households were equally impacted.  Among low income households, however, housing 
  cost  burden  affected  a  significantly  higher  proportion  of  owner‐households  than  renter‐
  households, indicating that rental housing is generally more affordable to this income group.   
   
  16  Housing Element                                                                                  

    
Table	HE‐11:	Housing	Cost	Burden	by	Tenure	and	Household	Type
                                                         Renters	                                       Owners	
Household	by	Type,	Income,	                                                                                                            Total	
    and	Housing	Problem	                           Small	         Large	                                  Large	                    Households	
                                    Seniors	                                    Total	     Seniors	                    Total	
                                                  Families	      Families	                              Families	
Extremely	Low	(0‐30%)	                810	         1,755	          820	         3,635	       495	          165	        1,100	         4,735	
With	any	housing	problem	            75.9%	        89.7%	        100.0%	       86.9%	      49.5%	        87.9%	       66.4%	          81.9%	
With	cost	burden	>30%	               75.9%	        88.9%	         89.0%	       84.0%	      49.5%	        87.9%	       66.4%	          79.9%	
With	cost	burden	>50%	               57.4%	        75.8%	         72.6%	       68.6%	      32.3%	        87.9%	       57.3%	          66.0%	
Very	Low	(31‐50%)	                    255	         2,175	          820	         3,610	       415	          495	        1,620	          5,230	
With	any	housing	problem	            94.1%	        93.8%	         97.0%	       95.2%	      34.9%	        91.9%	       72.8%	          88.2%	
With	cost	burden	>30%	               94.1%	        84.8%	         75.6%	       83.9%	      34.9%	        86.9%	       70.7%	          79.8%	
With	cost	burden	>50%	               29.4%	        18.2%	         15.2%	       20.4%	      27.7%	        58.6%	       48.5%	          29.1%	
Low	(51‐80%)	                         160	         2,000	          725	         3,235	       475	         1,170	       2,810	          6,045	
With	any	housing	problem	            12.5%	        51.5%	         81.4%	       57.0%	      30.5%	        88.9%	       73.7%	          64.8%	
With	cost	burden	>30%	               12.5%	        21.5%	         10.3%	       20.7%	      26.3%	        61.5%	       61.4%	          39.6%	
With	cost	burden	>50%	               0.0%	          1.0%	          0.0%	        0.9%	      14.7%	        24.8%	       27.0%	          13.1%	
Moderate/Above	Moderate	
                                       55	         1,615	          645	         2,555	       505	         2,050	       5,180	         7,735	
(>80%)	
With	any	housing	problem	            18.2%	        21.1%	         60.5%	       30.1%	      22.8%	        66.1%	       45.6%	          40.5%	
With	cost	burden	>30%	               18.2%	        4.6%	           0.0%	        3.3%	      22.8%	        30.2%	       27.9%	          19.8%	
With	cost	burden	>50%	               0.0%	          0.0%	          0.0%	        0.0%	       2.0%	         6.3%	        5.4%	           3.6%	
Total	Households	                    1,280	        7,545	         3,010	       13,035	      1,890	        3,880	      10,710	         23,745	
With	any	housing	problem	            69.1%	        66.1%	         86.2%	       70.7%	      34.1%	        77.2%	       59.1%	          65.4%	
With	cost	burden	>30%	               69.1%	        51.8%	         47.3%	       52.5%	      33.3%	        49.4%	       47.1%	          50.1%	
With	cost	burden	>50%	               42.2%	        23.1%	         23.9%	       25.0%	      18.8%	        22.0%	       22.9%	          24.1%	
Source:	HUD	Comprehensive	Housing	Affordability	Strategy	(CHAS),	2005‐2009.	
Note:		Data	presented	in	this	table	are	based	on	special	tabulations	from	the	American	Community	Survey	(ACS)	data.		Due	to	the	
small	 sample	 size,	 the	 margins	 for	 error	 can	 be	 significant.	 	 Interpretations	 of	 these	 data	 should	 focus	 on	 the	 proportion	 of	
households	in	need	of	assistance	rather	than	on	precise	numbers.	
    
   Special Needs Groups 
    
   State Government Code Section 65580‐65589.8 requires that households and/or persons with 
   special needs be identified in the Housing Element.  Special needs groups in South Gate include: 
   seniors,  single  parent  households,  large  households,  persons  with  disabilities,  farm  workers, 
   persons  living  in  poverty  and  the  homeless.    The  City  may  also  have  a  large  number  of 
   undocumented  immigrants.    These  population  groups  are  identified  as  special  needs  groups 
   because  their  specific  circumstances  often  make  it  difficult  for  them  to  find  and  secure 
   affordable housing.  Table HE‐12 summarizes characteristics of the special needs population in 
   South Gate.  These groups are also discussed in further detail below. 
    
                                                                              South Gate General Plan 2035  17 

Table	HE‐12:	Special	Needs	Groups	
                                                       Persons	or	
            Special	Needs	Group	                                             Renter	             Owner	     Percent	of	Total	
                                                       Household	
Senior‐Headed	Households	                                 3,280	         1,220	(37.2%)	      2,060	(62.8%)	     14.1%	
Households	with	a	Senior	Member	                          5,093	               n.a.	               n.a.	        21.9%	
                                                                               521	               475	
Seniors	Living	Alone	                                      996	                                                  4.3%	
                                                                            (52.3%)	            (47.7%)	
Single‐Parent	Households	                                 3,656	               n.a.	               n.a.	        15.7%	
Female	Single‐Parent	Households	                          2,501	                ‐‐	                 ‐‐	         10.7%	
Large	Households	                                         8,590	         4,013	(46.7%)	      4,577	(53.3%)	     36.9%	
Persons	with	Disabilities**	                              6,851	               n.a.	               n.a.	         7.3%	
Agricultural	Workers*	                                     213	                n.a.	               n.a.	         0.2%	
Persons	living	in	Poverty*	                              18,456	               n.a.	              n.a.	         19.6%	
Homeless***	                                               199	                n.a.	               n.a.	        <1.0%	
Notes:	
*=2010	Census	data	not	available.		Estimate	is	from	the	2007‐2011	ACS.	
**=2010	Census	data	not	available.		Estimate	is	from	the	2009‐2011	ACS.	
***=2010	Census	data	not	available.		Estimate	is	from	2011	Greater	Los	Angeles	Homeless	Count	Report.	
n.a.=	Data	not	available.	
Sources:	
     1.   Bureau	of	the	Census,	2010	Census.	
     2.   Bureau	of	the	Census,	American	Community	Survey	(ACS),	2007‐2011	and	2009‐2011.	
     3.   2011	Greater	Los	Angeles	Homeless	Count	Report.	
      
     Seniors   
      
     Many seniors live modestly on fixed incomes of social security and personal retirement funds.  
     Seniors are also more likely to have physical ailments that limit mobility.  This combination of 
     factors causes seniors to be especially vulnerable to fluctuations in housing costs, health care 
     availability, and transportation accessibility. 
      
     The 2010 Census reported a total of 6,623 persons in South Gate that were 65 years or older.  
     Seniors  represent  approximately  five  percent  of  the  City’s  population.    Among  the  City’s 
     seniors,  3,280  persons  (50  percent)  were  heads  of  households  and  996  seniors  (15  percent) 
     lived alone.  Furthermore, according to the 2011 ACS, a total of 1,028 persons 65 years of age 
     or older were living below the poverty level, representing approximately 16 percent of the total 
     senior population.  ACS data also estimates that approximately 41 percent of senior residents 
     have one or more disabilities, the majority of which were ambulatory and independent living 
     difficulties. 
      
     Resources 
      
     The  City’s  Housing  Choice  Vouchers  program  provides  rental  assistance  to  lower  income 
     seniors.  In addition, the City allocates Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds to a 
     18  Housing Element                                                                                           

 
Meals  on  Wheels  program  that  provides  hot,  nutritious  meals  to  the  homes  of  frail,  inbound 
seniors.  Seniors  can  also  benefit  from  the  activities  and  programs  offered  at  the  South  Gate 
Senior  Center  and  Oldtimers  Center,  including  fitness  and  cultural  classes,  travel  excursions, 
social and health services, and a lunch program.  Elderly residents in need of transportation can 
utilize  South  Gate  Phone‐A‐Ride  (P.A.R.),  which  provides  low  cost  transportation  services  to 
local  destinations  within  City  limits  as  well  as  medical  appointments  at  16  approved 
destinations outside of the City. 
 
Single‐Parent Households 
 
Single‐parent households must often live with only one income. This limitation, combined with 
their childcare needs, makes single‐parent households a unique special needs group.  About 16 
percent  of  the  City’s  households  in  2010  were  single‐parent  households,  and  approximately 
two‐thirds of these households were headed by a female.   
 
Compared  to  the  general  population,  a  larger  proportion  of  female‐headed  single  parent 
households  were  living  below  the  poverty  level.  According  to  the  2007‐2011  ACS, 
approximately 20 percent of all South Gate households were living in poverty, while 43 percent 
of the female‐headed single parent households lived in poverty. 
 
Resources 
 
The  City’s  Housing  Choice  Vouchers  program  provides  rental  assistance  to  lower  income 
households,  including  single‐parent  households.    In  addition,  the  City  offers  a  range  of 
affordable  rental  and  ownership  housing  for  single‐parent  households  through  the 
Acquisition/Rehabilitation  Program,  Home  Improvement  Program,  First‐Time  Homebuyer 
Program, and Neighborhood Stabilization Program.  The City also funds programs and services 
with  CDBG  funds  that  assist  single  parent  households,  including  the  Teen  Challenge  Ministry 
Institute, which offers after school learning and prevention programs designed to provide safe 
and  effective  homework  assistance  to  youth.    Additional  opportunities  for  youth  and  their 
families  include  various  sports  programs,  the  teen  town  program,  the Teen  Center  located  at 
the South Gate Sports Center, recreation programs at The Girls Clubhouse, and the tiny two and 
tot time programs. 
 
Large Households 
 
Both  the  State  and  HUD  define  a  large  household  as  one  with  five  or  more  members.    Large 
households are considered a special needs group due to the general shortage of housing units 
that are adequately sized and affordable to these households.  According to the 2010 Census, 
about 37 percent of the households in South Gate were large households.  A larger proportion 
of owner‐households (43 percent) had five or more members compared to renter‐households 
                                                          South Gate General Plan 2035  19 

(32 percent).  According to the 2007‐2011 ACS, the average household size in South Gate was 
4.22 for owner‐households and 3.85 for renter‐households.   
 
Generally, housing units with three or more bedrooms are considered to be adequate for large 
households.  Finding affordable adequately sized rental housing, though, is often a problem for 
large  renter‐households,  particularly  those  with  lower  incomes.    According  to  the  2007‐2011 
ACS,  only  26  percent  of  the  8,248  housing  units  in  South  Gate  with  three  or  more  bedrooms 
were occupied by renters.   
 
      Table	HE‐13:	Large	Households	by	Tenure
                                      Owner‐Households	      Renter‐Households	           Total	
                    	
                                      Number	       Percent	 Number	   Percent	   Number	      Percent	
      Small	Households		
                                       6,081	        57.1%	   8,607	    68.2%	     14,688	       63.1%	
      (up	to	4	persons)	
      					Single‐Households	            843	          7.9%	  1,449	    11.5%	      2,292	        9.8%	
      Large	Households		
                                       4,577	        42.9%	   4,013	    31.8%	      8,590	       36.9%	
      (5	or	more	persons)	
      Total		                         10,658	       100.0%	  12,620	   100.0%	     23,278	     100.0%	
      Source:	U.S.	Bureau	of	the	Census,	2010	Census.	
 
Resources 
 
The  City’s  Housing  Choice  Vouchers  program  provides  rental  assistance  to  lower  income 
households, including large households.  In addition, the City offers a range of affordable rental 
and  ownership  housing  for  large  households  through  the  Home  Improvement  Program  and 
First‐Time  Homebuyer  Program.  Large  households  in  South  Gate  can  also  benefit  from  the 
general programs and services available to all lower income households in the City. 
 
Persons with Disabilities (Including Developmental Disabilities) 
 
Physical, mental, and/or developmental disabilities may prevent a person from working, restrict 
one’s mobility, or make it difficult to care for oneself.  Thus, disabled persons often have special 
housing needs related to limited earning capacity, a lack of accessible and affordable housing, 
and  higher  health  costs  associated  with  a  disability.  Some  residents  in  South  Gate  have 
disabilities that prevent them from working, restrict their mobility, or make it difficult to care 
for themselves. An additional segment of residents suffers from disabilities that require living in 
an  institutional  setting.  Because  of  these  conditions,  persons  with  disabilities  have  special 
housing needs.
 
The  2010  Census  did  not  collect  information  on  disability.    However,  according  to  2009‐2011 
ACS  data,  persons  with  disabilities  made  up  seven  percent  of  the  population  in  South  Gate 
(Table  HE‐14).    The  majority  (53  percent)  of  the  City’s  disabled  population  was  between  the 
ages of 18 and 64, though a substantial proportion (38 percent) were among the seven percent 
20  Housing Element                                                                                      

 
of  the  City’s  residents  that  were  aged  65  and  older.    The  ACS  also  tallied  the  number  of 
disabilities  by  type  for  residents  with  one  or  more  disabilities.  Among  the  disabilities  tallied, 
ambulatory  difficulties  were  the  most  prevalent  (54  percent);  cognitive  (35  percent)  and 
independent living (34 percent) difficulties were also common. 
 
Disabled individuals have unique housing needs because they may be limited in mobility or in 
their ability to care for themselves.  In addition, the earning power of disabled persons may be 
limited.    Their  housing  need  is  also  often  compounded  by  design  and  location  requirements, 
which  can  drive  up  housing  costs.    For  example,  wheelchair‐bound  or  semi‐ambulatory 
individuals may require ramps, holding bars, special bathroom designs, wider doorways, lower 
cabinets,  and  other  interior  and  exterior  design  features.    Affordable  housing  and  housing 
programs  that  address  accessibility  can  assist  these  individuals  with  their  specific  housing 
needs. 
 
          Table	HE‐14:	Disability	Status
                                                                  Percent	of	Disabilities	Tallied	
          Disability	Type	                              Age	5	to	      Age	18	to	
                                                           17	             64	       Age	65+	       Total	
          With	a	hearing	difficulty	                     10.9%	          16.6%	       33.2%	       22.5%	
          With	a	vision	difficulty	                      23.0%	          26.8%	       21.3%	       24.4%	
          With	a	cognitive	difficulty	                   63.3%	          36.2%	       27.7%	       35.3%	
          With	an	ambulatory	difficulty	                 16.4%	          54.1%	       63.3%	       54.4%	
          With	a	self‐care	difficulty	                   22.0%	          20.2%	       34.3%	       25.8%	
          With	an	independent	living	difficulty	           ‐‐	           33.0%	       42.2%	       33.7%	
          Total	Persons	with	Disabilities	                586	           3,623	       2,630	       6,839	
          Notes:	
              1. Persons	under	5	years	of	age	are	not	included	in	this	table.	
              2. Persons	may	have	multiple	disabilities.	
          Source:	U.S.	Bureau	of	the	Census,	American	Community	Survey	(ACS),	2009‐2011.
 
Persons with Developmental Disabilities 
A recent change in State law requires that the Housing Element discuss the housing needs of 
persons  with  developmental  disabilities.   As  defined in  Section  4512  of  the  Welfare  and 
Institutions  Code,  developmental  disability  means  “a  disability  that  originates  before  an 
individual  attains  age  18  years,  continues,  or  can  be  expected  to  continue,  indefinitely,  and 
constitutes  a  substantial  disability  for  that  individual.  As  defined  by  the  Director  of 
Developmental Services, in consultation with the Superintendent of Public Instruction, this term 
shall  include  mental  retardation,  cerebral  palsy,  epilepsy,  and  autism.  This  term  shall  also 
include  disabling  conditions  found  to  be  closely  related  to  mental  retardation  or  to  require 
treatment similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall not include 
other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.” 
 
The Census does not record developmental disabilities. According to the U.S. Administration on 
Developmental Disabilities, an accepted estimate of the percentage of the population that can 
                                                                South Gate General Plan 2035  21 

be defined as developmentally disabled is 1.5 percent. This equates to 1,416 persons in the City 
of South Gate with developmental disabilities, based on the 2010 Census population.  
 
According  to  the  State’s  Department  of  Developmental  Services,  as  of  November  2012, 
approximately 664 South Gate residents with developmental disabilities were being assisted at 
the  South  Central  Los  Angeles  Regional  Center.    Most  of  these  individuals  were  residing  in  a 
private  home  with  their  parent  of  guardian  and  350  of  these  persons  with  developmental 
disabilities were under the age of 18. 
 
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional 
housing  environment.  More  severely  disabled  individuals  require  a  group  living  environment 
where  supervision  is  provided.  The  most  severely  affected  individuals  may  require  an 
institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because 
developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the 
developmentally  disabled  is  the  transition  from  the  person’s  living  situation  as  a  child  to  an 
appropriate level of independence as an adult. 
 
Resources 
 
The City recently completed two HOPE projects, consisting of four units each for a total of eight 
units,  for  extremely  low  income  developmentally  disabled  individuals.  The  City  also  provides 
CDBG funds to a number of programs and supportive services for persons with disabilities, such 
as  the  Meals  on  Wheels  Program  for  frail  and  home‐bound  seniors  and  Southern  California 
Rehabilitation Services (which provides home improvements that can range from installing grab 
bars, constructing wheel chair ramps, and widening doorways to persons with disabilities).  The 
Housing Choice Vouchers Program also provides rental assistance to lower income households, 
including households with disabled persons.  Residents in need of transportation can also utilize 
South  Gate  Phone‐A‐Ride  (P.A.R.),  which  provides  low  cost  transportation  services  to  local 
destinations  within  City  limits  as  well  as  medical  appointments  at  16  approved  destinations 
outside of the City. 
 
Farmworkers 
 
South  Gate  is  essentially  built‐out  and  there  is  no  agriculturally  designated  land  in  the  City.  
Furthermore,  the  2007‐2011  ACS  found  only  213  South  Gate  residents  employed  within  the 
occupational  category  of  farming,  fishing  and  forestry,  representing  less  than  one  percent  of 
the City’s total population.  Those employed in this occupation are also most likely employed as 
gardeners, landscapers or in plant nurseries. 
 
22  Housing Element                                                                                      

 
Resources 
 
Because  farmworkers  makes  up  such  a  small  percentage  of  the  City’s  total  population  no 
specific programs for this special needs group are necessary.  The housing needs of farmwokers 
can adequately be addressed through the general programs and services available to all lower 
and moderate income households. 
 
Residents Living Below the Poverty Level 
 
The  Census  Bureau  defines  poverty  based  upon  Directive  14  issued  by  the  Office  of 
Management  and  Budget.    The  Census  Bureau  uses  a  set  of  income  thresholds  that  vary  by 
household  size  to  determine  poverty.    If  the  total  income  for  a  household  falls  below  the 
relevant  federal  poverty  threshold,  then  that  household  is  considered  as  being  “below  the 
poverty level.”  Table HE‐15 presents the extent of poverty in South Gate.  Approximately 20 
percent of the City’s households received incomes below the poverty level in 2011.  In general, 
families with children, particularly female‐headed families with children, were the most likely to 
be affected by poverty. 
 
                  Table	HE‐15:	Poverty	by	Household	Type
                  	                                                           Below	Poverty	
                                                                         Number	             Percent	
                  Family	Households	                                      3,955	             84.1%	
                  Families	with	Children	                                 3,232	              68.7%	
                  Female‐Head	of	Households	                              1,846	              39.2%	
                  					With	Children	                                     1,550	              33.0%	
                  Non‐Family	Households	                                   749	              15.9%	
                  					Seniors	(65+)	                                      360	                7.7%	
                  Total	Households	below	Poverty	Level	                   4,704	             100.0%	
                  Note:	Numbers	represent	those	for	whom	poverty	status	has	been	reported.	“Families	
                  with	 Children”,	 “Female‐Head	 of	 Households”,	 and	 Female‐Head	 of	 Households”	 are	
                  subcategories	of	families.	
                  Source:	U.S.	Bureau	of	the	Census,	American	Community	Survey	(ACS),	2007‐2011.	
 
Resources 
 
Residents  living  below  the  poverty  level  in  South  Gate  can  benefit  from  a  variety  of  family 
services  supported  with  CDBG  funds,  including  the  Southeast  Churches  Service  Center  which 
assists families with obtaining adequate food and the Teen Challenge Ministry Institute which 
offers  after  school  learning  and  prevention  programs  designed  to  provide  safe  and  effective 
homework assistance to youth.  Additional services for this special needs group include various 
sports  programs,  the  teen  town  program,  the  Teen  Center  located  at  the  South  Gate  Sports 
Center, recreation programs at The Girls Clubhouse, and the tiny two and tot time programs.  
Additionally,  the  Housing  Choice  Vouchers  Program  also  provides  rental  assistance  to 
                                                                   South Gate General Plan 2035  23 

households earning lower incomes.  Persons living in poverty can also access various affordable 
housing programs offered by the City. 
 
Homeless 
 
In  2011,  the  Los  Angeles  Homeless  Service  Authority  (LAHSA)  undertook  a  homeless 
enumeration  effort.    This  comprehensive  study  included  a  field  enumeration,  field  surveys, 
telephone surveys, and a sophisticated statistical analysis used to project homelessness in non‐
enumerated  areas.    For  the  purposes  of  this  study,  the  HUD  definition  of  an  unsheltered 
homeless person was used: someone who is either living on the streets, or living in a vehicle, 
encampment, abandoned building, garage, or any other place not normally used or meant for 
human habitation.  The overall homeless population of the Greater Los Angeles Continuum of 
Care (CoC) at a given point in time was estimated to be 45,422 people.  Approximately 28,450 
were  unsheltered,  and  16,882  people  were  living  in  either  emergency  shelters  or  transitional 
housing programs at the time of the enumeration.   
 
LAHSA covers Los Angeles County, which is divided into eight Service Planning Areas (SPAs). The 
City of South Gate is located within SPA 7 (East Los Angeles) at the western edge of the service 
area.    The  2011  homeless  count  estimated  that  4,759  homeless  persons  were  in  SPA  7, 
representing  approximately  11  percent  of  the  homeless  persons  in  the  County.    As  an  opt‐in 
area, a specific homeless count for South Gate was conducted as part of the LAHSA study. This 
survey estimated that 199 homeless persons were located within the City of South Gate based 
on the City’s general population proportion to that of SPA 7. 
 
Resources 
 
Homeless persons in South Gate have access to a number of homeless shelters and programs 
that are located within SPA 7.  These include: 
 
     Rio  Hondo  Temporary  Home,  Norwalk  –  Provides  emergency  food  and  transitional 
         shelter  for  families  with  children  in  the  Cerritos,  Downey,  La  Mirada,  Montebello, 
         Norwalk, Pico  Rivera, Santa Fe Springs and Whittier areas.  There are no geographical 
         restrictions for residents. 
          
     Santa  Fe  Springs  Transitional  Living  Center,  Whittier  –  Provides  shelter  for  homeless 
         families in transition, most of whom are single parents or victims of domestic violence 
         and substance abuse, in Los Angeles County. 
 
     Hospitality Housing, Whittier – Provides homeless support services for single adults 18 
         years and older and families with children. 
 
     Birch Grove Homes, Norwalk ‐ Provides supportive services to 20 persons in an existing 
         permanent housing program for persons with mental health disabilities. 
24  Housing Element                                                                                  

 
 
        Community Housing Options, scattered sites ‐ Provides permanent supportive housing 
         to homeless persons and families living with HIV/AIDS or dual diagnoses. 
 
        Denker  House/Harvest  House,  scattered  sites  ‐  Provides  supportive  services    in  an 
         existing permanent housing program for persons with disabilities. 
 
        Homes  for  Life  Foundation,  Norwalk  ‐  Provides  permanent  housing  to  eight  persons 
         with mental health disabilities in eight one‐bedroom apartment style units. 
 
        Su Casa Domestic Violence Network, Lakewood ‐ Provides crisis intervention service for 
         domestic violence victims and their children, for a maximum of 30 consecutive days. 
 
        Salvation Army, Bell Shelter – Provides emergency shelter services and transitional care 
         for up to 350 homeless men and women. 
 
While  no  homeless  facilities  are  located  in  South  Gate,  the  City  provides  Community 
Development  Block  Grant  (CDBG)  and  Emergency  Solutions  Grant  (ESG)  funds  annually  to 
various nonprofit organizations that offer a range of homeless and supportive services for those 
who  are  homeless  and  at‐risk  of  becoming  homeless.    Programs  and  agencies  that  have 
received funding support from the City include: the Homelessness Assistance Program, LAHSA, 
Southeast Churches Service Center and Salvation Army Bell Shelter. 
 
Housing Characteristics 
 
Housing Trends and Types 
 
Housing growth in South Gate was modest but steady during the 1990s and the 2000 Census 
recorded  24,269  housing  units  in  the  City,  representing  a  six  percent  increase  from  ten  years 
earlier  (Table  HE‐16).    This  growth,  however,  slowed  dramatically  during  the  2000s  and  the 
City’s housing stock actually decreased slightly (by less than one percent) by 2010.  Residential 
development  trends  in  surrounding  communities  were  similar  to  those  in    South  Gate.  
Typically,  residential  development  in  this  region  occurs  primarily  on  small  infill  sites  with  the 
recycling of single‐family homes into higher intensity residential projects. 
 
The majority of housing units in South Gate, according to the 2007‐2011 ACS, were single‐family 
homes,  which  comprised  approximately  70  percent  of  all  units  (Table  HE‐17).    Most  of  these 
units  (approximately  89  percent)  were  detached  single  family  units.    Multi‐family  units 
comprised just 29 percent of South Gate’s housing stock.     
 
                                                         South Gate General Plan 2035  25 

          Table	HE‐16:	Comparative	Housing	Growth
                                                                                       Percent	Change	
          Jurisdiction	                  1990	           2000	          2010	
                                                                                 1990‐2000	 2000‐2010	
          South	Gate	                   22,946	         24,269	        24,160	      5.8%	         ‐0.4%	
          County	of	Los	Angeles	      3,163,343	      3,270,906	    3,445,076	      3.4%	          5.3%	
          Bell	Gardens	                  9,546	          9,788	         9,986	      2.5%	          2.0%	
          Cudahy	                        5,416	          5,542	         5,770	      2.3%	          4.1%	
          Downey	                       34,302	         34,759	        35,601	      1.3%	          2.4%	
          Huntington	Park	              14,515	         15,335	        15,151	      5.6%	         ‐1.2%	
          Lynwood	                      14,525	         14,987	        15,277	      3.2%	          1.9%	
          Paramount	                    13,726	         14,591	        14,571	      6.3%	         ‐0.1%	
          Source:	 U.S.	Bureau	of	Census,	1990,	2000,	and	2010	Census.	
 
     Table	HE‐17:	Changes	in	Housing	Stock:		2000‐2011
                                                            2000	                      2011	(Estimate)	
     Housing	Type	
                                                Number	          Percent	         Number	          Percent	
     Single	Family	                             15,600	           64.3%	          17,214	           69.7%	
     					Detached	                             12,339	           50.8%	          15,336	           62.1%	
     					Attached	                              3,261	           13.4%	           1,878	            7.6%	
     Multi‐Family	                               8,391	           34.6%	           7,123	           28.8%	
     					2‐4	Units	                             3,695	           15.2%	           3,434	           13.9%	
     					5	+	Units	                             4,696	           19.3%	           3,689	           14.9%	
     Mobile	Homes	and	Other	                      278	            1.1%	             355	             1.4%	
     Total	Units	                               24,269	          100.0%	          24,692	          100.0%	
     Source:	
            1. U.S.	Bureau	of	Census,	2000	Census.	
            2. U.S.	Bureau	of	Census,	American	Community	Survey	(ACS),	2007‐2011.
 
Tenure and Vacancy 
 
The 2010 Census recorded a total of 23,278 occupied housing units for the City of South Gate.  
Owner‐occupied units comprised 46 percent of all occupied units, while renter‐occupied units 
made up the remaining 54 percent.   
 
According to the ACS, most of the City’s single‐family detached housing was owner‐occupied in 
2011 (63 percent).  Homeownership is often a significant factor in maintaining the stability of 
single‐family neighborhoods and encouraging reinvestment.  To promote homeownership, the 
City currently offers a first‐time homebuyer program.   
 
Vacancy  rates  within  a  community  are  an  indicator  of  the  availability  and  cost  of  housing.  
Vacancy rates below five percent for rental housing and two percent for ownership housing are 
generally  indicative  of  a  critical  shortage  of  housing.    According  to  the  2010  Census,  the 
ownership vacancy rate in South Gate was 1.5 percent, while the rental vacancy rate was 3.6 
percent.  (At the same time, the rate in Los Angeles County as a whole for rental units was 5.8 
percent.) The rates for South Gate suggest a very tight suboptimal housing market. 
26  Housing Element                                                                                          

 
 
Age of Housing Stock 
 
A majority of the residential development in the City of South Gate occurred just after World 
War II.  More than 50 percent of the City’s housing stock was constructed between 1940 and 
1959. 
 
Typically, housing over 30 years of age needs some form of major rehabilitation, such as a new 
roof, foundation work, and plumbing.  With a vast majority (approximately 90 percent) of the 
City’s housing stock built prior to 1980, housing rehabilitation is clearly a priority need for the 
community.  Table HE‐18 summarizes the age of the City’s housing stock.  City staff estimates 
approximately 25 percent of housing units in the City require substantial rehabilitation and no 
housing units require replacement. 
 
                           Table	HE‐18: Year	Units	Built
                           Year	Built	               Units	Built	       Percent	
                           1939	or	Earlier	            4,450	            18.0%	
                           1940	to	1959	               12,495	           50.6%	
                           1960	to	1969	               3,227	            13.1%	
                           1970	to	1979	                2,002	            8.1%	
                           1980	to	1989	                1,160	            4.7%	
                           1990	to	1999	                 618	             2.5%	
                           2000	to	2004	                 615	             2.5%	
                           2005	or	Later	                125	             0.5%	
                           Total		                     24,692	          100.0%	
                           Sources:	 Bureau	 of	 the	 Census,	 American	 Community	
                           Survey	(ACS),	2007‐2011.	
 
Housing Costs and Affordability 
 
Ownership Housing Prices  
 
According to DataQuick, a company that collects real estate data, median home prices in South 
Gate and nearby jurisdictions (with the exception of Downey) were well below the countywide 
median  sales  price  of  $385,000  (Figure  HE‐2).    The  City’s  median  home  sales  price  through 
March 2013 was $237,500, approximately 38 percent less than the County’s median price. 
 
                                                            South Gate General Plan 2035  27 

                 Figure	HE‐2:	Median	Home	Sales	Price	(March	2013)	
                   $450,000
                   $400,000                                                   LA County: $385,000
                   $350,000
                   $300,000
                   $250,000
                   $200,000                                  $380,000
                   $150,000
                                   $237,500     $240,000                            $225,000
                   $100,000                                            $197,250                  $191,000
                    $50,000
                           $0
                                  South Gate       Bell       Downey  Huntington    Lynwood     Paramount
                                                 Gardens                  Park
                                                                                                                
                 Note:	
                  1. Real	estate	data	for	Cudahy	is	not	available.	
                  2. 2013	estimates	represent	sales	data	through	March	2013.	
                 Source:	www.DQNews.com,	May	2013.	
     
    The  City’s  median  sales  price  in  2012  represents  an  increase  of  approximately  four  percent 
    from  the  previous  year.  By  contrast,  during  this  same  time  period,  most  neighboring 
    jurisdictions actually experienced a decline in median home price (Table HE‐19). By early 2013, 
    however,  this  trend  appears  to  have  reversed  and  home  prices  in  the  region  (with  some 
    exceptions, including Huntington Park) are now increasing steadily. When comparing monthly 
    sales data through March 2013, the City experienced an increase in median sales price of five 
    percent, while most neighboring jurisdictions saw significantly larger increases.   
     
Table	HE‐19:	Annual	Median	Home	Prices	(2011‐2013)
                                 2011	                  2012	                                           Percent	Change	in	
                                                                             March	2013	
                               (Annual)	             (Annual)	                                           Median	Sale	Price	
Jurisdiction	
                                             Number	                    Number	                       2011‐	     March	2012‐
                                 Price	                       Price	                   Price	
                                                Sold	                     Sold	                       2012	      March	2013	
South	Gate	                   $230,000	         392	       $240,000	       26	       $237,500	         4.4%	        ‐5.2%	
County	of	Los	Angeles	        $315,000	       83,770	      $330,000	     7,172	      $385,000	         4.8%	        24.2%	
Bell	Gardens	                 $220,000	         157	       $212,500	       12	       $240,000	        ‐3.4%	        12.3%	
Downey	                       $340,000	         776	       $330,000	       68	       $380,000	        ‐2.9%	        13.4%	
Huntington	Park	              $216,000	         209	       $210,500	       16	       $197,250	        ‐2.6%	       ‐12.3%	
Lynwood	                      $220,000	         300	       $222,250	       29	       $225,000	         1.0%	         1.2%	
Paramount	                    $170,000	         243	       $150,000	       20	       $191,000	       ‐11.8%	        46.9%	
Notes:	
      1. Real	estate	data	for	Cudahy	is	not	available.	
      2. 2013	estimates	represent	sales	data	through	March	2013.		Percent	change	in	median	sale	price	between	2012	and	2013	is	
         based	on	median	prices	reported	for	March	2012.	
Source:	www.DQNews.com,	May	2013.	
    28  Housing Element                                                                                               

 
Rental Housing Costs 
 
The  City  had  a  rental  vacancy  rate  of  less  than  four  percent  in  2011,  slightly  below  what  is 
typically  considered  optimum  and  indicating  a  tight  rental  market.    Few  units  in  the  City  are 
even publicized as being available for rent in local newspapers or Internet listings.  Instead, non‐
traditional advertising practices, such as placing for‐rent signs outside of the residence or using 
word‐of‐mouth, are more commonplace in the City.  Table HE‐20 summarizes average market 
rents by unit size based on available rental listings from Craigslist.org that were reviewed during 
May  2013.    As  presented,  average  rental  costs  in  South  Gate  ranged  from  $850  for  a  one‐
bedroom  studio  to  $2,200  for  a  three‐bedroom  unit.    The  documented  median  rent  for  all 
housing units, regardless of size, was $1,200 and the average rent was $1,293.   
 
According  to  the  City’s  Housing  Inspector,  two  bedroom  units  in  the  City  range  from  $980  to 
$1,500 and three bedroom units range from $1,500 to $1,900. In general, most of the housing 
units available for rent were one‐ to three‐bedroom units.  Larger rentals and studios had very 
limited availability. 
 
            Table	HE‐20:	Median	and	Average	Market	Rents	by	Number	of	Bedrooms	(2013)	
            Housing	Type	                          #	of	Listings	 Median	Rent	           Average	Rent	           Rent	Range	
            0	                                           2	            $850	                 $850	                   $850	
            1	                                          13	            $860	                 $845	              $675	to	$970	
            2	                                           7	          $1,395	                $1,399	           $1,095	to	$1,700	
            3	                                          11	          $1,800	                $1,836	           $1,500	to	$2,200	
            4+	                                          0	               ‐‐	                   ‐‐	                    ‐‐	
            Totals	                                     33	          $1,200	                $1,293	            $675	to	$2,200	
            Source:	www.Craigslist.org;	accessed	May	14,	2013.	
 
Housing Affordability 
 
The  State  has  established  the  threshold  of  affordable  housing  cost  at  30  percent  of  gross 
household income.3  Table HE‐21 provides estimates of affordable rents and home prices based 
on HCD’s 2013 income limits for Los Angeles County, current mortgage rates(i.e., 4.0 percent 
for 30‐year fixed‐rate mortgage), and cost assumptions for utilities, taxes and insurance.  Based 
on  the  housing  costs  presented  earlier  in  Table  HE‐19  and  Table  HE‐20,  most  South  Gate 
residents, with the exception of extremely low income and most very low income households, 
are able to afford both ownership and rental housing in the City.  Many of the units available, 
however,  are  typically  smaller  and  large  households  may  still  have  difficulty  securing 
appropriately sized housing.     
 
                                                       
3
       Affordable  housing  cost  is  set  at  30%  of  income  for  all  renters  and  owners  except  for  median  and  moderate  income 
       homeowners.  Their affordable housing cost for home purchase is set at 35%.   
                                                                              South Gate General Plan 2035  29 

Table	HE‐21:	Estimated	Affordable	Housing	Price	by	Income	and	Household	Size (2013)	
                                   Affordable	Cost	              Utilities	                              Affordable	Prices	
                 Annual	                                                                 Taxes/	
                 Income	                                                               Insurance	                         Home	
                               Rental	     Ownership	    Rental	      Ownership	                         Rent	
       	                                                                                                                   Price	
Extremely	Low	Income	
1‐Person	        $20,250		     $506		         $506		       $76		           $92		          $101		         $430		          $72,846		
2‐Person	        $23,150		     $579		         $579		       $96		          $112		          $116		         $483		          $81,690		
3‐Person	        $26,050		     $651		         $651		      $114		          $130		          $130		         $537		          $90,999		
4‐Person	        $28,900		     $723		         $723		      $153		          $169		          $145		         $570		          $95,188		
5‐Person	        $31,250		     $781		         $781		      $170		          $186		          $156		         $611		         $102,171	
Very	Low	
1‐Person	        $33,750		     $844		         $844		       $76		           $92		          $169		         $768		         $135,684	
2‐Person	        $38,550		     $964		         $964		       $96		          $112		          $193		         $868		         $153,372	
3‐Person	        $43,350		    $1,084		       $1,084		     $114		          $130		          $217		         $970		         $171,525	
4‐Person	        $48,150		    $1,204		       $1,204		     $153		          $169		          $241		        $1,051		        $184,791	
5‐Person	        $52,050		    $1,301		       $1,301		     $170		          $186		          $260		        $1,131		        $198,988	
Low	Income	
1‐Person	        $53,950		    $1,349		       $1,349		      $76		           $92		          $270		        $1,273		        $229,709	
2‐Person	        $61,650		    $1,541		       $1,541		      $96		          $112		          $308		        $1,445		        $260,896	
3‐Person	        $69,350		    $1,734		       $1,734		     $114		          $130		          $347		        $1,620		        $292,548	
4‐Person	        $77,050		    $1,926		       $1,926		     $153		          $169		          $385		        $1,773		        $319,312	
5‐Person	        $83,250		    $2,081		       $2,081		     $170		          $186		          $416		        $1,911		        $344,215	
Median	Income	
1‐Person	        $61,050		    $1,526		       $1,781		      $76		           $92		          $356		        $1,450		        $310,119	
2‐Person	        $69,750		    $1,744		       $2,034		      $96		          $112		          $407		        $1,648		        $352,709	
3‐Person	        $78,500		    $1,963		       $2,290		     $114		          $130		          $458		        $1,849		        $396,037	
4‐Person	        $87,200		    $2,180		       $2,543		     $153		          $169		          $509		        $2,027		        $434,205	
5‐Person	        $94,200		    $2,355		       $2,748		     $170		          $186		          $550		        $2,185		        $468,262	
Moderate	Income	
1‐Person	        $73,250		    $1,831		       $2,136		      $76		           $92		          $427		        $1,755		        $376,371	
2‐Person	        $83,700		    $2,093		       $2,441		      $96		          $112		          $488		        $1,997		        $428,465	
3‐Person	        $94,200		    $2,355		       $2,748		     $114		          $130		          $550		        $2,241		        $481,295	
4‐Person	       $104,650		    $2,616		       $3,052		     $153		          $169		          $610		        $2,463		        $528,967	
5‐Person	       $113,000		    $2,825		       $3,296		     $170		          $186		          $659		        $2,655		        $570,355	
Assumptions:	2013	HCD	income	limits;	30.0%	gross	household	income	as	affordable	housing	cost;	20.0%	of	monthly	affordable	cost	
for	taxes	and	insurance;	10.0%	downpayment;	and	4.0%	interest	rate	for	a	30‐year	fixed‐rate	mortgage	loan.		Utilities	based	on	Los	
Angeles	County	Utility	Allowance.	
Sources:	HCD	(2013);	and	Veronica	Tam	and	Associates	(2013).
     
    Table  HE‐21  shows  the  maximum  amount  that  a  household  can  pay  for  housing  each  month 
    (e.g.,  rent,  mortgage,  and  utilities)  without  exceeding  the  30  percent  income‐to‐housing  cost 
    ratio that is the threshold for overpayment. This amount can be compared to current market 
    prices  for  single‐family  homes,  condominiums,  and  apartments  to  determine  what  types  of 
    housing opportunities a household can afford. 
     
    30  Housing Element                                                                                                    

 
Extremely Low Income Households: Extremely low income households earn 30 percent or less 
of the AMI. Based on financing criteria noted earlier, the maximum affordable home price for 
an extremely low income household ranges from $72,846 to $102,171 based on 2013 income 
limits.  Homeownership is out of reach for all extremely low income households.  Similarly, after 
deductions for utilities, an extremely low income household can afford to pay $430 to $611 in 
rent  per  month,  depending  on  the  household  size.  In  practical  terms,  this  means  that  even  a 
five‐person  extremely  low  income  household  cannot  afford  an  average  priced  one‐bedroom 
without severe overpayment or overcrowding.   
 
Very Low Income Households: Very low income households earn 50 percent or less of the AMI.  
Based on the 2013 income limits, the maximum affordable home price for a very low income 
household  ranges  from  $135,684  for  one‐person  to  $198,988  for  a  five‐person  households. 
Based on the sales data presented in Table HE‐19, very low income households cannot afford 
the median sales price for a home in the City, regardless of size. As outlined in Table HE‐21, a 
very low income household can afford to pay $768 to $1,131 in monthly rent, after deductions 
for utilities and depending on household size. Generally, very low income families cannot afford 
to rent in South Gate. 
 
Low  Income  Households: Low income households earn 51 percent to 80 percent of the AMI. 
The maximum affordable home price for a low income household ranges from $229,709 for a 
one‐person household to $344,215 for a five‐person household. Based on the data presented in 
Table HE‐19 and Table HE‐20, low income households with two or more persons can generally 
afford  to  purchase  and  rent  homes  in  South  Gate;  however,  larger  households  may  still  have 
difficulty finding affordable large rental units. 
 
Median Income Households: Median income households earn 80 percent to 100 percent of the 
AMI.    The  maximum  affordable  home  price  for  a  median  income  household  ranges  from 
$310,119 for a one‐person household to $468,262 for a five‐person household.  Based on the 
sales  data  presented  in  Table  HE‐19  and  Table  HE‐20,  ownership  and  rental  housing  in  South 
Gate is generally affordable to median income households. 
 
Moderate Income Households: Moderate income households earn 100 percent to 120 percent 
of  the  AMI.  The  maximum  affordable  home  price  for  a  moderate  income  household  ranges 
from $376,371 for a one‐person household to $570,335 for a five‐person household (see Table 
HE‐21).  Moderate  income  households  in  the  City  can  afford  to  purchase  and  rent  homes  in 
South Gate. 
 
As  shown  in  Figure  HE‐3,  to  afford  a  median‐priced  home  of  $237,500  in  2013,  a  household 
income of approximately $59,300 (32 percent less than the County median income for a family 
of  four)  would  be  needed  (Table  HE‐21).   Renting  an  average  apartment  at  $1,293  would 
require  a  slightly  higher  income  of  $62,000.  Based  on  wage  data  from  2012,  many  of  the 
occupations that employ South Gate residents pay wages lower than the minimum required to 
afford housing in the City. 
 
                                                        South Gate General Plan 2035  31 

  Figure	HE‐3:	Income	Needed	to	Afford	Housing	Compared	with	Income	(2013)	
    $140,000
    $120,000
    $100,000
     $80,000
                                                                              Income Needed to Rent an Apt. ($62,000)
     $60,000          $124,479
                                                                               Income Needed to Buy a Home ($59,300)
                                   $91,631
     $40,000
                                              $59,891
                                                          $52,595
     $20,000                                                          $40,620
                                                                                    $29,930
                                                                                                  $22,019
          $0
                    Management  Engineering Education   Protective     Sales       Healthcare    Food Prep
                                                         Services                   Support
                                                                                                                       
  Sources:		State	Employment	Development	Department	(2013)	and	Veronica	Tam	and	Associates	(2013).	
 
Affordable Housing  
 
Inventory of Subsidized Housing 
 
The  City  has  a  number  of  affordable  rental  housing  developments  that  are  subsidized  to 
affordable levels for lower income households.  The length of affordability control is dependent 
on the requirements of the funding programs.  Table HE‐22 presents this inventory, providing 
project  information  on  total  units,  subsidized  units,  funding  programs  used  to  maintain 
affordability, and potential date for the subsidized units to convert to market‐rate housing due 
to expiration of subsidies or deed restrictions.   
 
In  compiling  the  inventory,  only  project‐based  assistance  received  by  the  developments  is 
considered, including density bonus, financial subsidies using local, state, or federal funds, and 
land write‐downs.  Rental developments that accept tenant‐based assistance such as Section 8 
vouchers are not included in the inventory as the vouchers are portable with the tenants and 
therefore do not guarantee the long‐term affordability of specific units. 
 
32  Housing Element                                                                                                  

     
Table	HE‐22:	Inventory	of	Subsidized	Rental	Housing	for	Lower	Income	Households	
                                   Total	 Subsidized                                               Potential	
           Project	Name	                                          Funding	Program	
                                   Units	    Units	                                           Conversion	Date	
At‐Risk	
Pennsylvania	Square	                75	        75	          Section	8	New	Construction	          1/12/2014	
                                                         HOME	Funds	and	Redevelopment	
Dudlext	II	Senior	Apartments	       34	        20	                                                  2016	
                                                                  Housing	Set‐Aside	
Pine	Place	                         22	        18	       Redevelopment	Housing	Set‐Aside	           2016	
Subtotal	                          131	       113	                                   	
Not	At‐Risk	
Ardmore	Terrace	Senior	
                                    35	        22	       Redevelopment	Housing	Set‐Aside	           2033	
Apartments	
Burke	Avenue	Apartments	
                                     8	         8	                      HOME	                       2037	
8953‐8957	Burke	Avenue	
11343	Pennsylvania	Avenue	           4	        4	                       HOME	                       2038	
2418	Glenwood	Pl.	                   4	        4	                       HOME	                       2038	
Hollydale	Plaza	Apartments	        101	       101	                      LIHTC	                      2038	
California	Senior	Plaza	(8933	
                                    69	        69	       Redevelopment	Housing	Set‐Aside	           2061	
California	Avenue)	
Subtotal	                          221	       208	                                   	
Total	                             352	       321	                                   	
Source:	City	of	South	Gate,	2013.	
     
    Description of Subsidized Units 
     
    A total of nine publicly subsidized, multi‐family rental complexes are located within the City of 
    South  Gate.    Collectively,  these  complexes  offer  208  rental  housing  units  that  are  deed‐
    restricted  as  housing  affordable  to  lower  income  households.    All  of  the  restricted  units  are 
    targeted to seniors or people with developmental disabilities. The nine affordable communities 
    include:   
     
          Pennsylvania  Square:    This  75‐unit  complex  was  developed  with  a  HUD  Section 
               221(D)(4)  market‐rate  financing  which  places  no  affordability  control  on  the  units 
               developed.    The  affordability  of  this  senior  complex  is  maintained  by  a  Section  8 
               contract that is due to expire on January, 12, 2014; however, this contract is expected to 
               be  renewed  prior  to  the  expiration  date  as  the  property  owner  has  not  yet  filed  the 
               required Notice of Intent to opt out of the Section 8 program. 
          
          Dudlext  II  Senior  Apartments  (South  Gate  Park  Villas):  The  20‐unit  Dudlext  II  Senior 
               Apartments  were  constructed  with  federal  HOME  funds  and  a  City  of  South  Gate 
               Redevelopment Agency land write down.   
          
          Pine Place:  This 22‐unit complex is occupied by qualified senior citizens.  Pine Place is a 
               locally  assisted  development  with  funds  provided  through  the  South  Gate 
               Redevelopment Agency.  Additionally, the project was granted parking concessions that 
                                                               South Gate General Plan 2035  33 

        also constituted local assistance.  The project was completed in 1986 and has a total of 
        18 subsidized units with a 30‐year deed restriction due to expire in 2016.  
     
       Ardmore  Terrace  Senior  Apartments:  This  35‐unit  senior  housing  development  was 
        constructed in 1988.  A total of 22 units are maintained as affordable as a condition of 
        the  City’s  financial  participation.    Assisted  units  within  this  project  are  not  at  risk  of 
        converting to market rate until 2033. 
         
       Burke  Avenue  Apartments:    This  eight  unit  complex  was  constructed  in  2011,  with  a 
        total of eight units maintained as affordable housing in cooperation with the Oldtimers 
        Foundation.    Assisted  units  within  this  project  are  not  at  risk  of  converting  to  market 
        rate until 2037. 
         
       11343  Pennsylvania  Avenue:    A  total  of  four  units,  designated  as  affordable  special 
        needs  housing  for  persons  with  developmental  disabilities  were  constructed  in  2013.  
        Assisted units within this project are not at risk of converting to market rate until 2038. 
         
       2418  Glenwood  Place:    A  total  of  four  units,  designated  as  affordable  special  needs 
        housing for persons with developmental disabilities were constructed in 2013.  Assisted 
        units within this project are not at risk of converting to market rate until 2038. 
         
       Hollydale  Plaza  Apartments:  Hollydale  Plaza  is  an  affordable  apartment  community 
        comprised  of  101  one‐  and  two‐  bedroom  units  for  seniors.  The  community  was 
        developed by LINC Housing and  Meta Housing Corporation in  2010  using four  percent 
        low‐income housing tax credits. 
         
       California  Senior  Plaza:  This  affordable  senior  project  is  located  at  8933  California 
        Avenue.    The  project  consists  of  69  moderate  income  senior  units  and  was  funded  in 
        part with Redevelopment Housing Set‐Aside funds. 
 
Units at Risk 
 
The cost of constructing new affordable housing has continued to rise; therefore, it is important 
that a community preserves its existing affordable housing stock.  State law requires that the 
Housing Element assess the potential conversion of subsidized units to market‐rate housing due 
to  expiration  of  deed  restrictions  or  subsidy  contracts.    The  analysis  must  cover  a  ten‐year 
period.  Therefore, for this Housing Element, the “at risk” analysis covers the period of October 
15, 2013 through October 15, 2023.  During this ten‐year period, a total of 113 units within the 
Pennsylvania  Square,  Dudlext  II  Senior  Apartments,  and  Pine  Place  developments  are 
considered at risk of converting to market‐rate housing (see Table HE‐22) due to the potential 
expiration of their Section 8 contracts. 
 
34  Housing Element                                                                                         

 
Preservation Options and Cost Analysis  
 
This cost analysis is intended as a general analysis to establish an order of magnitude regarding 
the  costs  associated  with  various  options  to  preserve  the  affordability  of  Pennsylvania  Square, 
Dudlext  II,  and  Pine  Place  (totaling  113  units).    The  actual  costs  will  depend  on  the  market 
conditions at the time of conversion and detailed analysis should be conducted.    
 
Rent Subsidies 
 
Upon expiration of the Section 8 contract, tenant‐based rent subsidies funded by other funding 
programs could be used to preserve the affordability of the at‐risk units.  Similar to Section 8 
rental  assistance,  the  City  could  provide  rent  subsidies  to  very  low  income  households  at 
Pennsylvania Square, Dudlext II, and Pine Place.  The level of the subsidy required to preserve 
the at‐risk affordable units is estimated to equal the Fair Market Rent (FMR) for a unit minus 
the  housing  cost  affordable  by  a  very  low  income  household.    Table  HE‐23  presents  a 
calculation of the rent subsidies required to preserve the affordability of the 113 at‐risk units. 
 
Based on the estimates and assumptions shown in this table, approximately $333,576 in annual 
rent  subsidies  would  be  required  (in  2013  dollars).    The  amount  of  annual  subsidies  will  vary 
depending on market conditions. 
 
  Table	HE‐23:	Rent	Subsidies	Required
                                                      Fair	  Household	 Affordable	 Monthly	
                                   Number	of	                                                            Total	Monthly	
  Unit	Size/Household	Size	                        Market	     Annual	        Housing	 per	Unit	
                                       Units	                                                                Subsidy	
                                                     Rent1	    Income	          Cost3	        Subsidy4	
  Very	Low		Income	(50%	AMI)	
  One‐Bedroom/2	person	
                                        113	        $1,101	 $34,200	            $855	           $246	       $27,798	
  household	
  Total	Monthly	                                                                    $27,798		
                                        113	
  Total	Annual	Subsidy	                                                            $333,576		
  Notes:	
    1.		Fair	Market	Rent	(FMR)	is	determined	by	HUD.	These	calculations	use	the	2013	HUD	FMR	for	the	Los	Angeles‐Long	
         Beach	Metropolitan	Area.	
    2.		Rents	are	restricted	to	50%	AMI	in	these	buildings,	which	puts	residents	in	the	Very	Low	Income	Category,	set	by	the	
         California	Department	of	Housing	and	Community	Development	(HCD).	
    3.		The	affordable	housing	cost	is	calculated	based	on	30%	of	the	AMI,	minus	utilities	for	rentals.	
    4.		The	monthly	subsidy	covers	the	gap	between	the	FMR	and	the	affordable	housing	cost.	
  Source:	Veronica	Tam	and	Associates,	2013.	
 
Transfer of Property to Non‐Profit Ownership 
 
One option to preserve this development as affordable housing is to transfer the ownership of 
these  at‐risk  buildings  to  nonprofit  ownership,  provided  the  owners  are  willing  to  sell.    Table 
HE‐24  presents  an  estimated  market  value  of  Pennsylvania  Square,  Dudlext  II,  and  Pine  Place 
using general assumptions on operating cost, rent income, and building condition. 
                                                                    South Gate General Plan 2035  35 

 
            Table	HE‐24:	Estimated	Market	Value	of	At‐Risk	Units
                                                            Pennsylvania	
            Project	Units	                                                     Dudlext	II	 Pine	Place	
                                                               Square	
            One‐Bedroom	Units	                                   75	                20	        18	
            Annual	Operating	Cost	                            $202,500		         $54,000		   $48,600		
            Gross	Annual	Income	                              $941,355		        $251,028		  $225,925		
            Net	Annual	Income	                                $738,855		        $197,028		  $177,325		
            Market	Value	                                    $9,235,688		     $2,462,850		 $2,216,565		
            Market	value	is	estimated	with	the	following	assumptions:
                1. Fair	Market	Rent	for	one‐bedroom	is	$1,101	(Table	HE‐23).	
                2. One‐bedroom	unit	is	600	square	feet	in	size.	
                3. Vacancy	rate	=	5%	
                4. Annual	operating	expenses	per	square	foot	=	$4.50	
                5. Market	value	=	Annual	net	project	income*multiplication	factor	
                6. Multiplication	factor	for	a	building	in	moderate	condition	is	12.5.	
 
New Construction of Replacement Units 
 
Preservation of the at‐risk units as long‐term affordable housing depends on the intent of the 
property owners.  If preservation proves to be infeasible, construction of new affordable units 
may be the only option to replenish the City’s affordable housing stock. 
 
The  cost  of  developing  new  housing  depends  on  a  variety  of  factors  such  as  density,  size  of 
units,  location  and  related  land  costs,  financing  and  type  of  construction.    The  City  of  South 
Gate,  similar  to  most  cities  within  a  highly  urbanized  setting,  is  essentially  built‐out  with  few 
vacant parcels of any size remaining.  Most development is limited to in‐fill housing, especially 
recycling less intensively developed sites.  As with all commodities, when there is limited supply 
and great demand, the cost escalates commensurately.  Thus land costs are generally very high 
throughout  California  but  are  even  more  so  in  communities  where  vacant  lots  are  scarce.  
Based on general assumptions for average construction costs, it would cost approximately $9.9 
million to construct 113 affordable replacement units, excluding land costs and soft costs such 
as architecture and engineering.  Including land costs, the total costs to develop replacement 
units would be significantly higher. 
 
36  Housing Element                                                                                        

 
                  Table	HE‐25:	Estimated	New	Construction	Costs
                                               (A)	          (B)	           (C)	             (D)
                  Unit	Size	                             Estimated	 Estimated	
                                                                                         Estimated	
                  	                          Total	       Average	         Gross	
                                                                                       Gross	Building	
                                             Units	       Unit	Size	     Building	
                                                                                            Costs
                                                           (sq.	ft.)	       Size	
                  One‐Bedroom	                 113	          600	         81,360	        $9,892,359		
                  Total	                       113	                       81,360	        $9,892,359		
                  Average	Per	Unit	Cost:	                                                 $87,543	
                  (C)	=	(A)	x	(B)	x	1.20	(i.e.	20%	inflation	to	account	for	hallways	and	other	common	
                  areas).	
                  (D)	=	(C)	x	$97.27	(per	square	foot	construction	costs)	x	1.25	(i.e.	25%	inflation	to	
                  account	for	parking	and	landscaping	costs).	
 
Purchase of Affordability Covenants
 
Another  option  to  preserve  the  affordability  of  the  at‐risk  project  is  to  provide  an  incentive 
package  to  the  owner  to  maintain  the  project  as  affordable  housing.    Incentives  could  include 
writing down the interest rate on the remaining loan balance, and/or supplementing the Section 8 
subsidy received to market levels.  The feasibility of this option depends on whether the complex is 
too highly leveraged.  By providing lump sum financial incentives or ongoing subsides in rents or 
reduced mortgage interest rates to the owner, the City can ensure that some or all of the units 
remain affordable. 
 
Cost Comparisons 
 
The above analysis attempts to estimate the cost of preserving the at‐risk units under various 
options.  The cost of constructing 113 replacement units is high ($9,892,359 plus land and soft 
costs).    In  comparison,  the  annual  costs  of  providing  rental  subsidies  to  preserve  the  113 
assisted units are relatively low ($333,576); however, long‐term provision of rental subsidies for 
at least 55 years would cost over $39 million.  The option of acquiring the three projects and 
transferring ownership to non‐profit housing organizations is also costly ($13,915,103). 
                                                                    South Gate General Plan 2035  37 


HOUSING CONSTRAINTS 
 
Market  and  governmental  factors,  and  infrastructural  limitations  may  constrain  the 
construction,  rehabilitation,  affordability,  and  maintenance  of  housing.    These  constraints 
ultimately influence the type and number of housing units available in the City.   
 
Market Constraints 
 
Factors  such  as  current  interest  rates,  land  prices  and  cost  of  construction  affect  the  cost  of 
housing and may constrain the production of affordable units.  Interest rates and loan costs, at 
the writing of this Housing Element, have been among the lowest in over 25 years.  However, 
land costs are higher than ever and significantly raise the cost of housing.  Specifically, the high 
cost of land and construction has priced many families out of the homeownership market. 
 
Land Availability and Cost 
 
Housing  demand  far  exceeds  the  available  housing  units  within  the  Southern  California  real 
estate market.  In areas such as South Gate, where the City is essentially built‐out and available 
land  is  extremely  limited,  the  supply  and  demand  paradigm  is  out  of  balance.    Residentially 
designated vacant land in South Gate is nearly non‐existent.  Based on a survey of listings for 
vacant  land  in  June  2013  on  Realtor.com,  only  one  vacant  property  in  the  entire  City  was 
available  for  sale  at  a  cost  of  approximately  $871,200  per  acre.  Furthermore,  much  of  the 
housing in South Gate was built before the 1950s and the lots are narrow by today’s standards. 
The  single  vacant  lot  available  for  purchase  is  only  6,400  square  feet.  Future  residential 
development  must  rely  on  lot  consolidation  and  conversion  of  underutilized  land  for  more 
intensified uses.   
 
In  order  to assemble a usable  parcel  that  would  accommodate  multi‐family  housing,  which  is 
most  needed  in  South  Gate,  or  new  construction  of  single‐family  units,  large  parcels  are 
required.    A  multi‐family  parcel  is  generally  at  least  7,500  feet  in  size  or  larger.    Often,  with 
smaller parcels it is necessary for the private developer to acquire properties as these become 
available  for  sale  and  hold  the  properties  until  such  time  as  sufficient  land  is  acquired  to 
complete  a  development  that  is  a  cost‐effective  return  on  investment.    Carrying  costs 
associated  with  this  process  can  make  or  break  a  project.    Additionally,  this  is  a  speculative 
process in that it may not be possible to assemble the required land if the adjacent property 
owners are unwilling sellers just as it is entirely possible that the price of the land escalates as 
property owners learn of the project and hold out for a higher purchase price. 
 
As  part  of  the  City’s  comprehensive  General  Plan  update,  the  City  provided  additional 
opportunities  for  housing  development  through  increased  density  and  other  incentives.  
                                                            South Gate General Plan 2035  39 

Several  strategic  areas  will  provide  for  mixed‐use  development  of  ground  floor  retail  with 
housing.   
 
Construction Costs 
 
The construction cost factor has significant impact on the cost of new housing.  Labor and the 
cost of building materials combined can account for approximately 40 to 50 percent of the price 
of  a  new  home.    However,  construction  costs  are  consistent  throughout  the  region  and 
therefore would not specifically constrain housing development in South Gate. 
 
Building costs can be reduced if amenities and the quality of building materials are maintained 
at  just  the  minimum  standards  that  ensure  health,  safety  and  adequate  performance.    These 
reductions may reduce the initial sales price but may also diminish the useful life of the home 
over time as well as the buildings contribution to the character of the community. 
 
Another factor related to construction costs is the number of units that can be developed at a 
single site which allows for reductions in building costs through economies of scale.  This cost 
reduction  is  particularly  beneficial  when  coupled  with  density  bonuses  which  allow  for  more 
units than would be permitted according to the existing zoning.  The density bonus serves as an 
incentive to the private developer to construct affordable housing.  Pursuant to State law, the 
City  of  South  Gate  offers  density  bonus  and  other  regulatory  incentives  to  developers  that 
include affordable housing within the development. 
 
Financing 
 
Interest  rates  are  determined  by  national  policies  and  economic  conditions,  over  which 
municipalities have little ability to influence.  However, jurisdictions can and do offer interest 
rate  write‐downs  and  soft‐second  downpayment  assistance  to  close  the  gap  between  the 
amount at which the mortgage lender will qualify the potential homebuyer and the actual cost 
of the mortgage.  These types of programs extend home purchasing opportunities to a broader 
economic segment of the population. Due to drastic reductions in the City’s CDBG and HOME 
allocations, the City of South Gate has discontinued its Down Payment Assistance Program for 
low‐income, first‐time homebuyers.  
 
Mortgage rates in recent years have been at an all‐time low and many homeowners are taking 
the  opportunity  to  refinance  home  loans  to  lower  mortgage  payments.    These  low  interest 
rates also make it easier for first‐time homebuyers to enter the market.  As of August 2013, the 
average  interest  rate  in  the  western  region  of  the  U.S.  was  4.36  percent  for  a  30‐year  fixed 
mortgage.4    
 
                                                       
4
   http://www.freddiemac.com/pmms/				
40  Housing Element                                                                                     

Under the federal Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending institutions are required to 
disclose information on the disposition of loan applications and the income, gender, and race of 
loan  applicants.  The  availability  of  financing  for  a  home  greatly  affects  a  person’s  ability  to 
purchase a home or invest in repairs and improvements. HMDA requires lending institutions to 
disclose  information  on  the  disposition  of  loan  applications  by  income,  gender,  and 
race/ethnicity of applicants.  
 
     Table	HE‐26:	Disposition	of	Home	Purchase	and	Improvement	Loan	Applications	(2011)
                                                     Total	          Approved	          Denied	            Other	
     Loan	Type	
                                                 Applications        #	       %	      #	       %	       #	       %	
     Government	Backed	Purchase	Loans                467	          323	    69.2%     71	     15.2%	    73	   15.6%	
     Conventional	Purchase	Loans	                    203	          134	    66.0%      31	    15.3%	    38	   18.7%	
     Refinance	                                     1,024	         610	    59.6%     219     21.4%	 195	 19.0%	
     Home	Improvement	Loans	                          83	           39	    47.0%      34	    41.0%	    10	   12.0%	
     Total	                                         1,777	        1,106    62.2%     355     20.0%	 316	 17.8%	
     Notes:		
         1.   Percent	Approved	includes	loans	approved	by	the	lenders	whether	or	not	accepted	by	the	applicant.	
         2.   Percent	Other	includes	loan	applications	that	were	either	withdrawn	or	closed	for	incompleteness.	
     Source:	www.LendingPatterns.comTM,	2013.	
 
Overall,  in  2011,  a  total  of  670  households  applied  for  loans,  either  conventional  or 
government‐backed,  to  purchase  homes  in  South  Gate  (Table  HE‐26).  About  69  percent  of 
government  backed  loans  were  approved,  while  conventional  home  purchase  loans  had  a 
slightly lower approval rate at 66 percent. Fewer households in South  Gate applied for home 
improvement  loans  in  2011  (just  83  households),  47  percent  of  which  were  approved.  The 
majority  of  loan  applications  submitted  in  the  City  during  2011  were  for  home  refinancing 
(1,024 applications); 60 percent of these applications were approved. 
 
Foreclosures 
 
Foreclosure  occurs  when  households  fall  behind  on  one  or  more  scheduled  mortgage 
payments.  The  foreclosure  process  can  be  halted  if  the  homeowner  is  able  to  bring  their 
mortgage payments current. If payments cannot be resumed or the debt cannot be resolved, 
the lender can legally use the foreclosure process to repossess (take over) the home. When this 
happens, the homeowners must move out of the property.  If the home is worth less than the 
total  amount  owed  on  the  mortgage  loan,  a  deficiency  judgment  could  be  pursued.  If  that 
happens,  the  homeowner  would  lose  their  home  and  also  would  owe  the  home  lender  an 
additional amount. 
 
Homes can be in various stages of foreclosure.  Typically, the foreclosure process begins with 
the  issuance  of  a  Notice  of  Default  (NOD).    An  NOD  serves  as  an  official  notification  to  a 
borrower that he or she is behind in their mortgage payments, and if the payments are not paid 
up,  the  lender  will  seize  the  home.    In  California,  lenders  will  not  usually  file  an  NOD  until  a 
                                                                 South Gate General Plan 2035  41 

borrower  is  at  least  90  days  behind  in  making  payments.    As  of  May  2013,  46  properties  in 
South Gate were in this pre‐foreclosure stage. 
 
Once an NOD has been filed, borrowers are given a specific time period, typically three months, 
in which they can bring their mortgage payments current.  If payments are not made current at 
the  end  of  this  specified  time  period,  a  Notice  of  Trustee  Sale  (NTS)  will  be  prepared  and 
published in a newspaper.  An NTS is a formal notification of the sale of a foreclosure property.  
In  California,  the  NTS  is  filed  90  days  following  an  NOD  when  a  property  owner  has  failed  to 
make  a  property  loan  current.    Once  an  NTS  has  been  filed,  a  property  can  then  be  sold  at 
public  auction.    According  to  foreclosure  records,  87  properties  in  South  Gate  were  in  the 
auction stage of the foreclosure process. 
 
Many  properties,  however,  are  unable  to  be  sold  at  public  auction.    In  the  event  of  an 
unsuccessful  sale  at  auction,  a  property  becomes  classified  as  Real  Estate  Owned  (REO)  and 
ownership  of  it  reverts  back  to  the  mortgage  company  or  lender.    In  May  2013,  the  City  of 
South  Gate  had  a  total  of  46  bank‐owned  properties.  Figure  HE‐4  illustrates  the  location  and 
status of foreclosed properties in the City of South Gate. 
 
42  Housing Element                                                                                      

 
    Figure	HE‐4:	Foreclosures	in	South	Gate	
	 	                                          South Gate General Plan 2035 43	

Governmental Constraints 
 
Housing policy and implementation activities by the City of South Gate may have an impact on 
the  price  and  availability  of  housing.    Specifically,  land  use  controls,  site  improvement 
requirements,  building  codes,  fees  and  other  local  programs  intended  to  improve  the  overall 
quality of housing may serve as a constraint to housing development.  This section assesses the 
potential of public policies as constraints to housing development. 
 
Land Use Controls and Development Standards 
 
Land Use Controls 
 
The City adopted General Plan 2035 in 2009.  As part of the General Plan update, a new concept 
in  dealing  with  land  use  and  development  standards  was  introduced.    Unlike  traditional 
Euclidean  land  use  and  zoning  system,  the  proposed  South  Gate  General  Plan  uses  a  “form‐
based” system to determine location and intensity of uses.   
 
Under this new land use system, the City is divided into residential neighborhoods, mixed‐use 
districts,  and  corridors,  with  specific  “strongly  desired,”  “desired”,  and  “discouraged”  “place 
types”.  Definitions of each are below: 
 
      Strongly Desired – This is the preferred Place Type for a district or corridor and should 
        be implemented unless there is a strong overriding reason not to implement it.  This is 
        the Place Type that best meets the vision for each district or corridor.  For districts and 
        corridors, these are represented with a green dot in the Place Type table. 
 
      Desired – Place Types with this designation are allowed in the area but are not as highly 
        desired.  Certain restrictions may be placed on future projects that would like to build 
        with this Place Type.  This is represented with an orange dot in the Place Type table. 
 
      Discouraged  –  These  Place  Types  are  allowed  in  the  district  or  corridor  but  in  very 
        limited amounts.  This is represented with a red dot in the Place Type table. 
 
Unlike  Districts  and  Corridors,  which  allow  more  than  one  Place  Type,  primarily  residential 
areas of the City are designated with either the Neighborhood Low or Neighborhood Medium 
designation. The majority of the City is designated with the Neighborhood Low designation and 
a  small  percentage  of  areas  are  designated  as  Neighborhood  Medium  (Figure  HE‐5).  Single‐
family  homes  are  permitted  uses  in  the  Neighborhood  Low  designation.  The  Neighborhood 
Medium designation allows for a range of housing types including single family, duplex, triplex, 
and small apartments.  Although small‐scale recycling and infill residential projects will continue 
to  occur  in  these  neighborhoods,  significant  residential  growth  is  not  desired  or  anticipated, 
except  within  the  Corridor  Transition  Overlay  Zone  (discussed  later).    Neighborhood  Medium 
44  Housing Element                                                                                   

High  and  Neighborhood  High  areas  are  incorporated  into  the  City’s  Districts  and  Corridors 
areas. 
 
Districts  are  areas  of  higher  intensity  development  located  throughout  the City  (Figure HE‐6). 
The design and desired land use mix of Districts varies from area to area. Some, such as the new 
transit‐oriented  village  near  the  intersection  of  Firestone  and  Atlantic  Avenues,  will  create  a 
pedestrian‐ and transit‐oriented environment. These districts will incorporate some mixed use 
residential  development  at  a  higher  density  than  surrounding  areas.  Districts  will  serve  as  a 
focal point for new housing to meet anticipated growth in population. 
 
Corridors are the major transportation thoroughfares and access routes in the City (Figure HE‐
7). Corridors also include the parcels fronting the roadway and may be several parcels deep to 
allow  for  significant  redevelopment  opportunities.  Corridors  should  be  attractive,  contain  a 
diverse mix of uses – including residential uses at higher densities than currently exist – provide 
safe  travel  for  pedestrians,  bicycles,  transit  vehicles  and  automobiles,  and  enable  people  and 
goods to circulate with relative ease. 
 
The City recognizes the tremendous need for workforce housing in the region and the benefits 
of providing residential uses along transportation corridors and near employment centers, and 
creating a resident population in commercial nodes.  The South Gate General Plan 2035 fosters 
increased  residential  opportunities  in  select  districts  and  corridors  where  a  range  of  housing 
types  are  encouraged  or  permitted.    Table  HE‐27  provides  a  description  of  the  various  Place 
Types.  Table  HE‐28  and  Table  HE‐29  provide  a  matrix  of  districts  and  corridors  that  illustrate 
Place Types where residential uses are strongly desired or desired.   
 
Corridor  Transition  Overlay  Zone:  This  designation  facilitates  the  consolidation  of  parcels  to 
spur redevelopment along the corridors while providing a transition between the higher density 
and mix of uses along the corridor and lower density residential areas.  Parcels in the Corridor 
Transition  Overlay  Zone  have  a  base  Place  Type  designation  (such  as  Neighborhood  Low  or 
Neighborhood  Medium).    If  the  Corridor  Transition  Overlay  Zone  parcels  are  developed  in 
conjunction  with  the  parcels  along  the  corridor  then  the  designation  for  these  parcels  is 
increased to the designation of the corridor.   
 
If development along the corridor occurs without involving the Overlay Zone parcels, then the 
parcels may be “upzoned” to the next higher neighborhood density Place Type on their own.  
On the other hand, if no development occurs along the adjacent corridor then development in 
the Corridor Transition Overlay Zone may only occur at the existing “base” designation applied 
to the parcel. 
 
                                                           South Gate General Plan 2035  45 

 Table	HE‐27:	Place	Types	
 Neighborhood	Low	
 This	designation	covers	the	majority	of	residential	areas	of	the	City	and	is	intended	to	preserve	the	
 existing	character	and	nature	of	the	neighborhoods.		This	designation	provides	for	low	to	moderate	
 intensity	single‐family	residential	uses	with	some	parcels	allowing	second	units	on	the	parcel.		
 Frontage	and	Building	Placement:	
 Buildings	shall	be	set	back	from	the	street	and	                 Uses:	           Density:	         Height:	
 sidewalk	to	a	depth	that	is	consistent	with	those	in	       Single‐Family	      0‐12	du/ac	        2	stories	
 the	existing	neighborhood.			
 Neighborhood	Medium	
 The	purpose	of	this	designation	is	to	provide	areas	for	a	mix	of	single‐family	and	lower	density	multi‐
 family	residential	housing.		These	areas	are	located	along	collector	streets	as	a	transitional	area	between	
 higher	intensity	uses	and	lesser	intensity	single‐family	areas	and	in	neighborhoods	that	already	exhibit	a	
 high	degree	of	diversity	in	the	type	and	density	of	housing.			
 Frontage	and	Building	Placement:	                                Uses:	
 Buildings	should	be	set	back	from	the	street,	              Single‐Family	
 depending	on	the	building	type	and	overall	character	           Duplex	
                                                                                   Density:	         Height:	
 of	the	block.		The	setbacks	shall	be	generally	                 Triplex	
                                                                                 9‐20	du/ac	        3	stories	
 consistent	on	a	block‐by‐block	basis	so	long	as	the	           Fourplex	
 buildings	create	an	attractive	pedestrian	and	street	        Townhouse	
 environment.			                                               Rowhouse	
 Neighborhood	Medium‐High	
 This	designation	provides	for	attached	single‐family	and	multi‐family	housing.		This	designation	is	
 generally	located	along	relatively	high	frequency	roadways.		Development	in	this	designation	will	add	a	
 mix	of	housing	types	in	the	City	and	serve	as	a	transition	between	the	corridors	and	adjacent	single‐
 family	areas.			
                                                                  Uses:	                             Height:	
                                                                 Duplex	           Density:	
 Frontage	and	Building	Placement:	                                                                  4	stories	
                                                                 Triplex	        21‐40	du/ac	
 Buildings	should	have	minimal	setbacks	from	the	                                                   (up	to	5	
                                                                Fourplex	         (up	to	45	
 street	with	frontages	that	support	the	creation	of	                                                stories	if	
                                                                                   du/ac	if	
 attractive	and	public	spaces	along	streets	and	              Townhouse	                           amenities	
                                                                                amenities	are	
 sidewalks.	                                                   Rowhouse	                               are	
                                                                                  provided)	
                                                             Multi‐Family	                         provided)	
 Neighborhood	High	
 The	purpose	of	this	designation	is	to	provide	for	condominiums	and	apartment	developments	where	
 public	transit	is	readily	available	and	where	there	is	a	diverse	mix	of	uses.	This	designation	is	typically	
 found	along	major	transportation	corridors	or	as	a	part	of	districts	that	are	expected	to	be	redeveloped	
 over	the	life	of	the	General	Plan.			
                                                                                                     Height:	
                                                                                   Density:	
                                                                                                    6	stories	
 Frontage	and	Building	Placement:	                                               41‐75	du/ac	
                                                                  Uses:	                            (up	to	8	
 Buildings	shall	be	located	directly	at	the	property	                             (up	to	85	
                                                                                                    stories	if	
 line	or	pushed	back	from	the	property	line	and	             Multi‐Family	         du/ac	if	
                                                                                                   amenities	
 landscaped.			                                                                 amenities	are	
                                                                                                       are	
                                                                                  provided)	
                                                                                                   provided)	
 Neighborhood	Center	
 This	designation	is	intended	to	establish	a	neighborhood	focus	that	is	distinguished	by	civic	buildings,	
 small‐scale	commercial	and	mixed‐use	buildings	and	multi‐family	housing.		The	designation	allows	for	a	
 diverse	mix	of	uses	to	create	nodes	or	focal	points	where	numerous	neighborhoods	meet.			
46  Housing Element                                                                                           

  Table	HE‐27:	Place	Types	
  Frontage	and	Building	Placement:	
  Buildings	shall	be	placed	at	the	back	of	the	sidewalk	          Uses:	            Density:	         Height:	
  or	pushed	back	from	the	sidewalk	with	public	uses,	
                                                              Multi‐Family	      12‐40	du/ac	        3	stories	
  such	as	plazas	or	outdoor	seating,	separating	the	
  building	from	the	sidewalk.	
  Boulevard	Medium‐High	
  This	designation	provides	for	vertical	and	horizontal	mixed	use	developments	along	major	corridors	
  throughout	the	City,	such	as	Paramount,	Atlantic,	and	Tweedy.		This	designation	is	intended	to	allow	for	
  relatively	high	intensity	uses	that	increase	the	amount	and	diversity	of	housing	units	in	South	Gate	and	
  allow	for	the	addition	of	office	uses.			
                                                                                                      Height:	
  Frontage	and	Building	Placement:	                                                                  4	stories	
  Buildings	shall	be	placed	at	the	back	of	the	sidewalk	          Uses:	            Density:	        (up	to	5	
  or	pushed	back	from	the	sidewalk	to	provide	space	                                                stories	if	
                                                              Multi‐Family	      21‐40	du/ac	
  for	gathering	places,	such	as	plazas	or	outdoor	                                                  amenities	
  seating.			                                                                                           are	
                                                                                                   provided)	
  Boulevard	High	
  This	designation	provides	for	vertical	and	horizontal	mixed	use	developments	along	major	corridors	
  throughout	the	City,	such	as	Firestone	and	Long	Beach.		This	designation	is	intended	to	allow	for	higher	
  intensity	uses	that	increase	the	amount	and	diversity	of	housing	units	in	South	Gate	and	allow	for	the	
  addition	of	office	uses	to	the	City’s	land	use	mix.			
                                                                                                      Height:	
                                                                                    Density:	
  Frontage	and	Building	Placement:	                                                                3‐5	stories	
                                                                                 41‐75	du/ac	
  Buildings	shall	be	placed	at	the	back	of	the	sidewalk	          Uses:	                             (up	to	8	
                                                                                   (up	to	85	
  or	pushed	back	from	the	sidewalk	to	provide	space	                                                stories	if	
                                                              Multi‐Family	         du/ac	if	
  for	gathering	places,	such	as	plazas	or	outdoor	                                                  amenities	
                                                                                amenities	are	
  seating.			                                                                                           are	
                                                                                  provided)	
                                                                                                   provided)	
  Urban	Village	
  This	designation	is	intended	to	create	mixed	use	districts	in	key	locations	of	the	City	such	as	the	Gateway	
  Transit	Village	area.		The	designation	provides	for	vertical	and	horizontal	mixed	use	developments	that	
  increase	residential	and	employment	opportunities	in	the	City.			
  Frontage	and	Building	Placement:	                               Uses:	            Density:	         Height:	
  Buildings	shall	be	placed	at	the	back	of	the	sidewalk	      Multi‐Family	    41‐100	du/ac	         8	stories	
  or	pushed	back	from	the	sidewalk	to	provide	space	                              (up	to	120	       (up	to	10	
  for	gathering	places,	such	as	plazas	or	outdoor	                                  du/ac	if	       stories	if	
  seating.			                                                                   amenities	are	      amenities	
                                                                                  provided)	            are	
                                                                                                   provided)	
 
                                                            South Gate General Plan 2035  47 

Table	HE‐28:	Allowable	Place	Types	by	District	
                                                   
48  Housing Element                              

Table	HE‐29:		Allowable	Place	Types	by	Corridor	
                                                                               
 
                                                 South Gate General Plan 2035  49 

     Figure	HE‐5:	Neighborhoods	
                                    
50  Housing Element               

  Figure	HE‐6:	Districts	
                                                      
                          South Gate General Plan 2035  51 

     Figure	HE‐7:	Corridors	
                                
52  Housing Element           

Development Standards 
 
In 2010 the City of South Gate adopted General Plan 2035, which offers increased opportunities 
for  housing  growth,  expanded  housing  options,  and  enhanced  neighborhoods  for  South  Gate 
residents through mixed use and high density residential development.  To implement the Land 
Use Plan with innovative policies, a new set of development standards is required, necessitating 
a  comprehensive  update  to  the  City  Zoning  Code.    Such  an  update  to  the  Zoning  Code, 
however, would be a massive undertaking, requiring significant financial and staffing resources.  
In the meantime, the City was required by State law to demonstrate its ability to accommodate 
the 1,490‐unit Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the 2008‐2013 Housing Element, 
with  adequate  mixed  use  and  residential  sites  that  had  appropriate  zoning  and  development 
standards.  To allow implementation of the new General Plan while the Zoning Code was being 
comprehensively  updated,  the  City  of  South  Gate  prepared  a  focused  Interim  Zoning  Code 
amendment.  The Interim Zoning Code addresses only certain corridors and districts identified 
in the 2008‐2013 Housing Element as having capacity for mixed use and high density residential 
development  in  the  near  term.    The  Interim  Zoning  Code  establishes  specific  development 
standards  to  implement  a  variety  of  housing  types  within  these  districts  and  corridors  as 
envisioned by the General Plan 2035. 
 
The City is currently undertaking a comprehensive update to the Zoning Code to implement the 
entire General Plan.  Adoption of the Zoning Code Update is anticipated by Fall 2014. Until the 
new Zoning Code is updated, the Interim Zoning Code will remain in effect. Table HE‐30 outlines 
the zones that allow residential and mixed use place types.  Development standards established 
in the Interim Zoning Code are incorporated into the Draft Comprehensive Zoning Code Update. 
                                                        South Gate General Plan 2035  53 

Table	HE‐30:	Zones	Allowing	Residential	Uses	
Zone		                                                       General	Plan	“Place‐Type”	
Urban	Mixed	Use	Zones	
                                                      Urban	Village	(41	to	100	units	per	acre)	
Civic	Center	(CIV)	
                                                                 Civic/Institutional	
                                                    Neighborhood	High	(41	to	75	units	per	acre)	
Transit	Village	(TV)	                                 Urban	Village	(41	to	100	units	per	acre)	
                                                                     Office/R&D	
                                                                     Office/R&D	
                                                                Light	Industrial/Flex	
Urban	Flex	(UF)	                               Neighborhood	Medium‐High	(21	to	40	units	per	acre)	
                                                 Boulevard	Medium‐High	(21	to	40	units	per	acre)	
                                                      Boulevard	High	(41	to	75	units	per	acre)	
                                                                  Single‐Use	Retail	
Corridor	1	(CDR	1)	                                 Neighborhood	High	(41	to	75	units	per	acre)	
                                                      Boulevard	High	(41	to	75	units	per	acre)	
                                                                  Single‐Use	Retail	
                                               Neighborhood	Medium‐High	(21	to	40	units	per	acre)	
Corridor	2	(CDR	2)	                                 Neighborhood	High	(41	to	75	units	per	acre)	
                                                 Boulevard	Medium‐High	(21	to	40	units	per	acre)	
                                                      Boulevard	High	(41	to	75	units	per	acre)	
                                                                  Single‐Use	Retail	
                                                                     Office/R&D	
                                                                Light	Industrial/Flex	
Urban	Neighborhood	(UN)	
                                                 Boulevard	Medium‐High	(21	to	40	units	per	acre)	
                                                      Boulevard	High	(41	to	75	units	per	acre)	
                                               Neighborhood	Medium‐High	(21	to	40	units	per	acre)	
Main	Street	(MS)	                           Main	Street/Neighborhood	Center	(12	to	40	units	per	acre)	
Commercial	and	Industrial	Zones	
                                                                  Single‐Use	Retail	
Regional	Commercial	(RC)	                                            Office/R&D	
                                                      Urban	Village	(41	to	100	units	per	acre)	
Residential	Neighborhood	Zones	
Neighborhood	Low	(NL)	                                           Neighborhood	Low	
Neighborhood	Medium	(NM)	                                      Neighborhood	Medium	
Mobile	Home	Park	(MH)	                                           Neighborhood	Low	
Source:	City	of	South	Gate	Municipal	Code	Public	Review	Draft	June	2013.	
 
54  Housing Element                                                                                     

Density  and  Height  Bonuses:  Under  State  law  (Senate  Bill  1818  of  2004),  cities  and  counties 
must  provide  a  density  increase  up  to  35  percent  over  the  otherwise  maximum  allowable 
residential density under the Municipal Code and the Land Use Element of the General Plan (or 
bonuses of equivalent financial value) when builders agree to construct housing developments 
with units affordable to lower or moderate income households or senior citizen developments.  
State law also requires that local governments provide regulatory incentives and concessions to 
qualifying projects and a process for waiving or reducing development standards under certain 
circumstances.  Updated density bonus provisions consistent with State law are included in the 
comprehensive Zoning Code Update (anticipated adoption by Spring 2014). 
 
The  various  Place  Types  established  in  General  Plan  2035  accommodate  a  range  of  housing 
options,  from  low‐density  single‐family  homes  to  high‐density  multi‐family  housing  up  to  100 
units  per  acre  in  Mixed  Use  Districts.    In  addition  to  the  State  density  bonus  provisions  for 
affordable  housing,  the  City  offers  density  and  height  increases  in  exchange  for  certain 
amenities, which will be determined either on a case‐by‐case basis or as specified in the Zoning 
Code.  Specifically,  if  public  improvements  are  provided,  a  development  can  receive  density 
increases as follows: 
 
    o Neighborhood Medium‐High: A density bonus of up to five additional dwelling units per 
        acre. 
    o Neighborhood High: A density bonus of up to 10 additional dwelling units per acre 
    o Boulevard Medium‐High: A density bonus of up to 5 additional dwelling units per acre 
        and 0.25 FAR for nonresidential uses. 
    o Boulevard High: A density bonus of up to 10 additional dwelling units per acre and 0.5 
        FAR for nonresidential uses. 
    o Urban  Village:  A  density  bonus  of  up  to  20  additional  dwelling  units  per  acre  and  0.5 
        FAR.  
    o Civic/Institutional: A density bonus of up to 1.0 FAR. 
     
Parking:  As  part  of  the  comprehensive  Zoning  Code  Update  to  implement  General  Plan  2035 
(anticipated adoption by Spring 2014) the City will establish the following parking requirements 
(Table HE‐31):  
 
                                                           South Gate General Plan 2035  55 

       Table	HE‐31:	Proposed	Parking	Standards	
               Housing	Type	                                 Parking	Requirement	
       Development	in	the	NL	zone	
       Efficiency/Studio	             1.0	to	1.5	spaces	per	unit	
       2	to	4	Bedrooms	               2.0	spaces	per	unit	
       5	Bedrooms	                    3.0	spaces	per	unit	
       6	or	more	Bedrooms	            3.0	spaces	per	unit	plus	one	paved	open	space	on‐site	
       Second	Dwelling	Unit	          1.0	spaces	per	unit	
       Live/Work	Units	               2.15	spaces	per	unit	
       Development	in	Urban	Mixed	Use	zones	
       Efficiency/Studio	             1.0	to	1.5	spaces	per	unit,	assigned	plus	0.15	guest	spaces	per	unit
       Two	to	Three	Bedroom	Unit	 2.0	spaces	per	unit,	assigned	plus	0.2	guest	spaces	per	unit	
       Senior	Housing	                0.8	spaces	per	unit	plus	0.3	guest	spaces	per	unit	
       Live/Work	Units	               2.0	spaces	per	unit	plus	0.15	guest	spaces	per	unit	
       Multi‐Family	Development	in	any	other	zones	
       Efficiency/Studio	             1.0	to	1.5	spaces	per	unit	
       2	Bedrooms	                    2.0	spaces	per	unit	
       3	or	more	Bedrooms	            2.0	covered	spaces	per	unit,	plus	1.0	uncovered	space	per	unit	
       Live/Work	Units	               2.15	spaces	per	unit	
       Source:	City	of	South	Gate	Municipal	Code	Public	Review	Draft	June	2013.	
 
Provisions for a Variety of Housing Types 
 
Housing  element  law  specifies  that  jurisdictions  must  identify  adequate  sites  to  be  made 
available  through  appropriate  zoning  and  development  standards  to  encourage  the 
development  of  a  variety  of  types  of  housing  for  all  income  levels,  including  single‐family 
homes,  multi‐family  rental  housing,  factory‐built  housing,  mobile  homes,  emergency  shelters, 
transitional housing, supportive housing and farmworker housing.  Table HE‐32 summarizes the 
City’s zoning provisions for various types of housing.   
 
 
56  Housing Element                                                                                         

Table	HE‐32:	Provisions	for	a	Variety	of	Housing	Types
	                                                 NL	         NM	          MH	           TV	          UF	           CC	       CDR1	         CDR2	      UN	      MS	        RC	
Single‐Family	                                     P	          P	           ‐‐	           ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	       ‐‐	      ‐‐	       ‐‐	
Duplex/Two‐Family	Residential	                     P	          P	           P	            ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	       ‐‐	      ‐‐	       ‐‐	
Multi‐Family	                                      ‐‐		        P	           ‐‐		          P	           P	           P 1	         P	           P	        P	      P1	         C	
Ground	Floor	Residential	                          ‐‐	         ‐‐	          ‐‐	           P	           ‐‐	          ‐‐	          P	           P	        P	       ‐‐	       ‐‐	
Mixed	Use	                                         ‐‐	         ‐‐	          ‐‐	           P	           P	           P	           P	           P	        P	       P	         C	
Live/Work	                                         P	          P	           ‐‐	           ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	       ‐‐	      ‐‐	       ‐‐	
Residential	Care	Facility	(6	or	Fewer)	            P	          P	           P	            P	           P	           P	           P	           P	        P	       P	        ‐‐	
Mobile	Home/Mobile	Home	Park	                      ‐‐	         ‐‐	          P	            ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	       ‐‐	      ‐‐	       ‐‐	
Second	Dwelling	Unit	                              P	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	           ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	      ‐‐	       ‐‐	       ‐‐	
Emergency	Shelter		                                ‐‐	         ‐‐	          ‐‐	           ‐‐	          P	           ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	       ‐‐	      ‐‐	       ‐‐	
Transitional	Housing2	                             P	          P	           P	            P	           P	           P	           P	           P	        P	       P	         C	
Supportive	Housing2	                               P	          P	           P	            P	           P	           P	           P	           P	        P	       P	         C	
Single‐Room	Occupancy	                             P	          P	           ‐‐	           ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	          ‐‐	      ‐‐	       ‐‐	       ‐‐	
P=	Permitted,	C=Conditionally	Permitted,	A=Accessory	Use,	‐‐ =	Not	Permitted
Note:		
    1. Upper	Floor	Use.	Permitted	on	the	2nd	story	or	above	subject	to	compliance	with	all	applicable	provisions	of	the	Zoning	Code,	subject	to	first	obtaining	a	Code	Compliance	
          Certificate.	
    2. Considered	a	residential	use	and	is	only	subject	to	those	restrictions	that	apply	to	other	residential	uses	of	the	same	type	in	the	same	zone.	
Source:	City	of	South	Gate	Municipal	Code	Public	Review	Draft	June	2013.	
     
                                                                                                                           South Gate General Plan 2035  57 

The  following  types  of  housing  are  highlighted  to  demonstrate  the  City’s  compliance  with 
specific  State  regulations.  Overall,  the  Land  Use  Plan  offers  tremendous  flexibility  in  building 
types and uses. 
 
Single‐Family  Homes:    Single‐family  homes  are  defined  as  “a  single,  detached  dwelling  unit 
designed for habitation by a single household on an individual lot.” They are permitted in the 
Neighborhood Low (NL) and Neighborhood Medium (NM) areas of the City.  The majority of the 
City is designated NL and a small percentage of areas are designated as NM. 
 
Multi‐Family Homes:  The Zoning Code defines multi‐family dwelling units as a building, parcel, 
or site with three or more dwelling units (attached or detached).  They are permitted in the NM 
area  and  most  of  the  City’s  urban  mixed  use,  commercial  and  industrial  zones.  Multi‐family 
residential is restricted to upper floor use in the CC and MS zones and requires a conditional 
use permit in the RC zone. 
 
Mixed  Use  Development:  Mixed  use  developments  are  permitted  in  all  of  the  City’s  urban 
mixed  use,  commercial  and  industrial  zones.  However,  mixed  use  projects  in  the  RC  zone  do 
require a conditional use permit. 
 
Mobile Homes: The City permits manufactured housing placed on a permanent foundation in 
all its residential zones.  Such housing is subject to the same development standards and design 
review as stick‐built housing. Mobile home parks are permitted in the City’s MH zone. Overall, 
only one percent of the City’s housing stock is comprised of factory‐built homes.  
 
Second  Units:  Second  units  are  permitted  with  a  ministerial  building  permit  in  the 
Neighborhood Low (NL) zone, in accordance with the following performance standards:  
 
      A  second  dwelling  unit  shall  not  be  permitted  within  a  condominium  development  or 
          planned unit developments occurring in any zone. 
      The minimum size of the lot must be equal to or larger than 6,000 square feet. 
      The lot must have an existing single‐family detached dwelling unit (main dwelling) and 
          can not already have a second dwelling unit on‐site. 
      The  size  of  the  second  unit  can  not  exceed  30  percent  of  the  living  area  of  the  main 
          dwelling and must be a minimum of 240 square feet and a maximum of 640 square feet. 
          The unit can also have a maximum of one bedroom. 
      Maximum  building  height  of  35  feet  or  equal  to  the  height  of  the  main  dwelling, 
          whichever is less. 
      Located within the rear half of the lot. 
      May  be  located  on  the  first  or  second  floor,  attached  or  detached  from  the  main 
          dwelling. 
      Maximum  45%  lot  coverage,  including  the  sum  of  the  main  dwelling  and  the  second 
          dwelling unit. 
      The utilities for the second unit shall not be metered separately from that of the main 
          dwelling  unit  for  gas,  electricity,  trash,  water  or  sewer  services.  All  utilities  for  the 
58  Housing Element                                                                                        

        property  shall  also  be  undergrounded  and  both  units  (main  dwelling  and  the  second 
        dwelling  unit)  must  also  be  equipped  with  “hardwired”  smoke  detectors  with  battery 
        backup. 
       Prior  to  the  issuance  of  a  building  permit  for  the  additional  second  unit  a  deed 
        restriction shall be recorded for the property which specifies: 
             o The total number of dwelling units on the property shall be limited to two units; 
             o That one of the dwelling units (main or second unit) shall be continuously owner‐
                occupied; 
             o Parking  spaces,  including  garage,  shall  be  maintained  free  and  clear  of  storage 
                and debris; 
             o Units (main and second dwelling unit) shall not be metered separately; 
             o The units are prohibited from being sold separately; and 
             o Second  dwelling  unit  approval  shall  be  revoked  if  any  portion  of  the  deed 
                restriction  is  violated  or  not  complied  with,  at  which  time  the  second  dwelling 
                unit would be converted to living space for the main dwelling. 
       The  second  unit  shall  provide  a  minimum  of  one  on‐site  parking  space,  subject  to  the 
        following standards: 
             o Minimum parking space dimension shall be 10 feet by 20 feet; 
             o Shall meet City standards and not block access to the main dwelling garage; 
             o May not be in tandem or perpendicular to an adjacent parking space or garage; 
                and  
             o Shall not be permitted within the required setbacks (front or corner side) for the 
                lot. 
       All  applicable  zoning  standards  related  to  height,  setbacks,  building  separation,  floor 
        area ratio and lot coverage, shall be adhered to. 
       Occupancy shall be limited to a maximum of two persons. 
       An application for a permit may be made to convert an illegal accessory dwelling unit to 
        a conforming legal second unit, and the standards and requirements for the conversion 
        shall be the same as or proposed new construction of a second unit. 
       The  second  unit  shall  be  architecturally  compatible  with  the  main  single‐family 
        residence  with  respect  to  styling,  roofing,  window  and  door  treatment,  materials, 
        colors, textures, height, scale, bulk and is compatible to the surrounding neighborhood. 
       The  establishment  of  the  proposed  second  unit  will  not  adversely  affect  the 
        neighborhood  with  respect  to  on‐street  parking  demand  and  utilization,  traffic,  noise, 
        concentration  of  accessory  dwelling  units  or  other  impacts  that  could  result  in 
        significantly adverse impacts on public services and resources. 
 
Second  dwelling  units  are  also  permitted  as  an  accessory  use  in  the  City’s  urban  mixed  use, 
commercial and industrial zones. Since adoption of the Second Unit Ordinance pursuant to AB 
1866  (passed  in  2002),  the  City  has  experienced  substantial  second  unit  construction.    Since 
2004, 103 second units/granny flats have been constructed.  
 
Emergency  Shelters:    As  part  of  the  City’s  comprehensive  update  to  the  Zoning  Code 
(anticipated adoption by Spring 2014), the City identified the Urban Flex (UF) zone as the zone 
                                                          South Gate General Plan 2035  59 

in which emergency shelters would be permitted by right, pursuant to Senate Bill 2 passed in 
October 2007.  
 
Transitional and Supportive Housing:  Transitional housing is a type of supportive housing used 
to  facilitate  the  movement  of  homeless  individuals  and  families  to  permanent  housing.  
Transitional  housing  can  take  several  forms,  including  group  quarters  with  beds,  single‐family 
homes,  and  multi‐family  apartments  and  typically  offers  case  management  and  support 
services  to  return  people  to  independent  living  (usually  between  six  and  24  months).    It  is 
defined in Section 50675.2 of the Health and Safety Code as rental housing for stay for at least 
six  months  but  where  the  units  are  re‐circulated  to  another  program  recipient  after  a  set 
period.   
 
According  to  the  National  Housing  Institute,  supportive  housing  is  permanent  housing  with  a 
service  component,  which  can  be  provided  either  on‐site  or  off‐site.    Similar  to  transitional 
housing, supportive housing can be operated as either regular rental housing developments or 
as group quarters.   
 
The Zoning  Code will be comprehensively updated (anticipated adoption by Spring 2014).   As 
part  of  the  update,  transitional  housing  is  now  defined  as  “a  building  or  group  of  buildings 
configured  as  rental  housing  units,  operated  under  program  requirements  that  call  for  the 
termination  of  assistance  and  recirculation  of  the  assisted  unit  or  another  eligible  program 
recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than 6 months.” 
Supportive  housing  is  now  defined  as  “facility  or  use  that  provides  housing  with  no  limit  on 
length of stay that is occupied by the target population, as defined by Section 50675.14 of the 
California Health and Safety Code, and that is linked to on‐site or off‐site services that assist the 
tenant to retain the housing, improve his or her health status, maximize his or her ability to live, 
and,  when  possible,  work  in  the  community.”  Transitional  and  supportive  housing  meeting 
these  definitions  is  considered  a  residential  use  and  is  only  subject  to  those  restrictions  that 
apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.  
 
Single‐Room  Occupancy:  The  South  Gate  Zoning  Update  includes  provisions  for  SRO 
apartments in the NL and NM zones. The City currently has one 11‐unit SRO development. SRO 
hotels in South Gate cannot have more than 20 units and must be consistent with the following 
minimum requirements:  
 
      Full community kitchen and laundry as part of each building; 
      Laundry facility shall provide one washer and one dryer per six units; 
      Each unit shall include a private interior kitchenette, bathroom, and closet; 
      The maximum distance from a bus line or major arterial shall be 1,000 feet;  
      Electric  and  telephone  utilities  shall  be  metered  separately  for  each  unit,  while  the 
         meters  for  gas,  water,  or  sewer  services,  and  for  trash  pick‐up  shall  be  for  the  entire 
         building; 
      The property shall include on‐site management; 
60  Housing Element                                                                                       

        The building must be operated by a certified non‐profit organization under contract with 
         the City of South Gate to provide housing for low and very low income residents; 
        Utilities for the apartment building shall be underground; 
        Occupancy shall be limited to a maximum of one person per room; 
        Each unit shall be equipped with “hardwired” smoke detectors with battery backup; 
        Residents must sign one year leases for occupancy; and 
        All other development standards must be adhered to. 
 
Housing  for  Persons  with  Disabilities:  The  City  conducted  an  analysis  of  the  Zoning  Code, 
permitting  procedures,  development  standards,  and  building  codes  to  identify  potential 
constraints  for  housing  for  persons  with  disabilities.    The  City’s  policies  and  regulations 
regarding housing for persons with disabilities are described below. 
 
Definition of Family: Many zoning ordinances in California define a “family” as: 1) an individual; 
2) two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption; or 3) a group of not more than 
a specified number of unrelated persons as a single housekeeping unit.  However, the California 
court  cases  have  ruled  that  such  definition  is  invalid.    Some  definitions  of  family  may 
impermissibly limit the development and siting of group homes for persons with disabilities by 
defining  a  family  with  blood  relation  or  with  size.    Courts  have  ruled  that  defining  a  family 
serves  no  legitimate  or  useful  objective  or  purpose  recognized  under  the  zoning  and  land 
planning power of the jurisdiction and therefore violates rights of privacy under the California 
Constitution.    A  zoning  ordinance  also  cannot  regulate  residency  by  discriminating  between 
biologically related and unrelated persons.  Furthermore, a zoning provision cannot regulate or 
enforce the number of persons constituting a family. 
 
The South Gate Zoning Code Update proposes to remove the definition of “family” (anticipated 
adoption by  Spring 2014).  
 
Residential  Care  Facilities:  The  proposed  South  Gate  Zoning  Code  Update  defines  residential 
care  facility  as  “an  integrated  facility  that  provides  accommodations  for,  and  varying  level  of 
care  to,  residents  depending  on  need.  The  use  contains  the  following  components: 
independent living units; residential care facilities; and continuing care, Alzheimer, and related 
facilities.  This  use  may  include  supportive  medical  and  non‐medical  services  directly  affiliated 
with  the  treatment  of  on‐site  patients.”  The  definition  also  makes  a  distinction  between 
“residential  care  facility,  general”  which  serves  six  or  fewer  persons  and  “residential  care 
facility,  large”  which  serves  more  than  six  persons.  Residential  care  facilities  for  six  or  fewer 
persons are permitted in all residential and urban mixed use zones.  Facilities for seven or more 
are conditionally permitted in the same zones. 
 
Reasonable Accommodation Procedures: Both the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California 
Fair  Employment  and  Housing  Act  direct  local  governments  to  make  reasonable 
accommodations  (i.e.  modifications  or  exceptions)  in  local  zoning  laws,  land  use  regulations, 
and  other  public  policies  when  such  accommodations  may  be  necessary  to  afford  disabled 
                                                            South Gate General Plan 2035  61 

persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.  For example, it may be a reasonable 
request  to  waive  a  setback  requirement  so  that  a  paved  path  of  travel  can  be  provided  to 
residents  with  mobility  impairments.    Another  reasonable  request  may  be  to  relax  the 
maximum lot coverage when room addition in the ground floor is required to accommodate the 
housing need of a person with disabilities. 
 
In the City of South Gate, requests for reasonable accommodation are reviewed by the Division 
of  Building  and  Safety,  Housing  Division  and  Community  Development  Department,  as 
appropriate, and decided on a case‐by‐case basis.  Application for reasonable accommodation 
related to building codes are reviewed by the Division of Building and Safety and submitted as 
part of the building permit process.  Application for reasonable accommodation related to land 
use  and  zoning  codes,  and  other  development  procedures  are  reviewed  by  the  Community 
Development Department and submitted as part of the development application.  A reasonable 
accommodation  procedure  is  included  as  part  of  the  comprehensive  Zoning  Code  Update 
(anticipated adoption by Spring 2014). 
 
Permits  and  Fees: There  is  no  fee  for  the  City  to  consider  a  request  for  reasonable 
accommodation. Typical building permit fees would apply.
 
Building Codes: The City enforces Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations that regulates 
the access and adaptability of buildings to accommodate persons with disabilities.  No unique 
restrictions  are  in  place  that  would  constrain  the  development  of  housing  for  persons  with 
disabilities.    Compliance  with  provisions  of  the  Code  of  Regulations,  and  California  Building 
Standards Code is reviewed and enforced by the Division of Building and Safety as a part of the 
building permit submittal.   
 
On‐ and Off‐Site Improvements 
 
For new development, the City may require street improvements along the entire frontage of a 
property abutting the public right‐of‐way.  Improvements may include the following: pavement 
to  the  center  of  the  street  or  alley,  curbs,  gutters,  sidewalks,  driveways,  drainage  facilities, 
sewer  facilities,  water  facilities,  street  lighting,  parkway  trees,  right‐of‐way  dedication, 
modifications  to  or  undergrounding  of  existing  utilities.    Such  improvements  are  typical  for 
urbanized, built‐out communities with aging infrastructure. 
 
                                  Design	Criteria	               Right	of	Way
                                  Major	Highway	                     100’	
                                  Secondary	Street	                   80’	
                                  Collector	Street	                   60’	
                                  Local	and	Cul‐de‐Sac	Street         54’	
 
Other improvements may be required if, in the determination of the Director of Public Works, 
such improvements are directly related to the development of the site of the proposed building 
62  Housing Element                                                                                    

or structure and are required to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to comply with 
state or federal statutes or regulations.  To facilitate development, the City has determined that 
the estimated costs of all such requirements shall not exceed 50 percent of the valuation of any 
structure for which a building permit is requested. 
 
To  promote  development  in  the  CIV,  TV,  CDR  1,  CDR  2,  and  UN  1  zones,  height  bonus  is 
available when a developer certain public improvements are provided in the General Plan. 
Planning and Development Fees 
 
Various fees and assessments are charged by the City to cover the costs of processing permits 
and  providing  necessary  services  and  infrastructure.    Table  HE‐33  provides  a  listing  of  fees 
charged  by  the  City  of  South  Gate  for  residential  development.    Other  fees  may  be  assessed 
depending upon the circumstances of the development.  For example, the builder may need to 
pay  an  inspection  fee  for  required  improvements  or  the  builder  may  need  a  Variance, 
Conditional  Use  Permit,  or  Site  Plan  Review.    The  fee  for  sidewalks,  curbs  and  gutters  has 
changed over the years but the City does not impose Quimby fees.  Table HE‐33 also shows a 
comparison  of  the  planning  fees  required  for  a  standard  residential  development  in  adjacent 
communities.  In general, planning fees charged by the City of South Gate are most similar to 
the fees assessed by the City of Long Beach.   
 
For  a  typical  single‐family  project,  the  planning  and  development  fees  total  approximately 
$1,6,729 per unit.  For a typical multi‐family project, the planning and development fees total 
$16,889  per  unit.    Planning  and  development  impact  fees  charged  for  a  typical  multi‐family 
project  and for  a  single‐family  unit are  summarized  in  Table  HE‐34.    While  the  City’s  fees are 
higher  than  most  neighboring  cities,  with  the  exception  of  Long  Beach,  overall  planning  and 
impact  fees  are  moderate.    Also,  per‐unit  fees  are  similar  for  single‐family  and  multi‐family 
housing. 
 
Due  to  budgetary  constraints,  the  City  is  unable  to  waive  or  reduce  the  fees  for  affordable 
housing  projects.    However,  affordable  housing  funds,  such  as  HOME  funds,  may  be  used  to 
subsidize affordable housing projects, mitigating the cost impact of fees charged by the City. 
 
                                                           South Gate General Plan 2035  63 

Table	HE‐33:	Comparison	of	Planning	Fees
      Fee	Type	                  South	Gate	            Huntington	Park	            Inglewood	            Long	Beach	               Compton	
                              Less	than	1	acre:	
                              $4,387	                                                                 SPR	Committee	
                              More	than	1	                                                            Approval:	
                                                                               $100	+	1%	of	
Site	Plan	Review	             acre:	$2,500	             N/A	                                          $6,558	                  N/A	
                                                                               construction	
                              deposit+	hourly	                                                        PC	Approval:	
                              rate	and	                                                               $13,116	
                              expensed	
Conditional	Use	                                                                                      Minor:	$5,465	
                              $3,623	                   $1,900	                $750	                                           $1,500‐$2,500	
Permit	                                                                                               Major:	$8,744	
Time	Extensions	              $253	                     $543	                  N/A	                   $1,093	                  $350	
Variance	                     $3,434	                   $1,900	                $750	                  $6,012	                  $600‐$1,800	
Zone	Change	                  $5,454	                   $2,171	                $500	                  $10,930	                 $2,500	
General	Plan	
                              $6,550	                   $3,256	                $600	                  $10,930	                 $3,000	
Amendment	
Tentative	Parcel	                                                                                     $5,629	+	$137	
                              $4,304	                   $1,900	                $500	                                           $1,500	
Map	                                                                                                  per	unit	
                              Less	than	1	acre:	
                              $5,763	
                              More	than	1	
Tentative	Tract	                                                                                      $5,629	+	$137	
                              acre:	$2,500	             $1,900	                $500	+	$30/lot	                                 $2,500	
Map	                                                                                                  per	unit	
                              deposit+	hourly	
                              rate	and	
                              expensed		
Lot	Line	
                              $3,383	                   N/A	                   N/A	                   $2,733	                  $500	
Adjustment	
N/A	=	Not	Available	
Sources:	 	 City	 of	 South	 Gate	 (2012);	 City	 of	 Long	 Beach	 (2012);	 City	 of	 Compton	 (2009);	 City	 of	 Huntington	 Park	 (2011);	 City	 of	
Inglewood	(2000).	
     
    64  Housing Element                                                                                                                 

Table	HE‐34:	Planning	and	Development	Impact	Fees	for	Typical	Projects
                                                                                                    Multi‐Family	Unit	
                              Fees	                                    Single‐Family	Unit	
                                                                                                   (an	18‐unit	project)	
Building	and	Safety	Plan	Check	Fee	                                             $1,650	                    $13,860	
Building	Permit	Fees	                                                           $1,441	                    $11,840	
Plumbing	Permit	                                                                 $250	                      $8,509	
Electrical	Permit	                                                               $230	                      $4,161	
Mechanical	Permit	                                                               $300	                      $3,960	
Sewer	Connection	                                                                 $60	                       $817	
Road	Mitigation	Fee	                                                               $0	                     $41,604	
Art	in	Public	Places	Fee	                                                          $0	                     $25,209	
Water	Impact	Fee*	                                                              $5,250	                    $63,000	
Public	Works	PC	Fee	                                                             $520	                      $4,000	
County	Sanitation	Fee	                                                          $2,000	                    $22,140	
School	Fee	                                                                     $4,800	                   $100,800	
Certificate	of	Occupancy	                                                        $228	                      $4,104	
Total	Fees	                                                                   $16,729	                    $304,004	
Per‐Unit	Fees	                                                                $16,729	                     $16,889	
Source:	City	of	South	Gate,	2013.	
The	water	impact	fee	for	a	single‐family	unit	ranges	from	$3,500	to	$7,000.		An	average	of	$5,250	(for	a	three	bedroom,	one	
bathroom	1,200	square	foot	house)	is	used	here	to	estimate	typical	total	fees.	
 
Local Processing and Permit Procedures 
 
The  City  permits  various  residential  uses  by  right  in  their  respective  districts/neighborhoods.  
However, site plan approval is required for all parcels over 15,000 square feet or where two or 
more parcels are proposed to be consolidated for the development of a single project.  Criteria 
for site plan approval include: 
 
      The site for the proposal is in conformity with the general plan, is adequate in size and 
          shape  to  accommodate  such  use,  provides  all  yards,  wall  fences,  parking  and  loading 
          areas,  landscaping,  open  spaces  and  other  facilities  necessary  to  make  the  proposal 
          compatible with the abutting land and uses within the community. 
 
      The site for the proposal has adequate access to a public street or highway designed to 
          carry the volume and quantity of traffic movements generated by the proposal. 
 
      The proposal will mitigate potential adverse effects on the abutting land or uses and the 
          community. 
 
      The conditions as stated by the Planning Commission are deemed necessary to protect 
          the public health, safety and general welfare, and such conditions may include but not 
          be limited to the following: 
 
                                                                   South Gate General Plan 2035  65 

             o Additional yard areas, open spaces and buffer areas; 
     
             o Fences, walls, landscaping and the maintenance thereof; 
     
             o Dedication and improvements of streets, alleys and service roads; 
     
             o Control of all signs; 
     
             o Regulations  controlling  noise,  smoke,  vibration,  dust,  fumes,  odor,  and  other 
                 nuisances; and 
     
             o Such other conditions the commission may deem necessary to develop the city 
                 in  an  orderly  and  efficient  method  and  in  conformance  with  the  intent  and 
                 purpose set forth in this title and general plan.     
 
Conditional Use Permits and Variances 
 
The  City  uses  the  CUP  process  and  variances  to  control  the  location  and  operation  of  certain 
types  of  land  uses  to  ensure  public  health,  safety  or  general  welfare  or  to  mitigate/avoid 
material  detriment  to  the  property  of  other  persons  in  the  vicinity.    The  South  Gate  Zoning 
Code sets forth specific reasons for granting conditional use permits: 
 
         Reduce the detrimental effects of land uses on adjacent properties;  
         Compensate through conditions for specialized technology; and 
         Maintain a degree of compatibility between land uses throughout the City. 
 
A  CUP  typically  takes  90  days  to  process  and  requires  a  public  hearing  before  the  Planning 
Commission. Decisions by the Planning Commission can be appealed to the City Council. Figure 
HE‐8 illustrates the City’s Conditional Use Permit Process.  
 
66  Housing Element                                                                                   

                             Figure	HE‐8:	Conditional	Use	Permit	Process	
                                                                            
 
According  to  the  proposed  Zoning  Code  Update,  in  order  to  receive  a  variance  the  following 
must be shown: 
 
    There must be exceptional or extraordinary physical conditions or circumstances that do 
        not apply generally to the property or class of use in the same vicinity and zone; and 
    The  exceptional  or  extraordinary  physical  conditions  or  circumstances  are  a 
        characteristic of the property in relation to the regulations of this Code, and not a result 
        of any applicant/property owner action(s); and 
    The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property 
        right possessed by other property in the same vicinity and zone, and would be denied to 
        the  property  based  on  the  application  of  the  provisions  of  this  Code  without  the 
        issuance of the variance; and 
    The granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or 
        injurious  to  the  public  health,  safety,  or  welfare,  or  cause  adverse  effect  on  any 
        surrounding property or property/improvements in the same vicinity and zone; and 
    That the granting of the variance will not confer on the applicant any special privilege 
        that is denied by this Code to any other property or class of use in the same vicinity and 
        zone; and  
    That the granting of the variance is consistent with the intent of the General Plan. 
 
A variance typically takes 90 days to process and requires a public hearing before the Planning 
Commission. Decisions by the Planning Commission can be appealed to the City Council. Figure 
HE‐9 illustrates the City’s Variance Process.  
 
                                                        South Gate General Plan 2035  67 

                                      Figure	HE‐9:	Variance	Process	
                                                                         
 
After conditional use permit or variance applications are submitted, the Planning Commission 
gives  public  notice  of  the  intention  to  consider  the  granting  of  the  application  at  a  public 
hearing.  The resolution of the hearing must be mailed to the applicants within 14 days of the 
decision.   
 
Parcel Map 
 
When an owner or subdivider wishes to divide one or more parcels so as to produce not more 
than a total of four parcels and does not wish to record a subdivision map as provided law, they 
must record a parcel map in the following procedure: 
 
     An original and 16 prints of the map must be filed with the planning commission and will 
        be dispersed to appropriate parties by the Secretary of the planning commission. 
     Within ten days, the planning commission will either approve, conditionally approve, or 
        disapprove of the map. 
     The map must also be approved by the City engineer. 
 
Tentative Tract Map 
 
A  tentative  tract  map  (TTM)  is  prepared  after  the  subdivider  has  conferred  with  the  City 
engineer  and  the  secretary  of  the  City  planning  commission.    The  TTM  must  be  prepared  in 
accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and must be filed with the commission not less than 
20 days prior to the date of the planning commission meeting.  The planning commission must 
conduct  a  public  meeting  to  consider  a  tentative  tract  map  after  20  days  of  the  filing  of  the 
map.  Action approving, conditionally approving or disapproving the TTM shall be taken within 
50 days of the filing.   
 
68  Housing Element                                                                                      

Processing Time 
 
The  processing  time  needed  to  obtain  development  permits  and  required  approvals  is  often 
cited  as  a  factor  that  contributes  to  the  high  cost  of  housing.    In  response  to  State  law, 
California cities have been working to improve the efficiency of permit and review processes by 
providing  “one  stop”  processing  and  eliminating  costly  duplication  of  effort.    The  passage  of 
Assembly Bill 884, which took effect on January 1, 1978, has also helped reduce governmental 
delays  by:  1)  limiting  processing  time  in  most  cases  to  one  year;  and  2)  minimizing  and/or 
eliminating  “red  tape”  by  requiring  agencies  to  specify  in  writing  the  information  required  to 
complete  an  acceptable  application  for  a  building  permit.    Table  HE‐35  summarizes  the 
processing  time  required  for  different  types  of  applications.    However,  many  of  these 
applications can be processed concurrently.  
 
                    Table	HE‐35:	Permit	Processing	Time	by	Type	of	Application	
                    Development	Application	                         Processing	Time	
                    Site	Plan	Review	                                     90	days	
                    Conditional	Use	Permit	                               90	days	
                    Variance	                                             90	days	
                    Zone	Change	Application	                             120	days	
                    General	Plan	Amendment	                          180	to	270	days	
                    Tentative	Parcel	Map	                                120	days	
                    Tentative	Tract	Map	                                 120	days	
                    Lot	Line	Adjustment	                                  30	days	
                    Source:	City	of	South	Gate,	2013.	
 
The  City  of  South  Gate  has  adopted  a  program  that  expedites  processing  for  residential 
construction.  Under this program, most project fees and permits may be processed within 90 
to  180  days.    Table  HE‐36  summarizes  the  planning  review  and  processing  times  by  type  of 
development.  A typical multi‐family or mixed use development can be reviewed and approved 
within  three  to  six  months,  once  an  application  is  deemed  complete.    Such  review  and 
processing  times  are  typical  and  comply  with  the  Streamlining  Act,  and  do  not  constrain 
residential development. 
 
Furthermore,  the  comprehensive  update  to  the  Zoning  Code  (anticipated  adoption  by  Spring 
2014)  simplified  the  processing  time  and  requirements.    Residential  and  mixed  use 
developments will be permitted by right unless the proposal requests for an adjustment that is 
beyond the built‐in flexibility in the Code, or involves a use that requires discretionary review.   
 
                                                         South Gate General Plan 2035  69 

Table	HE‐36:	Planning	Review	and	Processing	Times	by	Type
                                                                                      Multiple‐Family	
        Project	Type	               Single‐Family	             Multiple‐Family	             (with	         Mixed	Use	
                                                                                       Subdivisions)	
                                                                                       Staff	Review1	
Permits	Required		                 Building	Permit	              Staff	Review1	                          Staff	Review1	
                                                                                         TTM/TPM	
                                                                  Community	
                                                                                          Planning	
Reviewing	Body	                           Staff	                 Development	                          Planning	Director	
                                                                                        Commission	
                                                                   Director	
Public	Hearing	Required?	                  no	                         no	                   yes	              no	
                                                                   Planning	                               Planning	
Appeal	Body	(if	any)	                    None	                                          City	Council	
                                                                 Commission	                              Commission	
Estimated	Total	Processing	
                                       90	days	                     90	days	              90	days	          90	days	
Time	
Notes:	
    1.   SPR	=	Site	Plan	Review	required	if	project	site	is	over	15,000	square	feet.	
    2.   TTM/TPM	=	Tentative	Tract	Map/Tentative	Parcel	Map
   
  Building Code and Enforcement 
   
  The City of South Gate currently uses the following Codes: 2010 California Administrative Code, 
  2010 California Residential Code, 2010 California Energy Code, 2010 California Green Building 
  Standards Code, 2010 California Referenced Standards Code, 2009 Uniform Solar Energy Code, 
  2009 Uniform Swimming, Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, 2010 California Historical Building Code, 
  and 2010 California Existing Building Code.  No local amendments that would impede housing 
  development were adopted. 
   
  The City of South Gate maintains an active Code Enforcement Program which works together 
  with residents and the business community to preserve clean and safe neighborhoods.  The City 
  has  adopted  codes  that  address  property  maintenance  standards  which  include  building, 
  zoning,  housing,  landscaping,  signage,  graffiti  and  swimming  pool  fences.    Complaints  are 
  assigned  to  code  enforcement  officers  who  investigate  and  give  written  notice  to  violators 
  advising  them  to  correct  the  violation.    In  addition  to  complaints,  code  violations  are  also 
  identified through referrals and field patrols. Violations are determined based on all permits on 
  file, plans and any other records that will assist in the process.  Low income code violators are 
  referred to the Housing Division’s Homeowner Rehabilitation Program.  The City initiates legal 
  action to obtain compliance through the office of the City prosecutor if the violation remains 
  uncorrected.  In recent years, 90 percent of inspections lead to identification of violations and 
  five percent lead to citations.  Ten percent of violations were referred to outside agencies for 
  assistance.   
   
  70  Housing Element                                                                                             

Environmental Constraints 
 
The following discussions are obtained from the Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for General 
Plan 2030 Update, which provides for the growth potential assumed in this Housing Element as 
presented in the Housing Resources section and as detailed in the Appendix. 
 
Hazardous Materials 
 
Future residential development is expected to occur as high‐density residential and mixed‐use 
developments  along  major  corridors.    Some  of  these  properties  are  currently  occupied  by 
industrial  operations.    According  to  the  General  Plan  EIR,  169  sites  in  the  City  contain  wells, 
underground storage tanks, and pipelines, 25 of the underground storage tanks have reported 
leaks.    Therefore,  there  is  a  potential  where  future  developments  may  occur  on  sites  that 
require remediation or are located near properties that contain hazardous conditions. 
 
While  the  risk  of  exposure  to  hazardous  materials  cannot  be  eliminated,  measures  can  be 
implemented to maintain risk to acceptable levels.  Compliance with measures established by 
Federal,  State  and  local  regulatory  agencies  is  considered  adequate  to  offset  the  negative 
effects related to the use, storage and transport of hazardous materials in the City.  In addition, 
the  General  Plan  Update  contains  goals  and  policies,  as  well  as  the  recommended  mitigation 
measures that would further reduce hazardous materials impacts to a less than significant level. 
 
Seismic Hazards 
 
The City is located within a seismically active region of southern California.    The nearest active 
or  potentially  active  fault  to  South  Gate  is  the  Newport‐Inglewood  Fault  Zone,  located 
approximately  5.7  miles  southwest  of  the  City.    Additionally,  several  active  faults  that  can 
generate  ground  shaking  in  South  Gate  are  located  within  50  miles  of  the  City.    The  City  is 
located  in  Seismic  Zone  4,  the  highest  hazard  zone,  and  is  therefore  susceptible  to  strong 
groundshaking.   Furthermore, the City is situated in an area of active crustal compression with 
recently  deposited  alluvial  sediments  and  would  likely  experience  groundshaking  due  to  a 
seismic event. 
 
Implementation of the General Plan could expose people or structures to potential substantial 
adverse effects as a result of strong seismic groundshaking.  Mitigation has been recommended 
in  order  to  reduce  impacts  associated  with  seismically  induced  groundshaking  to  less  than 
significant  levels.    The  mitigation  involves  compliance  with  the  recommendations  detailed  in 
site‐specific  Geotechnical  Studies  conducted  as  part  of  future  development.    Also,  numerous 
controls would be imposed on future development through the permitting process that would 
further  lessen  impacts  associated  with  seismically‐induced  groundshaking.    The  design, 
construction, and engineering of buildings within the City would be subject to compliance with 
the City’s Building Code and UBC.  Additionally, the Healthy Community Element of the General 
                                                          South Gate General Plan 2035  71 

Plan includes objectives, policies, and implementation actions to protect the community from 
risks associated with seismic hazards.  These measures acknowledge safety concerns pertaining 
to  seismic  groundshaking.    All  future  development  would  be  subject  to  compliance  with 
applicable  building  codes  (i.e.,  City  Building  Code,  Uniform  Building  Code,  California  Building 
Code),  General  Plan  policies,  the  Natural  Hazards  Mitigation  Plan,  and  recommended 
mitigation, which would lessen potential impacts associated with strong seismic groundshaking 
to less than significant levels. 
 
Flooding 
 
Two  types  of  flooding  primarily  affect  the  City  of  South  Gate:  riverine  and  urban  flooding.  
Riverine flooding is the over bank flooding of rivers and streams.  The Los Angeles River and Rio 
Hondo  Channel  represent  the  primary  flood  risk  for  the  City  of  South  Gate.  Urban  flooding 
occurs  as  land  is  developed  with  impermeable  surfaces.    Additionally,  Whittier  Narrows, 
Hansen,  and  Sepulveda  Dams,  and  Garvey  Reservoir  could  result  in  dam  inundation  of  South 
Gate if any of these facilities were to fail. 
 
The  entire  City  is  at  risk  of  seasonal  temporary  urban  flooding.    Sections  of  the  City  are 
occasionally prone to urban flooding, especially low lying areas.  This occurs because of “debris 
accumulation in storm drains and flood control basins, and over burden pumping stations and 
aged drainage systems.  Although development associated with implementation of the General 
Plan  would  increase  impermeable  surfaces  within  the  City,  the  increase  potential  for  urban 
flooding in the City would not be significant as the City is currently approximately 98 percent 
developed.    Additionally,  the  Green  City  Element  include  objectives,  policies,  and 
implementation  actions  that  address  potential  flooding  hazards,  reducing  potential  flooding 
impacts  to  less  than  significant  levels.    Therefore,  urban  flooding  impacts  associated  with 
implementation of the General Plan would be less than significant.   
 
Service and Facility Infrastructure 
 
South  Gate’s  utility  and  circulation  infrastructure  is  currently  at  or  beyond  capacity.    New 
housing construction will require expansion of the City’s infrastructure capacity.  As part of the 
City’s comprehensive update to the General Plan, the City identified the current infrastructure 
and  the  need  that  will  be  created  with  additional  development  and  prepared  a  capital 
improvement  plan  to  upgrade  the  existing  infrastructure  to  meet  these  development 
projections. 
 
Water Supply 
 
The  City  of  South  Gate  uses  groundwater  from  the  City  wells  as  its  primary  source.  Water 
generated  from  wells  is  chlorinated  and  distributed  to  City  customers  or  stored  in  reservoirs. 
The total capacity of both active and stand‐by wells is 32.97 million gallons per day (MGD), or 
72  Housing Element                                                                                   

101.19 acre‐feet per day. This represents a surplus over the City’s average daily demand of 9.32 
MGD, and the City’s maximum daily demand of 16.78 MGD. Because the total capacity of these 
existing  wells  exceeds  maximum  daily  demand,  additional  wells  are  not  required.  However, 
reservoir storage capacity needs to be improved and additional reservoirs or storage capacity 
needs to be developed. 
 
The City is working with other agencies to develop a “conjunctive use” program (water storage 
in the underground aquifer) and may be able to convert unused water to underground water 
storage.  In  addition,  South  Gate  has  committed  to  taking  the  following  actions  in  its  Public 
Facilities Element in order to ensure the City’s water supply: 
 
     Amend the Building Code to allow water‐conserving technologies. 
     Explore the creation of an infrastructure impact fee. 
     Replace existing above‐ground storage tanks. 
 
Wastewater 
 
The City’s sanitary sewer collection system is managed by the City’s Public Works Department. 
The collection system consists of about 116 miles of gravity sewer lines, no pump/lift stations, 
and about 100 sewer siphons within the system. Approximately 99 percent of flows from local 
sewers  discharge  into  the  County  Sanitation  Districts’  (LACSD’s)  facilities  for  transportation, 
treatment, and disposal. The remaining one percent of total sewage generated within the City 
passes into the City of Paramount system and is then discharged into CSD facilities. There are 
21 LACSD trunk lines that run through various portions of the City. These trunks convey sewage 
from South Gate and other communities to the Joint Water Pollution Control Plant in Carson. 
 
In 2002 and 2003, concrete sewer facilities were repaired and re‐lined and in 2008 the vitrified 
clay pipe portion of the system was checked and repaired. As deteriorated lines are discovered 
during preventive maintenance, these lines are either immediately repaired by Public Works or 
emergency contractors are retained to repair lines. In addition, South Gate has committed to 
taking  the  following  actions  in  its  Public  Facilities  Element  in  order  to  maintain  the  City’s 
wastewater capacity: 
 
     Evaluate the capacity of the existing wastewater collection system. 
     Explore the creation of an infrastructure impact fee. 
     Update the Sewer Master Plan. 
 
Before a development permit is granted, it must be determined that public service and facility 
systems  are  adequate  to  accommodate  any  increased  demand  created  by  the  proposed 
project.    Because  South  Gate  is  essentially  a  built‐out  urban  community  all  infrastructure 
systems are in place.  However, expansion of capacity may be necessary to accommodate the 
increased  development  intensities  permitted  under  the  updated  General  Plan  and  aging 
infrastructure may need to be replaced over time. 
                                                           South Gate General Plan 2035  73 

This  may  be  viewed  as  a  constraint  on  housing  development.    The  market  will  provide  the 
infrastructure upgrades for market rate units because sites will not redevelop until the market 
rates rents or for‐sale prices can carry the costs of the infrastructure upgrades.  However, for 
below market rate units, these added infrastructure improvement costs may make affordable 
housing development infeasible without additional local, state or federal assistance.  The City 
pro‐actively assists in the development of affordable housing to overcome this constraint.  City 
assistance  could  be  provided  through  CDBG  and  HOME  funds  and  other  local  sources  of 
funding.    The  City  could  also  commit  to  applying  for  statewide  infrastructure  improvement 
grants.    Assistance  can  be  direct  (give  funding  or  land  to  affordable  housing  developers)  or 
indirect  (use  cash  to  upgrade  off‐site  infrastructure  to  serve  a  specific  affordable  housing 
project).  
74  Housing Element                                                                                 

HOUSING RESOURCES 
 
This section provides an overview of land, financial, and administrative resources available to 
the  City  of  South  Gate  for  implementing  the  policies  and  programs  set  forth  in  this  Housing 
Element. 
 
Residential Development Potential 
 
Regional Housing Needs Assessment 
 
Pursuant to State law, each jurisdiction in California is responsible for a share of future housing 
needs  in  the  region.    For  the  2013‐2021  Housing  Element  cycle,  the  Southern  California 
Association  of  Governments  (SCAG)  region  has  been  allocated  a  future  housing  growth  of 
412,137 units by the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD).  SCAG 
is  responsible  for  allocating  this  future  housing  need  to  jurisdictions  within  the  six‐county 
region.    In  this  capacity,  SCAG  developed  a  Regional  Housing  Needs  Assessment  (RHNA)  that 
determines  each  jurisdiction’s  “fair  share”  of  the  forecasted  regional  growth  through  2021.5  
South  Gate’s  share  of  the  regional  housing  need  is  1,262  units  as  allocated  by  SCAG  into  the 
following income levels:   
 
        Extremely Low Income: 149 (11.0 percent) 
        Very Low Income: 165 units (13.5 percent) 
        Low Income: 185 units (15.1 percent) 
        Moderate Income: 205 units (16.6 percent) 
        Above Moderate Income: 558 units (43.9 percent) 
 
The  RHNA  has  a  slightly  different  planning  period  than  the  Housing  Element  planning  period.  
The RHNA covers from January 1, 2014 through October 31, 2021. 
 
The City must demonstrate that its land inventory is adequate in terms of the amount of land 
available,  zoning  provisions,  and  development  standards,  to  facilitate  and  encourage  the 
development  of  housing  that  is  affordable  to  the  various  income  groups  according  to  the 
distribution specified above.  
                                                       
5
       The City has a RHNA allocation of 314 very low income units (inclusive of extremely low income units).  Pursuant to new 
       State law (AB 2634), the City must project the number of extremely low income housing needs based on Census income 
       distribution or assume 50 percent of the very low income units as extremely low.  According to the CHAS data developed 
       by  HUD  using  2005‐2009  ACS  data,  the  City  has  30  percent  very  low  income  households  (14.1  percent  extremely  low 
       income and 15.7 percent very low income).  Therefore, the City’s RHNA of 314 very low income units may be split into 149 
       extremely low income units and 165 very low income units.  However, for purposed of identifying adequate sites for the 
       RHNA, State law does not mandate the separate accounting for extremely low income category. 
                                                                           South Gate General Plan 2035  75 

Residential Sites Inventory 
 
Pending Projects 
 
There are currently three pending residential projects within the City of South Gate that will not 
receive  building  permits  prior  to  January  1,  2014.  Two  of  the  three  projects  are  single‐family 
homes while the third is a second unit. All three units are expected to be market‐rate. 
 
Sites Inventory 
 
The City of South Gate’s residential neighborhoods are primarily built out and future residential 
development  will  occur  as  redevelopment  of  underutilized  residential  and  nonresidential 
properties.  The South Gate General Plan 2035 facilitates this redevelopment by introducing a 
new Land Use Plan that calls for the significant transformation of select areas of the City into 
vibrant districts and corridors with a diverse mix of uses.  The updated General Plan envisions, 
at  buildout  in  2035,  a  community  with  high  density  nodes  combined  with  existing 
neighborhoods.   
 
For  this  Housing  Element  RHNA  planning  period  (January  1,  2014  through  October  31,  2021), 
the City anticipates that much of the residential and mixed use development will occur along a 
few corridors and districts:  These are: 
 
             Districts 
             o Civic Center 
             o Gateway 
             o Imperial 2 
             o Firestone Industrial 
             o Rayo Industrial 2 
              
             Corridors 
             o Atlantic 1 
             o Firestone 
             o Long Beach 2 
             o Long Beach 3 
             o Paramount 
             o Tweedy 5 and Tweedy 6 
76  Housing Element                                                                                     

 
An interim Zoning Code was created in 2009 to implement high density residential and mixed 
use developments in these districts and corridors.  A comprehensive update to the Zoning Code 
is  underway  with  adoption  anticipated  in  Fall  2014.    The  Interim  Zoning  Code  will  remain  in 
effect until the Zoning Code Update is adopted. 
 
As  previously  stated  in  Section  3,  General  Plan  2035  envisions  preserving  the  integrity  of  the 
City’s  existing  single‐family  neighborhoods;  no  significant  growth  is  anticipated  in  these 
neighborhoods unless they are already transitioning into higher intensity uses.  Medium density 
neighborhoods  (Residential  Low  Place  Type)  would  offer  some  recycling  opportunities, 
primarily  as  single‐family  homes  are  being  replaced  by  triplex,  four‐plex,  and  small 
townhome/condominium  projects.    However,  the  net  increase  in  housing  units  in  these 
medium density neighborhoods is not expected to be significant.  Therefore, this sites inventory 
focuses on districts and corridors where residential intensification is either strongly desired or 
desired.   
 
Vacant Properties
The City has only a limited number of vacant properties.  Individually these parcels do not offer 
significant  opportunity  for  residential  growth  given  their  sizes.    However,  when  lot 
consolidation  efforts  are  considered  together  with  surrounding  vacant  or  underutilized 
properties, significant residential intensification can occur.   
 
Underutilized Properties
For purposes of this analysis, underutilized sites are defined as those with an improvement‐to‐
land value ratio of 1.0 or less (i.e. existing buildings/structures on site are worth less than the 
land)  for  properties  currently  improved  with  non‐residential  uses.    For  properties  improved 
with  residential  uses,  an  improvement‐to‐land  value  ratio  of  0.5  was  used  to  identify 
underutilized properties.  Then field surveys were conducted to verify the feasibility of sites for 
redevelopment.    Parcels  that  are  currently  used  as  easements,  public  schools  and  religious 
facilities, and other civic uses are excluded from the sites inventory.  
 
The  number  of  underutilized  properties  with  redevelopment  potential  based  on  the  current 
improvement‐to‐land  value  ratio  is  estimated  conservatively.    In  the  real  estate  market,  land 
value  tends  to  increase  with  density.    A  side  effect  of  General  Plan  2035  is  therefore  the 
increase  in  land  value  and  thereby  lowering  the  improvement‐to‐land  value  ratios  and 
rendering more properties financially feasible for redevelopment.6 
 
                                                       
6
       For example, a property with a current improvement‐to‐land value ratio of 2:1 ($200,000 in building value over $100,000 
       in  land  value)  may  become  feasible  for  redevelopment  with  General  Plan  2035,  where  the  allowable  density  on  that 
       property is substantially increased.  The improvement‐to‐land value ratio would be lowered significantly (e.g. $200,000 in 
       building  value  over  $300,000  in  land  value)  to  the  point  where  it  would  make  sense  financially  to  demolish  the 
       improvements on site and replace with new construction at a higher density.   
                                                                          South Gate General Plan 2035  77 

Redevelopment Trends
The City of South Gate General Plan 2035 is a response to the City’s vision of creating a livable 
city  that  is  widely  recognized  for  attractive  and  safe  neighborhoods,  a  diversity  of  shopping 
districts,  and  a  stable  economy.    Prior  to  the  recession,  the  City  was  receiving  many 
development  applications  that  proposed  high  density  residential  or  mixed  use  developments.  
As  indicated  before,  many  of  these  proposals  are  not  moving  forward  due  to  the  economy.  
However, they demonstrate development interests in the City and feasibility when the market 
improves.  For example: 
 
      Firestone  Condominium  Development  –  The  developer  proposed  to  construct  56 
         condominiums over 19,500 square feet of commercial on the former Moose Lodge site 
         on Firestone Boulevard.  The proposed density of this project was 47 units per acre. 
          
      Calden  Avenue  Development  –  The  project  was  approved  for  187  condominiums  at  a 
         four‐acre site, translating to a density of 47 units per acre. 
          
      Firestone Village – The developer proposed to construct 47 units and 15,000 square feet 
         of commercial on a 60,000‐square‐foot lot, yielding a density of 34 units per acre.  
 
The  City  was  also  considering  two  additional  mixed‐use  development  proposals  on 
underutilized  properties  currently  developed  with  M2  and  CM  uses.    Combined  these  two 
projects  would  offer  133  condominiums  and  82,300  square  feet  of  retail/commercial  uses.  
These  two  proposals  range  between  four  to  six  stories  in  height  with  two  stories  of 
subterranean parking.  The collapse of the housing market had ultimately led to the withdrawal 
of these applications.  Recent development activities have primarily been limited to small infill 
projects.  However, the City is beginning to see revived interest in development as the economy 
slowly recovers. 
 
Development Potential
When estimating residential development potential for the 2014‐2021 RHNA planning period, 
several factors were considered: 
 
      The  new  “form‐based”  land  use  system  allows  for  greater  flexibility  with  regard  to  lot 
         consolidation.  Traditional system of designating each parcel for specific land use could 
         impede  consolidation  of  adjacent  properties  with  different  land  use  designations 
         because  a  General  Plan  amendment  may  be  necessary.    This  new  land  use  system 
         eliminates the need for General Plan amendments as long as the parcels fall within the 
         same district or corridor. 
          
      Not all vacant and underutilized parcels will be redeveloped over the eight years. 
          
      Not  all  underutilized  parcels  will  redevelop  as  stand‐alone  residential  or  mixed‐use 
         development with a residential component.  
          
78  Housing Element                                                                                   

            Few  underutilized  parcels  will  redevelop  at  the  maximum  density  permitted  given  the 
             current market conditions. 
 
Taking  these  factors  into  consideration,  the  residential  sites  inventory  (Table  H‐37)  for  this 
Housing Element was compiled based on the following conservative assumptions: 
 
        When  more  than  one  Place  Type  is  permitted,  development  potential  is  based  on  the 
             Place  Type  with  the  highest  density  that  is  categorized  as  “strongly  desired”  or 
             “desired.” 
              
        Development potential is based on the minimum densities for the Neighborhood High, 
             Boulevard Medium‐High, and Boulevard High Place Types, and at 50 units per acre for 
             the Urban Village/Urban Flex Place Type (slightly above the minimum density of 41 units 
             per  acre  for  this  Place  Type  to  distinguish  from  the  Boulevard  High  Place  Types).  
             Therefore,  the  development  potential  estimated  in  this  Housing  Element  represents 
             very conservative assumptions, accounting for the current market conditions.   
              
        An improved site may be considered underutilized if it is located in a non‐single‐family 
             area  (e.g.,  commercial,  industrial,  multifamily,  etc.)  and  if  the  total  value  of 
             improvements  on  the  site  is  less  than  the  total  value  of  the  underlying  land  (i.e., 
             improvement to land value ratio < 1.0), this is known as ILR, the Improvement to Land 
             Value  Ratio.    Improved  sites  within  single‐family  residential  areas  that  have 
             improvements  values  at  less  than  half  of  the  land  value  (i.e.,  ILR  <  0.5)  may  also  be 
             considered  underutilized.7  Field  surveys  were  conducted  to  confirm  the  existing 
             conditions of the properties identified. 
              
        Additional  parcels  were  added  based  on  staff  knowledge  of  the  intent  of  property 
             owners, pipeline projects, and large‐scale planning efforts. 
              
        Contiguous parcels are group into “sites” but may be developed individually or as large 
             developments.    Grouping  these  parcels  into  sites  by  no  means  prevent  the  individual 
             parcels  from  developing  or  different  combinations  of  parcels  be  packaged  for 
             redevelopment.    While  common  ownership  makes  lot  consolidation  easier,  it  is  not  a 
             requirement  or  a  criterion  for  feasibility.    Experienced  developers  often  acquire 
             properties from multiple owners to accommodate large‐scale developments. 
              
Based  on  these  criteria,  90  acres  of  vacant  and  underutilized  sites  were  identified  within  the 
specific districts and corridors with near‐term development potential, with a capacity of 3,299 
units if all of these were to be developed or redeveloped with as residential uses or mixed use 
developments with a residential component.  Even if half of these parcels were to be developed 
                                                       
7
       According  to  methodology  developed  by  the  University  of  California  for  the  State  of  California  Business,  Transportation 
       and Housing Agency, the ratio of land improvements to land value (ILR) can facilitate identification of underutilizes sites 
       with potential for infill or redevelopment with higher density residential uses. 
                                                                          South Gate General Plan 2035  79 

   with  a  residential  component,  the  City  has  adequate  capacity  at  very  conservative  density 
   assumptions to meet its remaining RHNA. 
    
Table	H‐37:	Vacant	and	Underutilized	Residential	Sites	Inventory
                                                        Vacant                           Underutilized
                     Density     Potential     # of       Total                  # of       Total                 Total
     District         Range      Density      Parcels     Acres     Units     Parcels      Acres       Units      Units
Gateway	2	            41‐100	         50.0	                                           10      24.8	     1,234      1,234
Imperial	2	            21‐40	         21.0	                                           14      12.0	        245       245
Civic	Center	         41‐100	         50.0	         2        0.2         9            26       6.3	        304       313
Firestone	
                       41‐75	         41.0	         1        0.8       33              2       4.7	        190       223
Industrial	
Rayo	 Industrial	
                       21‐41	         21.0	         4        6.4      133              3      15.2	        318       451
2	
Total	Districts	           ‐‐‐	         ‐‐‐	        7        7.4      175             55      63.0	     2,291      2,466
                                                        Vacant                           Underutilized
                     Density     Potential     # of       Total                  # of       Total                 Total
     Corridor         Range      Density      Parcels     Acres     Units     Parcels      Acres       Units      Units
Long	Beach	2	          21‐40	         21.0	         2        0.5         9             6       2.8	          55       64
Long	Beach	3	          21‐40	         21.0	                                            1       1.0	          21       21
Firestone	             41‐75	         41.0	                                           20      11.9	        481       481
Paramount	             21‐40	         21.0	         2        1.7       34              2       2.1	          43       77
Tweedy	5	              21‐40	         21.0	                                            3       3.9	          81       81
Tweedy	6	              21‐40	         21.0	                                            2       5.3	        109       109
Total	Corridors	           ‐‐‐	         ‐‐‐	        4        2.2       43             34      27.0	        790       833
            Total	         ‐‐‐	         ‐‐‐	       11        9.6      218             89      90.0	     2,081      3,299
Notes:		
1.   Maximum	density	based	on	highest	“Strong	Desired”	or	“Desired”	Place	Type.	
2.   Average	density	based	on	50%	of	maximum	density	permitted	in	each	district	or	corridor.	
	
   Appendix C provides a list of vacant and underutilized sites identified for this Housing Element.  
   This  inventory  by  no  means  represents  an  exhaustive  inventory  of  vacant  and  underutilized 
   sites in South Gate.  These are just select sites within the targeted areas where recycling could 
   occur  in  the  near  future  based  on  the  low  intensity  and/or  marginal  existing  uses.    The  sites 
   identified  are  mostly  developed  with  single‐family  homes,  marginally  viable  commercial  uses, 
   and  other  buildings  with  needs  for  significant  improvements  to  meet  current  and  future 
   commercial needs. 
    
   Not  all  vacant  and  underutilized  sites  are  expected  to  be  redeveloped  with  a  residential 
   component.    However,  Gateway  District  is  envisioned  as  a  high  density  area  with  transit‐
   oriented  development,  complementing  the  transit  station;  recycling  of  the  vacant  and 
   underutilized sites identified in Appendix C (not all vacant and underutilized sites) is expected 
   to be at a higher than average rate.  Similarly, Firestone Corridor is expected to experience a 
   higher rate of recycling than other parts of the City due to development interests prior to the 
   downturn of the market.  
   80  Housing Element                                                                                           

Affordable Housing Projects Underway
 
The City is currently working on several affordable housing projects:  
 
     8457 California Avenue – new construction of four units by TELACU 
     Calden Court ‐ 216 units 
 
Specifically,  the  City  is  involved  in  ongoing  negotiations  with  the  developer  for  a  216‐unit 
complex—Calden  Court  Apartments.    The  project  will  consist  of  71  two‐bedroom,  115  three‐
bedroom  and  30  four‐bedroom  units.    All  of  the  units  will  be  income‐restricted,  as  per  Low 
Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) guidelines, and offered to households with income levels at 
50  and  60  percent  of  AMI  or  less,  with  the  exception  of  the  two  three‐bedroom  manager’s 
units.  Combined, the TELACU and Calden projects will result in 220 affordable units (primarily 
for  lower  income  households),  fulfilling  a  substantial  portion  of  the  City’s  RHNA  for  lower 
income households for the 2014‐2021 RHNA planning period already.  
 
Specific Plans Underway
 
The  City  is  also  currently  in  the  process  of  developing  several  specific  plans.  The  City  was 
recently  awarded  $570,000  from  the  Strategic  Growth  Council  under  the  Sustainable 
Communities  Planning  Grant  and  Incentive  Program  to  prepare  specific  plans  for  Tweedy 
Boulevard  and  Hollydale  Village.  The  specific  plans  will  be  based  upon  sustainability  and 
Greenhouse  Gas  (GHG)  emission  reduction  strategies,  advocating  a  new  and  compact  urban 
form of mixed‐use projects and higher density residential and commercial developments that 
are  strategically  located  within  walking  distance  of  major  transit  and  light  rail  stations  and 
popular  destination  points.  Higher  density  mixed‐use  developments  will  occur  at  major 
intersections  along  Tweedy  Boulevard  and  transit  oriented  development  will  occur  within 
walking  distance  of  the  proposed  Orange  Line  rail  station  in  Hollydale  Village.  It  is  the  City’s 
hope  that  these  specific  plans  will  attract  jobs  and  affordable  housing  to  the  area.  The  City 
anticipates adoption of these specific plans in early 2015. 
 
In addition, in March 2013, the City completed the Firestone and Atlantic Station Area Plan. The 
Eco‐Rapid Transit Authority (ERTA), formerly the Orange Line Development Authority (OLDA), is 
currently  in  the  process  of  planning  rail  transit  along  the  Union  Pacific  Railroad  right‐of‐way. 
This  proposed  rail  line  will  pass  through  the  City  of  South  Gate  and  the  Area  Plan  develops 
conceptual  land  use  and  transportation  scenarios  around  the  future  rail  station,  selects  a 
preferred  station  location  and  outlines  development  types,  transportation  and  public 
improvements  to  be  built  on  the  site.  The  Plan’s  preferred  alternative  features  a  rail  station 
located adjacent to Atlantic Avenue. Phase I of the preferred alternative features multi‐family 
residential  development  along  the  north‐eastern  corner  of  Firestone  Boulevard  and  Atlantic 
Avenue  across  from  the  azalea  retail  center.  Phase  II  anticipates  operation  of  the  proposed 
passenger  rail  line  and  with  it,  development  of  a  public  plaza  adjacent  to  the  rail  platforms 
linking the station area with the azalea retail center and the multi‐family housing proposed in 
                                                            South Gate General Plan 2035  81 

Phase  I.  Phase  III  envisions  a  conversion  of  the  surface  parking  lot  into  a  mixed‐use  transit‐
oriented development that complements the earlier phases of residential and community uses 
with office uses. The City received a SCAG Compass Blueprint Grant and will soon begin working 
on developing a Specific Plan to further refine the scenario outlined in the Area Plan in Summer 
2014. 
 
Adequacy of Sites Inventory in Meeting RHNA
 
AB 2348 establishes default densities for facilitating the development of lower income housing 
in  jurisdictions  across  the  State.    For  communities  in  Metropolitan  Los  Angeles,  the  State‐
established default density is 30 units per acre.  The City’s Land Use Plan accommodates this 
density threshold in all districts and corridors with residential development potential. Even the 
lower density districts and corridors (Imperial 2, Rayo Industrial 2, Long Beach 2, Long Beach 3, 
Paramount,  Tweedy  5,  and  Tweedy  6)  permit  a  maximum  of  40  units  per  acre  for  the  highly 
desirable Boulevard Medium‐High Place Type. 
 
If  all  vacant  and  underutilized  properties  within  the  districts  and  corridors  were  redeveloped 
with  residential  uses,  given  the  high  maximum  allowable  density  (75  to  100  units  per  acre) 
more  than  8,000  units  could  theoretically  be  accommodated.    When  focusing  residential 
growth  in  a  few  districts  and  corridors  (as  shown  in  Table  H‐37)  close  to  3,300  units  can  be 
accommodated  at  very  conservative  density  assumptions.  Specifically,  the  Gateway  District  is 
envisioned  to  be  a  high  density  transit  village,  high  density  residential  and  mixed  use 
development  is  desirable  and  encouraged  in  the  General  Plan.    Older  industrial  and 
warehousing uses in the Gateway District are expected to be recycled in the future into much 
higher density transit‐oriented development. 
 
While  not  all  of  these  vacant  and  underutilized  sites  are  expected  to  be  developed  or 
redeveloped with residential uses, the excess capacity offers by the sites inventory (more than 
double  the  RHNA)  is  adequate  to  ensure  that  the  City  accommodates  its  remaining  RHNA  of 
1,262  units  (including  314  extremely  low/very  low  income,  185  low  income,  205  moderate 
income,  and  558  above  moderate  income  units).    A  site  specific  listing  of  parcels  that  could 
accommodate the RHNA within the planning period is included in Appendix C. 
 
Availability of Infrastructure and Services
 
Infrastructure Systems
Because South Gate is essentially a built‐out urban community all infrastructure systems are in 
place.    However,  expansion  of  capacity  may  be  necessary  to  accommodate  the  increased 
development  intensities  permitted  under  the  updated  General  Plan  and  aging  infrastructure 
may need to be replaced over time.  The costs for infrastructure upgrades can be offset by the 
increased densities offered by the General Plan.  The City will also offer financial assistance for 
affordable housing projects to gap‐finance the projects. Assistance can be direct (give funding 
or land to affordable housing developers) or indirect (use cash to upgrade off‐site infrastructure 
to serve a specific affordable housing project). 
82  Housing Element                                                                                     

 
Water and Sewer Services
The  City  of  South  Gate  uses  groundwater  from  the  City  wells  as  its  primary  source.  Water 
generated  from  wells  is  chlorinated  and  distributed  to  City  customers  or  stored  in  reservoirs. 
The total capacity of both active and stand‐by wells is 32.97 million gallons per day (MGD), or 
101.19 acre‐feet per day. This represents a surplus over the City’s average daily demand of 9.32 
MGD, and the City’s maximum daily demand of 16.78 MGD. Because the total capacity of these 
existing wells exceeds maximum daily demand, additional wells are not required.  
 
The  City’s  sanitary  local  sewer  conveyance  system  is  managed  by  the  City’s  Public  Works 
Department.  The  collection  system  consists  of  about  116  miles  of  gravity  sewer  lines,  no 
pump/lift stations, and about 100 sewer siphons within the system.   Approximately 99 percent 
of flows from local sewers discharge into the regional sewer system, operated by the County 
Sanitation  Districts  of  Los  Angeles  County  (CSD),  for  transportation,  treatment,  and  disposal. 
The  remaining  one  percent  of  total  sewage  generated  within  the  City  passes  into  the  City  of 
Paramount sewer system and is then discharged into CSD facilities.  There are 21 LACSD trunk 
lines  that  run  through  various  portions  of  the  City.    These  trunks  convey  sewage  from  South 
Gate  and  other  communities  to  the  Joint  Water  Pollution  Control  Plant  (JWPCP)  operated  by 
the CSD. 
 
The CSD District serves the cities of South Gate, Bell, Compton, Cudahy, Huntington Park, Long 
Beach, Los Angeles, Lynwood, Maywood, Paramount, and Vernon.  Effluent generated in South 
Gate  flows  through  regional  trunk  pipelines  to  the  JWPCP.    The  JWPCP  is  located  at  24501 
South  Figueroa  Street  in  the  City  of  Carson.    The  JCWRP  provides  primary,  secondary,  and 
tertiary wastewater treatment.  This facility has a design capacity of 400 million gallons per day 
(mgd) and currently processes an average flow of 310.8 mgd.   
 
Implementation of General Plan 2035 is anticipated to increase wasterwater by 2.02 mgd.  With 
implementation  of  the  General  Plan  Update  objectives,  policies,  and  mitigation  requiring 
individual  development  projects  to  verify  with  that  sufficient  wastewater  transmission  and 
treatment plant capacity is available to serve the proposed development, wastewater impacts 
would  be  reduced  to  a  less  than  significant  level.    The  City  has  adequate  sewer  capacity  to 
accommodate the level of growth anticipated under the RHNA and the General Plan. 
 
FINANCIAL RESOURCES 
 
The  high  cost  of  preserving,  acquiring,  or  constructing  affordable  housing  usually  means  an 
affordable housing developer/provider must assemble multiple layers of financing.  Typically a 
project  will  require  several  forms  of  public  financing  in  order  to  secure  sufficient  funding  to 
acquire an existing project or construct new housing.  The  City of South Gate has access to a 
number of funding resources that may be used to expand affordability housing opportunities in 
the community.  These include:  
 
                                                           South Gate General Plan 2035  83 

Community Development Block Grants (CDBG) 
 
The City of South Gate receives approximately $1,750,000 in CDBG funds annually.  CDBG funds 
may  be  used  for  land  acquisition  and  off‐site  improvements  for  affordable  housing 
construction, and acquisition/rehabilitation of existing housing for low income households.   
 
HOME Investment Partnership Act (HOME) 
 
The City receives approximately $495,000 in HOME funds annually.  HOME funds must be used 
to  expand  affordable  housing  opportunities  in  the  community  and  eligible  activities  include 
homebuyer  assistance,  rent  subsidies,  new  construction,  moderate  and  substantial 
rehabilitation, and site acquisition.  
 
Emergency Solutions Grants (ESG)   
 
The City receives approximately $160,000 in ESG funds annually.  ESG funds are dedicated for 
the provision of emergency shelters and services for the homeless. 
 
Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program 
 
The  City  of  South  Gate  has  established  a  Local  Housing  Authority  to  administer  the  Section  8 
Housing  Choice  Voucher  program  with  funding  directly  from  HUD.    As  of  October  2013,  570 
extremely low and very low income households in the City were receiving voucher assistance. 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE RESOURCES 
 
The  following  describes  active  non‐profit  agencies  that  may  have  the  capacity  to  develop, 
acquire,  and/or  manage  affordable  housing,  including  housing  projects  that  are  at  risk  of 
converting to market‐rate housing. 
South Gate Housing Authority  
 
The South Gate Housing Authority represents a significant administrative resource in promoting 
and  preserving  affordable  housing  in  the  City.    The  Housing  Authority  administers  the  City’s 
Section  8  Housing  Choice  Voucher  Program,  as  well  as  the  CDBG  and  HOME  programs  and 
various  other  housing  programs  offered  by  the  City  of  South  Gate.    The  Housing  Authority 
prioritizes activities to assist renters, homeowners, and other persons with special needs who 
are in the very low to moderate income categories in the City’s 2010‐2015 Consolidated Plan. 
 
84  Housing Element                                                                                   

Oldtimers Housing Development Corporation 
 
Oldtimers  is  a  social  service  agency  with  the  purpose  of  maintaining  and  improving  the 
psychological  and  social  well‐being  of  older  persons  in  Los  Angeles  and  San  Bernardino 
Counties.  In  the  mid‐1980s,  Oldtimers  partnered  with  the  City  of  South  Gate  to  provide 
transportation services for seniors through the initiation of the first Senior Dial‐a‐Ride program 
in the area. The high demand and success of this program set the foundation for Oldtimers to 
also provide Dial‐a‐Ride and Fixed Route Services for the cities of Artesia, Huntington Park, Bell 
and Cudahy, making Oldtimers a leader in transportation services for seniors in Southeast Los 
Angeles.  
 
The  Oldtimers  Foundation  formed  Oldtimers  Housing  Development  Corporation  (OHDC)  over 
30  years  ago  for  the  development  of  a  150‐unit  senior  housing  residential  center  located  in 
Fontana.  Since  then,  OHDC  has  grown  to  assist  in  developing  over  800  affordable  senior  and 
family  units  in  Los  Angeles  and  San  Bernardino  County.  Oldtimers  Housing  Development 
Corporation  IV  (OHDC)  is  currently  designated  as  a  Community  Housing  Development 
Organization  (CHDO)  for  the  City  of  South  Gate.  During  Fiscal  Year  2011‐2012,  Oldtimers 
acquired two properties in South Gate with City assistance and the organization is currently in 
the process of rehabilitating the units. 
 
Home Ownership for Personal Empowerment (HOPE) 
 
HOPE  works  with  Southern  California  Regional  Centers  by  providing  affordable  housing 
opportunities for persons with developmental disabilities who want to live independently in a 
supported  living  environment.  HOPE  buys  residential  properties  and  then  renovates  them  in 
order to rent them at below market rates to clients of the Regional Centers. Modifications to 
the  home  include  exterior  ramping,  accessible  bathrooms  and  kitchens,  and  appropriate  fire 
exits. The rents are usually no more than 30 percent of the renter's monthly income.  A special 
feature of these homes is that every resident has his or her own bedroom.  Because the homes 
are  owned  by  a  corporation  set  up  solely  for  this  purpose,  HOPE  offers  greater  stability  than 
most  other community‐based  options.  During  Fiscal  Year  2011‐2012,  the  City awarded  HOME 
funds to HOPE to acquire two single‐family homes in the City. The organization is also currently 
in the process of rehabilitating eight rental units in South Gate for the disabled population. 
 
Other Non‐Profit Agencies 
 
In addition to the agencies identified above, a number of other nonprofits are active in South 
Gate  and  surrounding  communities.  Habitat  for  Habitat  for  Humanity  seeks  to  eliminate 
poverty and homelessness from the world and to make decent shelter a matter of conscience 
and  action.    Habitat  invites  volunteers  to  work  with  staff  and  build  houses  together  in 
partnership  with  families  in  need.    In  2010,  Habitat  was  awarded  over  $33  million  in 
Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP) funds to build and rehabilitate homes in the cities of 
                                                           South Gate General Plan 2035  85 

Long  Beach,  South  Gate  and  Lynwood.  Through  the  NSP  program,  Habitat  for  Humanity  has 
partnered with the City of South Gate to purchase 32 foreclosed homes, rehabilitate them with 
volunteer support, and sell them to qualified low‐income homebuyers. 
 
The City will also solicit the collaboration of other nonprofit housing developers such as CORE, 
Jamboree Housing, and Bridge Housing to provide affordable housing opportunities in the City.  
CORE,  formerly  known  as  the  Southern  California  Housing  Corporation,  is  one  of  the  largest 
nonprofit developers and managers of affordable housing in southern California.  Based in the 
Inland Empire, CORE finances, develops, and manages affordable housing throughout southern 
California,  including  properties  in  Orange,  San  Diego,  and  Los  Angeles  Counties.    Founded  in 
1990, Jamboree Housing has experienced steady growth and geographic expansion. Today the 
agency’s portfolio includes development and/or ownership interest of nearly 6,600 affordable 
homes in 67 California communities – topping a market value of $1 billion. Ranking among the 
most  successful  nonprofit  affordable  housing  developers  in  the  nation,  BRIDGE  Housing  has 
participated  in  the  development  of  over  14,000  high‐quality  homes,  with  many  more  in  the 
pipeline. 
 
ENERGY CONSERVATION 
 
As  a  community  with  an  older  housing  stock,  the  City  promotes  energy  efficiency  in  housing 
construction and rehabilitation.  Specifically, the City enforces Title 24 of the Building Code and 
encourages affordable housing construction and residential rehabilitation projects utilizing City 
funds  (HOME  and  CDBG)  to  include  energy‐efficient  features  and  improvements.    The  City  of 
South  Gate  adopted  the  Green  Building  Code  in  2010  and  enforces  its  standards  in  all  new 
construction, retrofits and remodels. Additionally, the City has adopted the following policies: 
 
       All new municipal buildings should meet or exceed silve in the appropriate LEED Rating 
         System, or a comparable green building standard. 
 
       The City should encourage green building techniques in single‐family homes as well as in 
         new municipal, commercial, mixed‐use or multifamily residential projects. 
          
       The  City  has  partnered  with  Southern  California  Edison  to  encourage  and  create 
         incentives  for  green  building  techniques  in  existing  building  retrofits  as  well  as  new 
         buildings. 
          
       The City emphasizes design for water conservation in its green building efforts. 
          
       New  buildings  are  required  to  meet  or  exceed  California  Title  24  energy  efficiency 
         requirements. 
          
86  Housing Element                                                                                    

      When  feasible  or  required  by  law,  new  development  must  utilize  Low  Impact  Design 
        (LID)  features,  including  infiltration  of  stormwater.  However,  LID  should  not  interfere 
        with  the  City’s  goals  of  infill  development  and  appropriate  densities  as  defined  in  the 
        Community Design Element. 
         
      The  City  assesses  all  new  development’s  use  of  green  building  techniques  as  a  formal 
        stage of design review. 
         
      The City, through its HOME program funds, finances energy efficiency retrofits and on‐
        site renewable energy installation. 
         
      When  feasible,  City  staff  is  trained  to  implement  the  green  building  program  and  to 
        provide advice and expertise about green building to residents, particularly small‐scale 
        developers or homeowners that may have less access to green building expertise. 
 
As  part  of  the  City’s  strategy  to  promote  sustainability  within  the  community,  General  Plan 
2035 promotes transit‐oriented development, high density residential development, and mixed 
use development as means to achieve jobs‐housing balance and reducing vehicle‐miles traveled 
associated  with  commuting  and  shopping.    The  newly  adopted  General  Plan  also  includes  a 
Green City Element that includes the goal of creating a robust green building program, with the 
objective  of  increasing  the  use  of  green  techniques  in  new  buildings,  new  building  sites  and 
building remodels and retrofits.  The specific policies are: 
 
     All new municipal buildings should meet or exceed silver in the appropriate LEED Rating 
        System, or a comparable green building standard.  
 
     The  City  should  encourage  green  building  techniques  efforts  in  single‐family  homes  as 
        well as in new municipal, commercial, mixed‐use or multifamily residential projects. 
         
     The  City  should  encourage  and  create  incentives  for  green  building  techniques  in 
        existing building retrofits as well as new buildings.  
         
     The City should emphasize design for water conservation in its green building efforts.  
         
     New buildings should meet or exceed California Title 24 energy efficiency requirements. 
         
     When feasible or required by law, new development should utilize Low Impact Design 
        (LID) features, including infiltration of stormwater, but LID should not interfere with the 
        City’s goals of infill development and appropriate densities as defined in the Community 
        Design Element.  
 
     The  City  should  assess  all  new  development’s  use  of  green  building  techniques  as  a 
        formal stage of design review.  
                                                           South Gate General Plan 2035  87 

     The  City  may  finance  energy  efficiency  retrofits  and  on‐site  renewable  energy 
     installation  through  a  local  assessment  district,  or  provide  administrative  or  financial 
     support in other ways. 
 
    On  an  ongoing  basis,  city  staff  should  be  trained  to  implement  the  green  building 
     program  and  to  provide  advice  and  expertise  about  green  building  to  residents, 
     particularly small‐scale developers or homeowners that may have less access to green 
     building expertise.  
 
88  Housing Element                                                                               

HOUSING PLAN 
 
The  Housing  Plan  represents  the  commitment  of  the  City  of  South  Gate  in  addressing  the 
housing needs of the community, in complying with both State and Federal housing mandates, 
and in implementing the vision of South Gate General Plan 2035.   
 
Goals and Polices 
 
Goal HE 1: Housing choice for all South Gate residents. 
 
Objective HE 1.1:  Provide  a  range  of  housing  prices,  unit  types,  and  sizes  to 
accommodate  the  varied  needs  of  all  socioeconomic  segments  of  South  Gate, 
fostering a diverse and balanced community.   
 
Policies 
 
    P.1  The  City  will  maintain  a  Land  Use  Plan  that  continues  to  accommodate  the  City’s 
          Regional Housing Needs Allocation. 
     
    P.2  The  City  will  encourage  the  assembly  of  parcels  to  create  larger  and  more  easily 
          developable lots. 
 
Objective HE 1.2:   Remove  or  mitigate  City  policies,  regulations,  and  procedures 
that  serve  to  constrain  the  development  of  housing  affordable  to  lower  and 
moderate income households. 
 
Policies 
 
    P.1 The  City  will  prioritize  review  of  affordable  housing  projects  and  expedite  the 
          permitting process. 
 
  P.2  Where feasible and appropriate, the City should allow shared parking arrangements to 
          reduce the number of parking spaces needed. 
 
  P.3  The  City  will  establish  development  standards  to  facilitate  a  range  of  housing  types, 
          allowing  development  to  achieve  the  intended  density,  scale,  and  character 
          envisioned in the General Plan. 
 
                                                       South Gate General Plan 2035  89 

    P.4  The City will annually review the City’s policies, regulations, and procedures to ensure 
          their continued relevance and impact on affordable housing development. 
 
Objective HE 1.3:  Provide  incentives  for  the  construction  of  housing  affordable 
to the workforce. 
 
Policies 
 
    P.1:  The City will encourage development of affordable housing through the use of federal, 
          state and local programs. 
     
    P.2:  The  City  will  encourage  the  use  of  density  bonuses  and  provide  other  regulatory 
          concessions to encourage affordable housing development. 
Objective HE 1.4:  Ensure  equal  housing  opportunity  for  all,  regardless  race, 
color,  national  origin,  ancestry,  religion,  marital  status,  familial  status,  disability, 
gender, age, sexual orientation, or any other arbitrary factor. 
 
Policies 
 
  P.1:  The City will provide fair housing services to ensure that residents and landlords are 
          aware of their rights and responsibilities regarding fair housing. 
 
Goal  HE  2:  Greater  housing  affordability  for  low  and  moderate 
income households. 
           
Objective HE 2.1:  Offer  assistance  to  low  and  moderate  income  households  to 
attain affordable housing. 
Policies 
    P.1:  The City will continue to provide rent subsidies to very low income households. 
    P.2:  The  City  will  work  to  preserve  existing  affordable  housing  that  may  be  at‐risk  of 
          converting from low‐income to market‐rate housing. 
     
    P.3:  The  City  will  actively  market  its  housing  programs  and  available  housing  resources 
          through City website, brochures, public service announcements, and other means. 
    P.4:  The City should develop capacity with non‐profit developers to encourage acquisition, 
          ownership and management of subsidized developments with potential to convert to 
          market rate. 
 
90	Housing	Element	                                                                               	

Goal HE 3: Preserved and enhanced residential neighborhoods. 
           
Objective HE 3.1:  Preserve and improve the quality of existing housing stock. 
 
Policies 
 
    P.1:  Property  owners  shall  be  required  to  maintain  property  appropriately  to  ensure  the 
          maximum useful life of the unit. 
     
    P.2:  The  City  will  encourage  and  assist  low  and  moderate  income  homeowners  with 
          residential  maintenance  and  improvements  through  the  home  improvement 
          programs. 
     
    P.3:  The  City  will  work  with  Community  Housing  Development  Organizations  (CHDOs)  to 
          acquire and/or rehabilitate deteriorating rental housing. 
 
Goal H 4: Improved housing for underserved populations. 
 
Objective H 4.1:  Encourage  the  development  of  housing  that  caters  to  the 
special  needs  groups,  including  the  elderly,  persons  with  disabilities  (including 
developmental disabilities), students, large families, and the homeless. 
 
Policies 
 
    P.1:  The City should promote the use of universal design principles to provide housing that 
          is adaptable to residents of varied abilities. 
     
    P.2:  The City will promote the development of a continuum of housing options for seniors, 
          ranging  from  granny  flats,  small  single‐family  homes,  condominiums/townhomes, 
          apartments, assisted living, to residential care facilities. 
     
    P.3:  The City should work with the East Los Angeles Community College to ensure housing 
          needs of the students are addressed. 
     
    P.4:  The  City  should  encourage  the  development  of  rental  units  of  adequate  size  and 
          amenities suitable for families. 
     
    P.5:  The  City  will  collaborate  with  the  Los  Angeles  Homeless  Services  Authority  (LAHSA) 
          communities  within  the  Gateway  subregion  to  create  a  continuum  of  care  for  the 
          homeless.   
     
                                                          South Gate General Plan 2035  91 

    P.6:  The  City  will  support  and  participate  in  a  partnership  with  agencies  such  as  the  Los 
            Angeles  Homeless  Services  Authority  (LAHSA)  to  provide  temporary,  transitional  and 
            permanent housing for the homeless. 
    P.7:  The  City  will  coordinate  with  the  South  Central  Los  Angeles  Regional  Center  to 
            promote affordable housing options for persons with developmental disabilities. 
 
IMPLEMENTING ACTIONS 
 
Program 1: Maintain a Residential Sites Inventory 
Maintain  a  residential  sites  inventory  that  is  adequate  to  accommodate  the  City’s  share  of 
regional  housing  needs.    The  City’s  Regional  Housing  Needs  Allocation  (RHNA)  for  the  2014‐
2021 planning period is 1,262 units.     
 
2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                    Funding:	
 Maintain	an	inventory	of	vacant	and	underutilized	sites	and	         Departmental	budget	
    provide	information	to	interested	developers.	(Update	             	
    annually)	                                                         Responsible	Agencies:	
 Maintain	an	inventory	of	City‐owned	properties	and	other	            Community	Development	–	Planning	
    surplus	sites	owned	by	other	public	agencies	that	may	be	          Division		
    appropriate	for	residential	uses.		(Update	annually)	
 Monitor	the	consumption	of	residential	acreage	to	ensure	an	
    adequate	inventory	is	available	to	meet	the	City’s	RHNA	
    obligations.			
 Play	an	active	role	in	facilitating	lot	consolidation,	particularly	
    as	it	relates	to	parcels	listed	in	the	sites	inventory.		For	
    example,	the	City	will	work	with	non‐profit	developers	and	
    owners	of	small	sites	to	identify	and	consolidate	parcels	to	
    facilitate	the	development	of	housing	affordable	to	lower‐
    income	households.		The	lot	consolidation	procedure	will	also	
    be	posted	on	the	City	website	and	discussed	with	developers	
    during	the	preliminary	review	team	process.		(Ongoing)			
Program 2: Mixed Use and Transit‐Oriented Development 
General Plan 2035 is intended to promote mixed use and transit‐oriented development in the 
community as a means of: 
 
     Achieving jobs‐housing balance 
     Accommodating  growth  in  a  manner  that  utilizes  land  resources  efficiently,  promotes 
         energy  conservation,  and  encourages  walking  and  other  alternative  means  of 
         transportation; and  
     Promoting public health through good planning. 
 
Much of the City’s future residential development is expected to occur in mixed use areas. The 
City is in the process of developing specific plans for Tweedy Boulevard, Hollydale Village, and 
the Firestone and Atlantic Station area (as discussed in the Housing Resources chapter). These 
92	Housing	Element	                                                                                   	

specific plans will propose a combination of mixed‐use projects, transit‐oriented development, 
and higher density residential and commercial developments.  
 
2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                Funding:	
 Promote	mixed‐use	and	transit‐oriented	development	              CDBG;	HOME	
    through	marketing	materials.	(Update	annually)	                	
 Assist	mixed	use	developers	in	site	identification,	especially	  Responsible	Agencies:	
    parcels	with	lot	consolidation	potential.	(Ongoing)	           Community	Development	–	Planning	
 Provide	technical	assist	mixed	use	developers	in	the	            Division;	Housing	Division		
    entitlement	process.	(Ongoing)	
 Complete	the	Tweedy	Boulevard,	Hollydale	Village	and	
    Firestone	and	Atlantic	Station	specific	plans	(2015)	
 Where	funding	permits,	provide	financial	assistance	to	mixed	
    use	developments	that	include	affordable	housing	units.	
    (Ongoing)	
Program 3: Offer Density Bonus Incentives 
As part of the comprehensive Zoning Code Update, the City included density bonus provisions 
outlined in the State law (anticipated adoption by Spring 2014).  In addition,  the various Place 
Types  established  in  General  Plan  2035  accommodate  a  range  of  housing  options,  from  low‐
density  single‐family  homes  to  high‐density  multi‐family  housing  up  to  100  units  per  acre  in 
Mixed Use Districts.  In addition to the State density bonus provisions for affordable housing, 
the  City  offers  density  and  height  increases  in  exchange  for  certain  amenities,  which  will  be 
determined  either  on  a  case‐by‐case  basis  or  as  specified  in  the  Zoning  Code.  Specifically,  if 
public improvements are provided, a development can receive density increases as follows: 
 
         Neighborhood Medium‐High: A density bonus of up to five additional dwelling units 
             per acre. 
         Neighborhood High: A density bonus of up to 10 additional dwelling units per acre 
         Boulevard  Medium‐High:  A  density  bonus  of  up  to  5  additional  dwelling  units  per 
             acre and 0.25 FAR for nonresidential uses. 
         Boulevard High: A density bonus of up to 10 additional dwelling units per acre and 
             0.5 FAR for nonresidential uses. 
         Urban Village: A density bonus of up to 20 additional dwelling units per acre and 0.5 
             FAR.  
         Civic/Institutional: A density bonus of up to 1.0 FAR. 
 
2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                Funding:	
 Adopt	comprehensive	Zoning	Code	Update	by	Fall	2014.	            Departmental	budget	
 Continue	to	offer	density	incentives	to	qualifying	residential	  	
    projects	(Ongoing)	                                            Responsible	Agencies:	
 Promote	the	density	bonus	program	to	developers.			              Community	Development	–	Planning	
    (Ongoing)	                                                     Division		
 
                                                          South Gate General Plan 2035  93 

Program 4: Provide Assistance for Affordable Housing Development 
Provide  technical  assistance,  financial  support,  and  expedited  review  for  affordable  housing 
development.  Given  the  City’s  current  financial  situation,  providing  direct  subsidies  to  gap‐
finance affordable housing development may not be an immediately feasible option.  However, 
as  funding  permits,  the  City  may  consider  offering  financial  assistance  to  support  affordable 
housing development: 
 
      Land  Assemblage  and  Write‐Down:  The  City  may  utilize  CDBG  and  HOME  funds  to 
          write‐down the cost of land for the development of low and moderate income housing 
          and housing for special needs, including for persons with disabilities.  As part of the land 
          write‐down,  the  City  may  also  assist  in  acquiring  and  assembling  property,  subsidizing 
          on‐site  and  off‐site  improvements,  and  assisting  in  relocation  activities  as  well  as 
          clearing  and  demolition.    The  City  has  previously  worked  with  HOPE  to  pursue 
          affordable housing development, including eight units for persons with developmental 
          disabilities.  HOME funds were allocated to assist these projects. 
      Direct Financial Assistance: The City may utilize HOME funds to provide direct financial 
          assistance in support of affordable housing development.  
 
In addition, the City may provide other forms of support for affordable housing development: 
 
      Application  for  State  and  Federal  Housing  Funds:    The  City  will  apply  for  funding 
          directly  or  support  the  application  for  affordable  housing  funds  by  developers  if  the 
          proposed  projects  are  determined  to  be  consistent  with  the  goals  of  this  Housing 
          Element. 
      Expedited  Review  and  Priority  Processing:  The  City  will  expedite  and  prioritize  the 
          review  of  housing  or  mixed‐use  developments  that  incorporate  an  affordable  housing 
          component  to  reduce  the  holding  costs  associated  with  delays  (such  as  increased 
          construction financing costs). 
      Fee  Deferrals:  The  City  will  consider  fee  deferrals  for  housing  or  mixed‐use 
          developments that incorporate an affordable housing component. 
2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                   Funding:	
 Continue	to	pursue	affordable	housing	opportunities	with	           CDBG;	HOME	
     interested	developers	and	agencies.	(Ongoing)	                   	
 Evaluate	financial	status	and	consider	setting	aside	funding	       Responsible	Agencies:	
     for	affordable	housing	development.	(Annually)	                  Community	Development	–		Planning	
 Continue	to	pursue	affordable	housing	opportunities	for	            Division;	Housing	Division		
     households	with	special	needs	(such	as	large	households	and	
     persons	with	disabilities,	including	developmental	
     disabilities)	and	incomes	at	or	below	30	percent	of	the	County	
     median	income	according	to	HUD	income	guidelines.	
     (Ongoing)		
 Encourage	developers	to	provide	residential	units	to	
     individuals	and	families	with	incomes	at	or	below	30	percent	
     of	the	County	median.		(Ongoing)	
 Encourage	affordable	housing	developers	to	include	large	
94	Housing	Element	                                                                                  	

     units	(with	three	or	more	bedrooms)	suitable	for	family	living	
     to	help	alleviate	overcrowding	issues.	(Ongoing)	
    Provide	fee	deferrals	and/or	expedited	review	and	priority	
     processing	for	projects	providing	affordable	housing	units	for	
     extremely	low	income	households,	large	households,	or	
     persons	with	disabilities,	including	developmental	
     disabilities.	(Ongoing)	
    Explore	funding	opportunities	from	State	and	Federal	
     programs,	including	funding	opportunities	for	housing	
     affordable	to	households	with	incomes	at	or	below	30	percent	
     of	the	County	median	income	according	to	HUD	income	
     guidelines.		(Annually)	
    Solicit	participation/partnership	with	nonprofit	housing	
     developers	through	a	Request	for	Proposal	process	and/or	
     direct	contacts.		(Annually)	
 
Program 5: Provide Fair Housing Services 
The  City  currently  contracts  with  the  Fair  Housing  Foundation  to  resolve  tenant  and  landlord 
conflicts  and  to  investigate  and  document  housing  discrimination  complaints.  The  City  will 
continue to contract with a fair housing service provider to provide services to its residents. 
 
2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                  Funding:	
 Provide	fair	housing	and	tenant/landlord	dispute	resolution	       CDBG	
     services.	(Ongoing)	                                            	
 Monitor	developers’	compliance	with	all	affirmative	               Responsible	Agencies:	
     marketing	requirements	for	housing	developments	that	           Community	Development	–			Housing	
     receive	financial	assistance	from	the	City,	incentives,	or	     Division		
     regulatory	concessions	in	exchange	for	affordable	housing.		
     (Ongoing)	
 
Program 6: Participate in County‐Administered Homebuyer Assistance Programs 
The dissolution of the City’s Redevelopment Agency has led to the elimination of South Gate’s 
First‐Time Homebuyer Program; however, the City has partnered with Habitat for Humanity to 
utilize NSP 2 funds to rehabilitate 32 homes and sell them to first‐time homebuyers. The also 
City continues to provide referrals to County‐administered homebuyer assistance programs: 
 
      Mortgage  Credit  Certificates  (MCCs)  are  issued  to  income  qualified  first‐time  home 
          buyers  authorizing  the  household  to  take  a  credit  against  federal  income  taxes  of  15 
          percent of the annual mortgage interest paid; no City guarantee required.  The City is a 
          part of a coalition that provides MCCs to income‐qualified first‐time home buyers.  The 
          program  is  administered  by  the  Los  Angeles  County  Community  Development 
          Commission.  The MCCs are available to households on a first‐come‐first‐serve basis.  
 
          Several census tracts in South Gate also qualify as Internal Revenue Services (IRS) target 
          areas.  These  are:  5355.01;  5356.06;  5355.03;  5356.05.    Income‐qualified  households 
          purchasing homes in these target areas using MCCs do not have to be first‐time buyers.  
         
                                                              South Gate General Plan 2035  95 

        The  Southern  California Home  Financing  Authority  (SCHFA) offers  a  mortgage  revenue 
         bond  program  that  issues  30‐year  mortgage  revenue  funds  at  below‐market  interest 
         rates. To be eligible for the program, the buyer must be a first‐time homebuyer whose 
         income may not exceed 120 percent of the Los Angeles County median income. The City 
         will  continue  to  participate  in  the  mortgage  revenue  bond  program,  providing 
         information  regarding  the  program  on  the  City’s  website  and  at  the  public  counter, 
         library, post office, and other community locations. 
2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                 Funding:	
 Promote	MCC	and	SCHFA	programs	by	making	program	                 None	required	
    information	available	on	City	website	and	public	counters.		    	
    (Ongoing)		                                                     Responsible	Agencies:	
 Work	with	developers	of	new	for‐sale	housing	to	promote	the	      Community	Development	–			Housing	
    use	of	MCCs	and	SCHFA	at	these	new	developments.		              Division		
    (Ongoing)	
 
Program 7: Provide Housing Choice Vouchers 
Continue  to  provide  rent  subsidies  for  very  low  income  renters  through  the  Housing  Choice 
Voucher  Program.  The  Housing  Choice  Voucher  program  provides  rental  subsidies  to  families 
with incomes that qualify as extremely low income (up to 30 percent of Median Family Income 
or MFI) and very low income (up to 50 percent of MFI).   As of October 2013, 570 households in 
the City are receiving Housing Choice Vouchers. 
 
2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                 Funding:	
 Assist	approximately	570	very	low	income	households	              HUD	Section	8	Rental	Assistance	
    annually.		(Ongoing)	                                           Program	
 Promote	the	Housing	Choice	Voucher	program	to	landlords	          	
    for	accepting	voucher	recipients.		(Ongoing)	                   Responsible	Agencies:	
 Actively	pursue	additional	funding	to	expand	the	Voucher	         Community	Development	–	Housing	
    program.		(Ongoing)	                                            Division		
 Allocate	70	percent	of	new	Section	8	assistance	to	extremely	
    low	income	households	pursuant	to	HUD	regulations.		
    (Ongoing)	
Program 8: Work to Preserve Assisted Housing at Risk of Converting to Market Rate  
Monitor  the  status  of  the  City’s  at‐risk  housing  units  and  work  with  affordable  housing 
providers  to  preserve  the  affordability  of  these  units  or  provide  replacement  units.  For  the 
2013‐2021  Housing  Element,  the  75‐unit  Pennsylvania  Square,  20‐unit  Dudlext  II  Senior 
Apartments, and 22‐unit Pine Place communities are considered at risk of converting to market‐
rate housing due to the potential expiration of their Section 8 contracts.   
 
96	Housing	Element	                                                                                  	

2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                Funding:	
 Monitor	the	status	of	HUD	Notices	of	Intent	and	Plans	of	        HOME;	Section	8	Rental	Assistance;	
    Action	filed	by	property	owners.		(Ongoing)	                   other	State	and	Federal	loans	and	grants	
 Establish	contact	with	public	and	non‐profit	agencies	           	
    interested	in	purchasing	and/or	managing	units	at	risk.	       Responsible	Agencies:	
    Where	feasible,	provide	technical	assistance	to	these	         Community	Development	–	Housing	
    organizations	with	respect	to	financing.		(Annually)	          Division		
 Work	with	tenants	of	at‐risk	units	by	providing	information	
    regarding	tenant	rights	and	conversion	procedures.		
    (Ongoing)	
 Ensure	property	owners	comply	with	California’s	
    requirement	of	tenant	notification	one	year	prior	to	
    conversion.		(Ongoing)	
 Explore	potential	funding	sources	for	preservation/	
    replacement.		(Annually)	
 Assist	tenants	in	applying	for	priority	status	in	the	Section	8	
    program	upon	notification	of	owners'	decision	to	discontinue	
    low‐income	use.	(Ongoing)	
 
Program 9: Provide Home Improvement Assistance 
Continue  to  provide  a  Homeowners  Rehabilitation  Program  focuses  on  rehabilitating  existing 
housing stock throughout the City.  This program provides assistance in the form of a deferred 
loan and is due and payable when the title is transferred or the property is refinanced or sold. 
Eligible  activities  under  this  program  include  correction  of  code  violations  and  interior  and 
exterior  improvements  and  repairs  such  as:  new  driveways,  new  roofs,  electrical,  plumbing, 
painting, re‐stuccoing, and other needed construction work.  The program also pays for room 
additions to ease overcrowding.  Households earning lower incomes (up to 80 percent of Area 
Median  Income  or  AMI)  are  eligible  for  this  program.    The  property  must  also  be  owner 
occupied  and  have  four  or  less  units  to  qualify.  In  combination  with  the  Homeowners 
Rehabilitation  Program,  the  City  offers  $10,000  grants  to  be  used  for  pest  control  and  lead 
abatement. 
 
2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                Funding:	
 Assist	40	households	during	the	2013‐2021	planning	period.	      HOME	
    (Ongoing)		                                                    	
                                                                   Responsible	Agencies:	
                                                                   Community	Development	–	Housing	
                                                                   Division	
 
Program 10: Assist in the Acquisition/Rehabilitation of Rental Housing 
Utilize HOME and other funding, as available, to assist in the acquisition and/or rehabilitation of 
rental  housing  for  low  and  very  low  income  households.    The  City  will  work  with  qualified 
Community  Housing  Development  Organizations  (CHDOs)  to  pursue  acquisition/rehabilitation 
opportunities  in  neighborhoods  with  deteriorating  rental  housing.    Specifically,  15  percent  of 
the annual HOME allocation must be provided to a CHDO for the development, acquisition, and 
or rehabilitation of affordable housing. 
 
                                                            South Gate General Plan 2035  97 

2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                  Funding:	
 Solicit	participation	of	CHDOs	to	implement	                       HOME	
    acquisition/rehabilitation	projects	by	providing	HOME	funds	     	
    through	a	Request	for	Proposal	process.	(Ongoing)	               Responsible	Agencies:	
 Acquire	and/or	rehabilitate	16	rental	units	during	the	2013‐       Community	Development	–	Housing	
    2021	planning	period,	ensuring	a	portion	of	the	units	are	       Division;	City‐certified	(CHDOs)	
    affordable	to	extremely	low	income	households.	(Ongoing)		
 
Program 11: Remove Constraints to the Development of Housing 
The City is in the process of updating its Zoning Code to implement General Plan 2035 and to 
bring the City’s zoning regulations in compliance with State and federal laws. This Zoning Code 
update  would  add  provisions  for  various  types  of  special  needs  housing  and  removed  all 
previously  identified  housing  constraints.    Specifically,  the  Zoning  Code  Update  addresses  the 
following  topics:  emergency  shelters;  transitional  and  supportive  housing;  reasonable 
accommodation;  SRO  housing;  and  density  bonus  provisions.    The  Zoning  Code  Update  is 
anticipated to  be  adopted  by  Spring  2014.    The  City  will  continue  to  monitor  its  Zoning  Code 
and policies for any potential constraints to the development of housing and remove them as 
necessary. 
 
2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                  Funding:	
 Adopt	Zoning	Code	by	Spring	2014	to	implement	General	Plan	        Departmental	budget	
    2035	and	comply	with	Housing	Element	law.	                       	
 Continue	to	monitor	the	Municipal	Code	and	City	policies	for	      Responsible	Agencies:	
    any	potential	constraints	to	the	development	of	housing	and	     Community	Development	–Planning	
    remove	them	as	necessary.	(Ongoing)	                             Division	
 
Program 12: Continuum of Care for the Homeless  
The  City  will  continue  to  participate  in  a  continuum  of  care  for  addressing  the  housing  and 
supportive  services  needs  of  the  homeless.    The  continuum  of  care  model  includes  five 
components:  outreach  and  prevention;  emergency  shelter;  transitional  housing;  supportive 
housing; and permanent housing.  The City will also continue to allocate CDBG and ESG funds to 
supportive services for the homeless and those at‐risk of becoming homeless.  The City will also 
continue  to  work  with  the  Los  Angeles  Housing  Services  Authority  (LAHSA)  to  coordinate  the 
County of Los Angeles Continuum of Care Strategy as well as the Ten‐Year Plan to End Chronic 
Homelessness. 
 
2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                  Funding:	
 Allocate	funding	to	address	the	emergency	shelter	and	             CDBG;	ESG	
    supportive	service	needs	of	the	homeless.		(Annually)	           	
 Continue	to	participate	in	LAHSA’s	efforts	to	address	             Responsible	Agencies:	
    homeless	issues	from	a	regional	perspective.		(Ongoing)	         Community	Development	–Housing	
                                                                     Division	
Program 13: Energy Conservation  
Energy consumption can increase the costs of housing and place a particular burden on lower 
income  households.    The  City  utilizes  a  number  of  mechanisms  to  encourage  energy 
98	Housing	Element	                                                                                    	

conservation, including adopting the Green Building Code in 2010 and adopting a “Green City 
Element” as part of General Plan 2035. As part of the newly adopted General Plan, the City also 
encourages  and  incentivizes  mixed  use  and  transit  oriented  development  which  promotes 
energy conservation.  
 
2013‐2021	Actions:	                                                    Funding:	
 Promote	energy	efficiency	improvements	in	all	residential	           Departmental	budget	
       rehabilitation	programs	offered	by	the	City.	(Ongoing)	         	
 Continue	to	work	with	the	community	college	and	developers	          Responsible	Agencies:	
       to	implement	“Savings	by	Design”	principles.		(Ongoing)	        Community	Development	–Planning	
 Continue	implementation	of	the	goals	and	policies	contained	         Division;	Public	Works;	Housing	
       in	General	Plan	2035,	particularly	those	outlined	in	the	Green	
       City	Element.	(Ongoing)	
 
Quantified Objectives  
 
For  the  2013‐2021  Housing  Element,  the  City  of  South  Gate  has  established  the  following 
specific objectives: 
 
  Table	HE‐38:		Quantified	Objectives	by	Income:	2013‐2021
                                     Extremely                                           Above
                                        Low        Very Low       Low     Moderate     Moderate      Total
  Units	to	be	Constructed	
                                               314	               185	       205	         558	       1,262	
  (RHNA)	
  Units	to	be	Rehabilitated	               	           	            	          	            	           	
  					Home	Improvement		                10	          10	          20	        ‐‐	          ‐‐	         40	
  					Rental	Acquisition/Rehab		         4	           4	          8	         ‐‐	          ‐‐	        16	
  Units	to	be	Preserved	                         	                  	          	            	           	
  					Units	at	Risk	                          113	                ‐‐	        ‐‐	          ‐‐	        113	
  					Section	8	Vouchers	                     654	                ‐‐	        ‐‐	          ‐‐	        654	
 
                                                               South Gate General Plan 2035  99 


APPENDIX A: REVIEW OF 
ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
 
The  South  Gate  2008‐2014  Housing  Element  established  specific  programs  and  objectives  for 
expanding  housing  opportunities  in  the  community.    In  updating  this  Element,  the  City 
reviewed  these  programs  for  successes  or  failures,  and  continued  appropriateness.    The 
Housing  Plan  in  the  updated  2013‐2021  Housing  Element  reflects  these  lessons  learned  to 
improve the effectiveness of City actions.   
 
PROGRAM‐SPECIFIC REVIEW 
 
The following provides a program‐by‐program review of the 2008‐2014 Housing Element.  Each 
program  will  be  evaluated  for  its  effectiveness  and  continued  appropriateness  for  the  2013‐
2021 Housing Element cycle.  
	    	                                                 South Gate General Plan 2035  A‐1	

 
Table	HE‐A1:	Review	of	Past	Accomplishments	for	the	2008‐2014	Housing	Element
             Action	                                        Objectives	                                                      Accomplishments	
                                  • Maintain	an	inventory	of	vacant	and	underutilized	sites	
                                    and	 provide	 information	 to	 interested	 developers.	
                                    (Update	annually)	
                                  • Maintain	 an	 inventory	 of	 City‐	 or	 Agency‐owned	
                                    properties	 and	 other	 surplus	 sites	 owned	 by	 other	           Accomplishments:	 The	 City	 continues	 to	 maintain	 a	
                                    public	agencies	that	may	be	appropriate	for	residential	            residential	sites	inventory	of	vacant	and	underutilized	
                                    uses.		(Update	annually)	                                           sites	 and	 City	 or	 former	 Agency‐owned	 properties.	
                                  • Monitor	 the	 consumption	 of	 residential	 acreage	 to	            Since	 adoption	 of	 the	 Housing	 Element	 in	 2010,	
                                    ensure	 an	 adequate	 inventory	 is	 available	 to	 meet	 the	      development	in	the	City	had	come	to	a	standstill	due	
                                    City’s	RHNA	obligations.	To	ensure	sufficient	residential	          to	the	recession.		However,	development	interest	has	
                                    capacity	is	maintained	to	accommodate	the	RHNA	need,	               resumed	somewhat	in	the	City.	The	City	is	involved	in	
                                    the	 City	 will	 develop	 and	 implement	 a	 formal	 ongoing	       ongoing	 negotiations	 with	 the	 developer	 for	 a	 216‐	
                                    (project‐by‐project)	 evaluation	 procedure	 pursuant	 to	          unit	complex—Calden	Court	Apartments.		The	project	
Action	1:	Maintain	a	Residential	   Government	 Code	 Section	 56863.	 	 Should	 an	 approval	          will	 consist	 of	 71	 two‐bedroom,	 115	 three‐bedroom	
Sites	Inventory	                    of	development	result	in	a	reduction	of	capacity	below	             and	 30	 four‐bedroom	 unitss.	 	 All	 of	 the	 units	 will	 be	
                                    the	 residential	 capacity	 needed	 to	 accommodate	 the	           income‐restricted,	 as	 per	 LHITC	 guidelines,	 and	
                                    remaining	 need	 for	 lower‐income	 households,	 the	 City	         offered	to	households	with	income	levels	at	50	and	60	
                                    will	 identify	 and	 zone	 sufficient	 sites	 to	 accommodate	      percent	of	AMI	or	less,	with	the	exception	of	the	two	
                                    the	shortfall.	(Ongoing)	                                           three‐bedroom	manager’s	units.	
                                  • Play	 an	 active	 role	 in	 facilitating	 lot	 consolidation,	       
                                    particularly	 as	 it	 relates	 to	 parcels	 listed	 in	 the	 sites	
                                    inventory.	 	 For	 example,	 the	 City	 will	 work	 with	 non‐      Continued	Appropriateness: This	program	continues	
                                    profit	 developers	 and	 owners	 of	 small	 sites	 to	 identify	    to	 be	 appropriate	 and	 is	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                    and	consolidate	parcels	to	facilitate	the	development	of	           Housing	Element. 
                                    housing	 affordable	 to	 lower‐income	 households.	 	 The	
                                    lot	 consolidation	 procedure	 will	 also	 be	 posted	 on	 the	
                                    City	website	and	discussed	with	developers	during	the	
                                    preliminary	review	team	process.		(Ongoing)	
A‐2  Housing Element    

Table	HE‐A1:	Review	of	Past	Accomplishments	for	the	2008‐2014	Housing	Element
             Action	                                       Objectives	                                                   Accomplishments	
                                                                                                       Accomplishments:	 Since	 adoption	 of	 the	 Housing	
                                                                                                       Element,	 development	 had	 come	 to	 a	 standstill.	 	 No	
                                   • Promote	 mixed‐use	 and	 transit‐oriented	 development	           mixed	 use	 development	 has	 been	 constructed	 yet.		
                                     through	marketing	materials.	(Update	annually)	                   However,	 the	 City	 has	 seen	 an	 increase	 in	
                                   • Assist	 mixed	 use	 developers	 in	 site	 identification,	        development	 interest	 recently	 and	 expects	 to	 begin	
                                     especially	 parcels	 with	 lot	 consolidation	 potential.	        implementing	its	mixed	use	policies	in	the	near	future.	
Action	 2:	 Mixed	 Use	 and	         (Ongoing)	                                                        Mixed‐use	 and	 transit‐oriented	 development	 will	 be	
Transit‐Oriented	Development	 •      Provide	 technical	 assist	 mixed	 use	 developers	 in	 the	      more	 vigorously	 promoted	 after	 the	 adoption	 of	 the	
                                     entitlement	process.	(Ongoing)	                                   new	 Zoning	 Code	 (anticipated	 adoption	 by	 Spring	
                                                                                                       2014).		
                                   • Where	 funding	 permits,	 provide	 financial	 assistance	 to	
                                     mixed	 use	 developments	 that	 include	 affordable	  
                                     housing	units.	(Ongoing)	                                         Continued	Appropriateness:	This	program	continues	
                                                                                                       to	 be	 appropriate	 and	 is	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                                                                                       Housing	Element.	
                                                                                                       Accomplishments:	 The	 City	 is	 in	 the	 process	 of	
                                                                                                       preparing	a	comprehensive	update	to	its	Zoning	Code.		
                                   • Establish	 density	 bonus	 incentives	 as	 part	 of	 the	 City’s	 Density	bonus	provisions	are	included	as	part	of	that	
                                     comprehensive	 Zoning	 Code	 update	 to	 implement	 update.	 	 The	 City	 anticipates	 completing	 the	 Zoning	
Action	 3:	 Offer	 Density	 Bonus	   General	Plan	2035.	(Within	one	year	of	the	adoption	of	 Code	update	by	Spring	2014.	
Incentives	                          the	General	Plan)	
                                                                                                        
                                   • Promote	 the	 density	 bonus	 program	 to	 developers.			
                                     (Ongoing)	                                                        Continued	Appropriateness:	This	program	continues	
                                                                                                       to	 be	 appropriate	 and	 is	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                                                                                       Housing	Element.	
                                                                                                       South Gate General Plan 2035  A‐3 

Table	HE‐A1:	Review	of	Past	Accomplishments	for	the	2008‐2014	Housing	Element
             Action	                                      Objectives	                                                Accomplishments	
                                                                                                  Accomplishments:	Since	2008,	the	City	has	completed	
                                                                                                  the	following	affordable	housing	projects:	
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                        Hollydale	 Plaza	 Apartments	 –	 101	 units	
                                                                                                         low/mod	seniors	(2009)	
                                  • Continue	 to	 pursue	 the	 20‐unit	 adaptive	 reuse	 project	       8953‐8957	 Burke	 Avenue	 –	 8	 units	 low/mod	
                                    with	 Habitat	 for	 Humanity	 and	 four‐unit	 project	 with	         (June	2011)	
                                    the	Oldtimers	Housing	Development	Corporation.	                     11343	 Pennsylvania	 Avenue	 –	 4	 units	 special	
                                  • Evaluate	 financial	 status	 and	 consider	 setting	 aside	          needs	 housing	 (developmentally	 challenged)	
                                    funding	for	affordable	housing	development.	(Annually)	              (February	2013)	
                                  • Continue	 to	 pursue	 affordable	 housing	 opportunities	           2418	 Glenwood	 Pl.	 ‐	 4	 units	 special	 needs	
                                    for	 households	 with	 special	 needs	 (such	 as	 large	             housing	      (developmentally	         challenged)	
                                    households)	and	incomes	at	or	below	30	percent	of	the	               (February	2013)	
                                    County	 median	 income	 according	 to	 HUD	 income	           	
                                    guidelines.	 	 Encourage	 developers	 to	 provide	            Habitat	 for	 Humanity	 has	 completed	 the	 acquisition	
                                    residential	 units	 to	 individuals	 and	 families	 with	     and	 rehabilitation	 of	 32	 single‐family	 residences	 for	
Action	4:	Provide	Assistance	for	
                                    incomes	at	or	 below	 30	 percent	 of	 the	 County	 median.		 resale	to	First‐time	Home	Buyers.		Seventeen	units	are	
Affordable	             Housing	
                                    Encourage	 affordable	 housing	 developers	 to	 include	      currently	 occupied	 and	 two	 more	 are	 expected	 to	
Development	
                                    large	units	(with	three	or	more	bedrooms)	suitable	for	       close	by	the	end	of	July	2013.	
                                    family	 living	 to	 help	 alleviate	 overcrowding	 issues.	   	
                                    (Ongoing)	                                                    In	 addition	 the	 following	 affordable	 projects	 are	
                                  • Explore	 funding	 opportunities	 from	 State	 and	 Federal	   currently	underway:	
                                    programs,	 including	 funding	 opportunities	 for	 housing	   	
                                    affordable	 to	 households	 with	 incomes	 at	 or	 below	 30	    9415	Madison	Avenue	‐	5	units		
                                    percent	of	the	County	median	income	according	to	HUD	            8961	McNerney	Avenue	‐	10	units	
                                    income	guidelines.		(Annually)	                                  8457	California	Avenue	‐	4	units	
                                  • Solicit	 participation/partnership	 with	 nonprofit	             9927	San	Antonio	Avenue	‐	5	units		
                                    housing	 developers	 through	 a	 Request	 for	 Proposal	         Calden	Court	‐	216	units	
                                    process	and/or	direct	contacts.		(Annually)	
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                  Continued	Appropriateness:	Without	redevelopment	
                                                                                                  funds	the	City’s	ability	to	provide	financial	assistance	
                                                                                                  to	affordable	housing	is	seriously	compromised.		This	
                                                                                                  program	 is	 modified	 and	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                                                                                  Housing	Element.	
A‐4  Housing Element    

Table	HE‐A1:	Review	of	Past	Accomplishments	for	the	2008‐2014	Housing	Element
              Action	                                       Objectives	                                                   Accomplishments	
                                                                                                      Accomplishments:	 The	 City	 contracts	 with	 the	 Fair	
                                                                                                      Housing	 Foundation	 to	 resolve	 tenant	 and	 landlord	
                                                                                                      conflicts	 and	 to	 investigate	 and	 document	 housing	
                                    • Provide	 fair	 housing	 and	 tenant/landlord	 dispute	          discrimination	 complaints.	 Since	 2008,	 1,539	
                                      resolution	services.	(Ongoing)	                                 residents	have	been	assisted	with	fair	housing	issues	
                                    • Monitor	 developers’	 compliance	 with	 all	 affirmative	       and	concerns.	A	total	of	57	discrimination	cases	have	
Action	 5:	 Provide	 Fair	 Housing	                                                                   also	 been	 investigated.	 The	 City	 will	 continue	 to	
                                      marketing	requirements	for	housing	developments	that	
Services	                                                                                             contract	 with	 a	 fair	 housing	 service	 provider	 to	
                                      receive	 City	 or	 Agency	 financial	 assistance,	 incentives,	
                                      or	 regulatory	 concessions	 in	 exchange	 for	 affordable	     provide	services	to	its	residents.		
                                      housing.		(Ongoing)	                                             
                                                                                                      Continued	Appropriateness:	This	program	continues	
                                                                                                      to	 be	 appropriate	 and	 is	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                                                                                      Housing	Element.	
                                                                                                      Accomplishments:	 Since	 2008,	 the	 City	 has	 assisted	
                                                                                                      two	 households	 through	 the	 First‐Time	 Homebuyer	
                                                                                                      Assistance	 Program.	 Both	 households	 earned	
                                                                                                      extremely	 low	 incomes.	 In	 addition,	 Habitat	 for	
                                                                                                      Humanity	 has	 completed	 the	 acquisition	 and	
                                                                                                      rehabilitation	of	32	single‐family	residences	for	resale	
                                                                                                      to	 First‐time	 Home	 Buyers.	 	 Seventeen	 units	 are	
                                                                                                      currently	 occupied	 and	 two	 more	 are	 expected	 to	
                                                                                                      close	by	the	end	of	July	2013.	
Action	 6:	 Offer	 First‐Time	                                                                        	
                                    • Assist	10	households	over	five	years.		(Ongoing)	               However,	 the	 dissolution	 of	 redevelopment	 agencies	
Homebuyer	Assistance	
                                                                                                      has	eliminated	one	of	the	primary	funding	sources	for	
                                                                                                      this	 program.	 The	 City	 will	 no	 longer	 administer	 the	
                                                                                                      First‐Time	Homebuyer	Assistance	Program	during	the	
                                                                                                      Housing	 Element	 planning	 period	 due	 to	 limited	
                                                                                                      funds.	
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                      Continued	 Appropriateness:	 Due	 to	 lack	 of	 funding,	
                                                                                                      this	 program	 is	 not	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                                                                                      Housing	Element.	
                                                                                                      South Gate General Plan 2035  A‐5 

Table	HE‐A1:	Review	of	Past	Accomplishments	for	the	2008‐2014	Housing	Element
             Action	                                     Objectives	                                               Accomplishments	
                                                                                                Accomplishments:	 Since	 2008,	 no	 households	 in	 the	
                                 • Continue	 to	 participate	 in	 the	 MCC	 program	 by	        City	 have	 participated	 in	 the	 MCC	 program.	 The	 City	
                                   contributing	administrative	costs.	(Annually)	               continues	 to	 participate	 in	 the	 Mortgage	 Credit	
                                 • Promote	MCC	program	by	making	program	information	           Certificate	(MCC)	program	by	providing		 information	
Action	7:	Participate	in	County‐
                                   available	 on	 City	 website	 and	 public	 counters.		       at	public	counters	and	the	City’s	website.	
Administered	 Mortgage	 Credit	
                                   (Ongoing)	
Certificate	Program	                                                                             
                                 • Work	 with	 developers	 of	 new	 for‐sale	 housing	 to	
                                   promote	 the	 use	 of	 MCCs	 at	 these	 new	 developments.		 Continued	Appropriateness:	This	program	continues	
                                   (Ongoing)	                                                   to	 be	 appropriate	 and	 is	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                                                                                Housing	Element.	
                                 • Assist	 approximately	 650	 very	 low	 income	 households	
                                   annually.		(Ongoing)	                                        Accomplishments:	 As	 of	 October	 2013,	 570	
                                 • Promote	 the	 Housing	 Choice	 Voucher	 program	 to	         households	 in	 the	 City	 are	 receiving	 Housing	 Choice	
                                   landlords	for	accepting	voucher	recipients.		(Ongoing)	      Vouchers.		
Action	 8:	 Provide	 Housing	
                                 • Actively	 pursue	 additional	 funding	 to	 expand	 the	       
Choice	Vouchers	
                                   Voucher	program.		(Ongoing)	                                 Continued	Appropriateness:	This	program	continues	
                                 • Allocate	 70	 percent	 of	 new	 Section	 8	 assistance	 to	  to	 be	 appropriate	 and	 is	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                   extremely	 low	 income	 households	 pursuant	 to	 HUD	       Housing	Element.	
                                   regulations.		(Ongoing)	
                                                                                                Accomplishments:	 No	 affordable	 housing	 project	
                                 • Monitor	the	status	of	HUD	Notices	of	Intent	and	Plans	of	    converted	 to	market‐rate	 housing	 between	 2008	 and	
                                   Action	filed	by	property	owners.		(Ongoing)	                 2013.		
Action	 9:	 Work	 to	 Preserve	
                                 • Establish	 contact	 with	 public	 and	 non‐profit	 agencies	  
Assisted	 Housing	 at	 Risk	 of	
                                   interested	in	purchasing	and/or	managing	units	at	risk.	
Converting	to	Market	Rate	                                                                      Continued	Appropriateness:	This	program	continues	
                                   Where	 feasible,	 provide	 technical	 assistance	 to	 these	
                                   organizations	with	respect	to	financing.		(Annually)	        to	 be	 appropriate	 and	 is	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                                                                                Housing	Element.	
A‐6  Housing Element    

Table	HE‐A1:	Review	of	Past	Accomplishments	for	the	2008‐2014	Housing	Element
            Action	                                     Objectives	                                                    Accomplishments	
                                                                                                    Accomplishments:	 Since	 2008,	 34	 households	 in	 the	
                                                                                                    City	 were	 assisted	 through	 the	 Homeowner	
                                                                                                    Rehabilitation	Program.	Of	these	assisted	households,	
                                                                                                    12	 were	 extremely	 low	 income	 households,	 10	 were	
                                                                                                    very	low	income	households,	and	12	were	low	income	
Action	 10:	 Provide	 Home	                                                                         households.	 The	 City	 continues	 to	 allocate	 HOME	
                                • Assist	60	households	over	five	years.	(Ongoing)	
Improvement	Assistance	                                                                             funds	to	this	program	annually.		
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                    Continued	Appropriateness:	This	program	continues	
                                                                                                    to	 be	 appropriate	 and	 is	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                                                                                    Housing	Element.	
                                                                                                    Accomplishments:	 The	 City	 has	 partnered	 with	
                                                                                                    Oldtimers	 Housing	 Development	 Corporation,	 a	
                                                                                                    Community	 Housing	 Development	 Organization	
                                                                                                    (CHDO)	to	develop	affordable	housing	at	a	number	of	
                                                                                                    locations.	 During	 Fiscal	 Year	 2008‐09,	 the	 City	
                                                                                                    entered	 into	 a	 development	 agreement	 with	
                                                                                                    Oldtimers	 Housing	 Development	 Corporation	 for	 the	
                                                                                                    acquisition	 and	 rehabilitation	 of	 two	 4‐unit	
                                                                                                    properties.	 The	 agreement	 provided	 HOME	
                                • Solicit	 participation	 of	 CHDOs	 to	 implement	                 entitlement	 and	 CHDO	 funds	 in	 the	 amount	 of	
                                  acquisition/rehabilitation	 projects	 by	 providing	 HOME	        approximately	 $1.3	 million	 to	 Oldtimers,	 which	 also	
Action	 11:	 Assist	 in	 the	
                                  funds	through	a	Request	for	Proposal	process.	                    contributed	 an	 additional	 $425,000	 toward	 the	
Acquisition/Rehabilitation	 of	
                                • Acquire	 and/or	 rehabilitate	 30	 rental	 units	 over	 five	     project.	During	Fiscal	Year	2010‐11,	the	 City	assisted	
Rental	Housing	
                                  years,	 ensuring	a	 portion	 of	 the	 units	 are	 affordable	 to	 Oldtimers	Housing	Development	Corporation	with	the	
                                  extremely	low	income	households.	(Ongoing)	                       acquisition	 and	 rehabilitation	 of	 two	 multi‐family	
                                                                                                    housing	 projects	 totaling	 15	 units.	 The	 agreement	
                                                                                                    provided	 for	 HOME	 entitlement	 and	 CHDO	 funds	 of	
                                                                                                    approximately	 $2.25	 million	 to	 Oldtimers,	 which	 will	
                                                                                                    contribute	 approximately	 $900,000	 toward	 the	
                                                                                                    project.		
                                                                                                    	
                                                                                                    During	 Fiscal	 Year	 2012‐13,	 the	 City	 approved	
                                                                                                    another	 project	 with	 Oldtimers,	 which	 consists	 of	
                                                                                                    rehabilitating	 four	 units	 of	 affordable	 housing.	 	 The	
                                                                                                    South Gate General Plan 2035  A‐7 

Table	HE‐A1:	Review	of	Past	Accomplishments	for	the	2008‐2014	Housing	Element
          Action	                                    Objectives	                                  Accomplishments	
                                                                              City	 will	 provide	 HOME	 entitlement	 and	 CHDO	 funds	
                                                                              of	approximately	$150,000	for	this	project.	
                                                                              	
                                                                              During	 Fiscal	 Year	 2012‐13,	 the	 City	 also	 approved	a	
                                                                              project	 with	 TELACU,	 which	 consists	 of	 the	 new	
                                                                              construction	 of	 four	 units	 of	 affordable	 senior	
                                                                              housing.	 	 This	 project	 will	 make	 use	 of	 an	 unused	
                                                                              common	 area	 space	 in	 an	 existing	 affordable	 senior	
                                                                              complex.	 	 The	 agreement	 provides	 for	 HOME	
                                                                              entitlement	 funds	 of	 approximately	 $340,000.		
                                                                              TELACU	 will	 contribute	 approximately	 $97,000	
                                                                              toward	 the	 project.	 The	 City	 will	 continue	 to	 secure	
                                                                              viable	development	projects	through	the	RFP	process	
                                                                              to	meet	its	goal	of	30	affordable	rental	units	over	five	
                                                                              years.	
                                                                               
                                                                              Continued	Appropriateness:	This	program	continues	
                                                                              to	 be	 appropriate	 and	 is	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                                                              Housing	Element.	
A‐8  Housing Element    

Table	HE‐A1:	Review	of	Past	Accomplishments	for	the	2008‐2014	Housing	Element
           Action	                                    Objectives	                                                  Accomplishments	
                                                                                               Accomplishments:	 In	 August	 2009,	 the	 City	 of	 South	
                                                                                               Gate,	for	itself	and	on	behalf	of	the	City	of	Huntington	
                                                                                               Park,	 applied	 for	 NSP	 funds	 totaling	 approximately	
                                                                                               $1.4	 million.	 South	 Gate’s	 share	 of	 $970,490	 was	
                                                                                               intended	 for	 the	 acquisition	 and	 rehabilitation	 of	
                                                                                               three	 foreclosed	 and	 abandoned	 single‐family	
                                                                                               properties.	 The	 City	 also	 partnered	 with	 Habitat	 for	
                                                                                               Humanity	to	apply	for	NSP	II	Program	funds	in	2009.	
                                                                                               This	 application	 was	 approved	 and	 the	 City,	 along	
                                                                                               with	11	other	jurisdictions,	shared	a	total	allocation	of	
                                                                                               $141	 million.	 	 For	 the	 City	 of	 South	 Gate,	 the	
Action	     12:	       Pursue	 •  Acquire	 and	 rehabilitate	 three	 single‐family	 homes	 in	 Neighborhood	 Stabilization	 Program	 (NSP1)	
Neighborhood	    Stabilization	   2010	 and	 make	 the	 homes	 available	 to	 low	 income	 terminated	 in	 September	 2011.	 Two	 single‐family	
Program	(NSP)	                    households	at	affordable	costs.		(2010)	                     residential	units	were	acquired,	rehabbed	and	leased	
                                                                                               to	 income‐qualified	 (80%	 AMI)	 families.	 Since	 2009,	
                                                                                               Habitat	 For	Humanity	 has	acquired	 and	rehabbed	 32	
                                                                                               single‐	 family		 residences	 (under	 NSP2)	 for	 resale	
                                                                                               to	    income‐eligible	         families	       (80%	       AMI).		
                                                                                               Approximately	 17	 units	 have	 been	 sold	 with	 another	
                                                                                               two	 units	 to	 close	 by	 the	 end	 of	 July	 2013.	 	 No	 other	
                                                                                               NSP	funding	is	expected.	
                                                                                                
                                                                                               Continued	 Appropriateness:	 The	 NSP	 funding	 is	
                                                                                               winding	 down.	 	 This	 program	 is	 not	 included	 in	 the	
                                                                                               2013‐2021	Housing	Element.	
                                                                                               South Gate General Plan 2035  A‐9 

Table	HE‐A1:	Review	of	Past	Accomplishments	for	the	2008‐2014	Housing	Element
            Action	                                     Objectives	                                                    Accomplishments	
                                                                                                    Accomplishments:	 The	 City	 is	 in	 the	 process	 of	
                                                                                                    preparing	a	comprehensive	update	to	its	Zoning	Code.		
                                                                                                    Zoning	 Code	 amendments	 to	 address	 housing	 for	
                                                                                                    persons	 with	 disabilities	 are	 included	 as	 part	 of	 the	
                                                                                                    Zoning	Code	update.		The	City	expects	to	complete	the	
                                                                                                    Zoning	Code	update	by	Spring	2014.	
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                    Since	 2008,	 the	 City	 has	 completed	 the	 following	
                                                                                                    affordable	 housing	 projects	 for	 persons	 with	
                                                                                                    disabilities:	
                                                                                                     
Action	 13:	 Facilitate	 the	 •   Update	 Zoning	 Code	 to	 remove	 constraints	 to	 housing	
                                                                                                         11343	 Pennsylvania	 Avenue	 –	 4	 units	 special	
Construction	 of	 Housing	 for	   for	 persons	 with	 disabilities.	 	 (Within	 one	 year	 of	 the	
                                                                                                          needs	 housing	 (developmentally	 challenged)	
Persons	with	Disabilities	        adoption	of	General	Plan)	
                                                                                                          (February	2013)	
                                                                                                         2418	 Glenwood	 Pl.	 ‐	 4	 units	 special	 needs	
                                                                                                          housing	      (developmentally	          challenged)	
                                                                                                          (February	2013)	
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                    Continued	 Appropriateness:	 This	 program	 is	
                                                                                                    completed	and	will	no	longer	be	included	in	the	2013‐
                                                                                                    2021	 Housing	 Element.	 However,	 a	 general	 program	
                                                                                                    to	 monitor	 the	 Municipal	 Code	 and	 City	 policies	 for	
                                                                                                    potential	 housing	 constraints	 will	 be	 a	 part	 of	 the	
                                                                                                    2013‐2021	Housing	Element.	
A‐10  Housing Element    

Table	HE‐A1:	Review	of	Past	Accomplishments	for	the	2008‐2014	Housing	Element
             Action	                                       Objectives	                                                Accomplishments	
                                                                                                  Accomplishments:	 In	 2009,	 a	 total	 of	 $865,273	 in	
                                                                                                  Homelessness	 Prevention	 and	 Rapid	 Re‐Housing	
                                                                                                  (HPRP)	 funds	 were	 received	 by	 the	 City.	
                                                                                                  Approximately	 97	 families	 were	 assisted	 with	 rent,	
                                                                                                  security	 deposits	 and	 utility	 payments.	 As	 of	 2011,	
                                                                                                  Emergency	 Solutions	 Grant	 (ESG)	 funds	 must	 be	
                                                                                                  utilized	 (partially)	 to	 fund	 HPRP‐type	 activities;	
                                                                                                  however,	since	the	City	only	received	its	ESG	funds	in	
                                  • Allocate	 funding	 to	 address	 the	 emergency	 shelter	 and	 January	 2013,	 no	 specific	 accomplishments	 have	 yet	
Action	 14:	 Continuum	 of	 Care	   supportive	service	needs	of	the	homeless.		(Annually)	        been	 reported.	 The	 City	 continues	 to	 allocate	 ESG	
for	the	Homeless	                 • Continue	 to	 participate	 in	 LAHSA’s	 efforts	 to	 address	 funds	 to	 homeless	 services	 providers	 annually.	 The	
                                    homeless	issues	from	a	regional	perspective.		(Ongoing)	 City	contracts	its	ESG	funds	to	the	Salvation	Army	Bell	
                                                                                                  Shelter,	 whose	 programs	 provide	 homeless	 persons	
                                                                                                  with	 shelter,	 food,	 job	 training	 and	 counseling.	 Since	
                                                                                                  2008,	 134	 persons	 have	 been	 assisted	 at	 the	 Bell	
                                                                                                  Shelter.	
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                  Continued	Appropriateness:	This	program	continues	
                                                                                                  to	 be	 appropriate	 and	 is	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                                                                                  Housing	Element.	
                                                                                                  South Gate General Plan 2035  A‐11 

Table	HE‐A1:	Review	of	Past	Accomplishments	for	the	2008‐2014	Housing	Element
            Action	                                     Objectives	                                                 Accomplishments	
                                                                                                 Accomplishments:	 The	 City	 is	 in	 the	 process	 of	
                                                                                                 preparing	a	comprehensive	update	to	its	Zoning	Code.		
                                                                                                 Zoning	 Code	amendments	to	address	 housing	 for	 the	
                                                                                                 homeless	 are	 included	 as	 part	 of	 the	 Zoning	 Code	
                                                                                                 update.	 	 Specifically,	 emergency	 shelters	 will	 be	
                                                                                                 permitted	 by	 right	 without	 discretionary	 review	 in	
                                • Update	 Zoning	 Code	 to	 incorporate	 provisions	 for	 the	 Urban	 Flex	 (UF)	 district.	 	 The	 City	 expects	 to	
Action	15:	Homeless	Shelters	     emergency	 shelters	 and	 transitional	 housing.	 	 (Within	 complete	the	Zoning	Code	update	by	Spring	2014.	
                                  one	year	of	the	adoption	of	General	Plan)	                      
                                                                                                 Continued	 Appropriateness:	 This	 program	 is	
                                                                                                 completed	and	will	no	longer	be	included	in	the	2013‐
                                                                                                 2021	 Housing	 Element.	 However,	 a	 general	 program	
                                                                                                 to	 monitor	 the	 Municipal	 Code	 and	 City	 policies	 for	
                                                                                                 potential	 housing	 constraints	 will	 be	 a	 part	 of	 the	
                                                                                                 2013‐2021	Housing	Element.	
                                                                                                 Accomplishments:	 The	 City	 is	 in	 the	 process	 of	
                                                                                                 preparing	a	comprehensive	update	to	its	Zoning	Code.		
                                                                                                 Zoning	 Code	amendments	to	address	 housing	 for	 the	
                                                                                                 homeless	 are	 included	 as	 part	 of	 the	 Zoning	 Code	
                                                                                                 update.	 	 Specifically,	 transitional	 and	 supportive	
                                                                                                 housing	 meeting	 the	 Health	 and	 Safety	 Code	
                                                                                                 definitions	 are	 treated	 as	 residential	 uses	 and	
                                • Update	 Zoning	 Code	 to	 incorporate	 provisions	 for	 permitted	 in	 the	 same	 manner	 as	 similar	 uses	 in	 the	
Action	 16:	 Transitional	 and	
                                  transitional	 and	 supportive	 housing.	 	 (Within	 one	 year	 same	zones.		The	City	expects	to	complete	the	Zoning	
Supportive	Housing	                                                                              Code	update	by	Spring	2014.	
                                  of	the	adoption	of	General	Plan)	
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                 Continued	 Appropriateness:	 This	 program	 is	
                                                                                                 completed	and	will	no	longer	be	included	in	the	2013‐
                                                                                                 2021	 Housing	 Element.	 However,	 a	 general	 program	
                                                                                                 to	 monitor	 the	 Municipal	 Code	 and	 City	 policies	 for	
                                                                                                 potential	 housing	 constraints	 will	 be	 a	 part	 of	 the	
                                                                                                 2013‐2021	Housing	Element.	
A‐12  Housing Element    

Table	HE‐A1:	Review	of	Past	Accomplishments	for	the	2008‐2014	Housing	Element
            Action	                                    Objectives	                                               Accomplishments	
                                                                                            Accomplishments:	 Energy	 efficiency	 improvements	
                                                                                            are	included	in	many	of	the	City‐funded	rehabilitation	
                                • Promote	 energy	 efficiency	 improvements	 in	 all	       projects.	 	 The	 City	 adopted	 the	 Green	 Building	 Code	
                                  residential	rehabilitation	programs	offered	by	the	City.	 on	July	1,	2010,	and	began	enforcement	on	January	1,	
                                  (Ongoing)	                                                2011.	 The	 City	 has	 partnered	 with	 Energy	 Upgrade	
                                • Pursue	adoption	of	the	Green	Building	Code	(Within	18	    California	 and	 Southern	 California	 Edison	 to	 provide	
                                  months	from	February	2010)	                               residential	 and	 business	 customers	 incentives	 to	
Action	17:	Energy	Conservation	 • Continue	 to	 work	 with	 the	 community	 college	 and	   make	 energy	 efficient	 upgrades.	 	 These	 incentives	
                                  developers	 to	 implement	 “Savings	 by	 Design”	         include	 an	 expedited	 permit	 process,	 tracking	 status,	
                                  principles.		(Ongoing)	                                   rebates	 and	 facilitating	 contacts	 for	 other	 valuable	
                                                                                            resources.	
                                • Begin	 implementation	 of	 the	 goals	 and	 policies	
                                  contained	in	the	Green	City	Element	of	the	General	Plan.	  
                                  (Ongoing)	                                                Continued	Appropriateness:	This	program	continues	
                                                                                            to	 be	 appropriate	 and	 is	 included	 in	 the	 2013‐2021	
                                                                                            Housing	Element.	
 
                                                                                            South Gate General Plan 2035  A‐13 

 
    Table	HE‐A2:	Quantified	Objectives	by	Income	(2008‐2014)	
                                               Extremely	                                        Above	
                             	                                Very	Low	     Low	     Moderate	            Total	
                                                   Low	                                         Moderate	
    Units	to	be	Constructed	
    Regional	Housing	Needs	Assessment	(RHNA)	              451	             244	        150	      645	    1,490	
    Actual	Construction	                                    0                50          90       30       170
    Units	to	be	Rehabilitated	
    					Home	Improvement	Program	                  10	            10	       20	         20	       0	      		60	
    					Rental	Acquisition/Rehab		                 10	            10	       10	         0	        0	      		30	
                                                        22	(HIP)		        12	(HIP)		
    Actual	Rehabilitation	Accomplishments	                                                0	       0	       61	
                                                      27	(Acq/Reh)	     0	(Acq/Reh)	
    Units	to	be	Preserved	
    					Units	at	Risk	                                    117	               0	         0	        0	     	117	
    Actual	Preservation	Accomplishments	                   117	               0	         0	        0	     	117	
    Households	to	be	Assisted	
    					First‐Time	Homebuyer	                      0	              0	       10	         0	        0	      		10	
    					MCC	                                       0	             0	         0	         20	       0	      		20	
    					Section	8	Vouchers	                       260	           390	        0	          0	       0	     	650	
                                                         2	(FTH)		
    Actual	Households	Assisted	                         0	(MCC)		         0	(MCC)		   0	(MCC)		    0	      656	
                                                     654	(Section	8)	
 
A‐14  Housing Element    

APPENDIX B: PUBLIC 
PARTICIPATION 
 
OUTREACH LIST 
 
A Community of Friends 
Academy Mortgage Corporation 
Active Alliance Real Estate 
Aid For Aids, Inc. 
AIDS Healthcare Foundation 
Amazing Homesellers 
American Team Realty 
Bank of America Home Loans 
Bautista Mortgage & Realty 
Beyond Shelter 
Bridge Housing 
California Association of Realtors 
Casas USA Realty 
Catholic Charities of Los Angeles, Inc. 
Centro Cristiano Betel 
CENTURY 21 Allstars 
CHASE Bank 
Citi Bank ‐ Mortgage Services 
Code Enforcement Program 
Cofradia Our Lady of Charity 
Coldwell Banker Dynasty 
Colonial Services Group, Inc. 
Crime Prevention Program 
Downey Unified School District 
Emergency Management Program 
Esperanza Galvan Re: Youth Program 
Evangelica Baptist Church 
Fair Housing Foundation 
Family Violence Prevention Program 
First Baptist Church of South Gate 
First Class Real Estate 
First Mortgage Corporation 
Foursquare Church 
                                         South Gate General Plan 2035  B‐1 

Grace Bible Church 
Graffiti Abatement Program 
Habitat for Humanity 
Higher Goals, Inc. 
Hollydale Senior Citizen's Center 
Home Security Program 
Homes For Life Foundation 
Hope Christian Center 
Housing Authority of the County of Los Angeles 
Hub Cities Consortium 
Iglesia Bautista 
Iglesia de Dios 
imortgage 
JADE Family Services 
Jamboree Housing Corporation 
Juvenile Assistance Diversion Effort (Jade) 
Keller Williams Realty 
Lamp Community 
LAUSD ‐ Local District 6 
Los Angeles Community Design Center 
Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority 
Los Angeles Mission, Inc. 
Lynwood Unified School District 
National CORE 
Oldtimers Foundation 
Optimist Club of South Gate 
Pacific Union Financial, LLC 
Paramount Residential Mortgage Group, Inc. 
Paramount Unified School District 
Parks And Recreation 
Pastor Ernesto Trejo 
People in Progress 
Police Activities League 
Powerhouse Mortgage, Inc. 
Prospect Mortgage, LLC 
Prudential California Realty 
RE/MAX Premium 
Redeemer Lutheran Church 
Rotary Club of South Gate 
Senior Citizen's Club of South Gate 
South Central Los Angeles Regional Center 
South Gate Chamber of Commerce 
South Gate Church of Christ 
South Gate Multicultural Women's Club 
B‐2  Housing Element    

South Gate Police Explorer Program 
Southeast Church Service Center 
Southeast Community Development Corp. 
Southern California Drug And Alcohol Program, Inc. 
Southern California Rehabilitation Services 
Southland Regional Association of Realtors, Inc. 
St Francis Medical Center 
St. Helen's Catholic Church 
St. Margaret's Church 
Stearns Lending, Inc. 
Teen Challenge Ministry Institute 
The Arc of L.A. and Orange Counties 
The Olson Company	
The Salvation Army ‐ Bell Shelter 
The Salvation Army ‐ Southeast Communities Corp 
The Society of St. Vincent De Paul, Council of Los Angeles 
Tweedy Mile Association 
U.S. Bank Home Mortgage 
Union Rescue Mission 
United Way of Greater Los Angeles 
Wells Fargo Home Mortgage 
                                                  South Gate General Plan 2035  B‐3 

                          
B‐4  Housing Element    

City of South Gate
 Safety Element
