Land Us
                                                                                                                                    INTRODUCTION
Purpose
Mill Valley’s attractive small-town character and charm are not a                                                                   LAND USE
secret. In 2005, CNN/Money and Money magazine ranked Mill Val-
ley tenth on its list of the “100 Best Places to Live in the United
                                                                                                                                    MOBILITY
States.” In 2012, Smithsonian magazine ranked Mill Valley fourth
on its list of “The 20 Best Small Towns in America,” in terms of
culture. In 2013, U.S. News and World Report selected Marin
County as the healthiest county in America for children. Much of
                                                                                                                                  COMMUNITY
this character can be attributed to historic land use decisions and
development patterns that have been strongly influenced by Mill
Valley’s natural setting, particularly the canyons and hillsides on                     Click Off (2000)
                                                                                                                                    VITALITY
                                                                                        Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission
and adjacent to Mount Tamalpais and the tidal flats of Richardson
                                                                                        Photographer: Margrithe Fliegauf
Bay. The Land Use Element of the General Plan is intended to iden-
                                                                                                                                     NATURAL
tify the distribution of various land uses in the community (through
the “Land Use Map”) and provide policies and programs to guide
                                                                                                                                  ENVIRONEMENT
future land use decisions and development patterns to ensure that
Mill Valley retains its renowned character and charm.
The Land Use Element is one of seven General Plan elements man-
dated by the California Government Code. The State General Plan
                                                                                                                                  CLIMATE
Guidelines provide further direction, based on state law, court deci-
                                                                                                                                  ACTION
sions, and professional best practices, for the contents of the Land
Use Element. While the General Plan is required to be internally
consistent – that is, as particular topics are addressed from one
element to another, the policies and programs support the same                                                                     HAZARDS &
Table 2.1 | State Requirements for Land Use Elements                                                                              PUBLIC SAFETY
     Land Use Element Content Requirements
                                                                              MV2040 General Plan Provisions
      (Government Code Section 65302(b))
Distribution of housing, business, and industry        See Figure 2.4 and Housing Element.                                          NOISE
Distribution of open space, including agricultural     See Figure 2.4.
land
                                                                                                                                   GENERAL PLAN
Distribution of mineral resources                      Not applicable to Mill Valley.
Distribution of recreation facilities and opportuni-   See Figure 4.1 in Community Vitality Element.
                                                                                                                                  ADMINISTRATION
ties
Location of educational facilities                     See Figure 4.2 in Community Vitality Element.
Location of public buildings and grounds               See Figure 4.2 in Community Vitality Element.
Location of future solid and liquid waste facilities   Not applicable to Mill Valley.
Identification of areas subject to flooding            See Figure 7.2 in Hazards and Public Safety Element.
Existing Timberland Preserve Zones                     Not applicable to Mill Valley.                                              Citations/
                                                                                                                                  Appendices
Water supply                                           See Natural Environment Element.
Scenic resources                                       See Natural Environment Element.
                                                                                                       MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       11

                                          direction or outcome, and no one element is to be considered more
                                          important or more influential than another – the Land Use Element
                                          is often considered to be the heart and soul of the General Plan
                                          because of the importance local communities put on land use deci-
                                          sions and the patterns of growth and development. As such, state
                                          law and the General Plan Guidelines suggest that the Land Use
                                          Element address a wide variety of topics. Table 2.1 identifies all
                                          of the topics required by Government Code Section 65302(a) and
                                          indicates whether they are relevant to Mill Valley and addressed in
                                          this General Plan.
                                          Existing Conditions
                                          Nestled among the redwoods and sheltered by Mount Tamalpais,
                                          Mill Valley provides a sense of refuge from the busy urban environ-
                                          ment of the greater Bay Area. Mill Valley is bounded by the hillsides
                                          and steep ridges of the coastal mountains and the water of Rich-
                                          ardson Bay, which form natural edges to urban growth. Many of the
                                          ridgelines that create the dominant visual backdrop for the commu-
                                          nity are now preserved as permanent open space. Similarly, much
                                          of the bayfront land has been preserved as park and open space,
    JUST THE FACTS                        providing important habitat as well as visual and physical access to
                                          the water. Creeks, marshes, redwood groves, heavily forested and
   A cross-section of the number of local grass-covered hillsides, and chaparral are commonplace. Single-
   businesses by type (year 2012)...      family residential neighborhoods are located in the valleys and on
                                          the hillsides, with commercial and more intensive residential uses
   • Eating & Drinking
                                          clustered on the flat low lands. The residential and commercial
      (Restaurants, bars, etc.): 48
                                          areas, together with the natural setting, create a small-town com-
   •Personal Appearance
                                          munity character that is cherished by the area’s residents. (Figure
      (Salons, Spas, etc.): 34
                                          2.1 illustrates existing land use.)
   • Fitness & Wellness
      (Gyms, yoga, nutrition): 22
                                          Highway 101 runs adjacent to the entire eastern edge of the Plan-
   • Banks: 11
                                          ning Area, providing a critical link to other Marin County communi-
   • Gas Stations & Automotive
                                          ties, as well as San Francisco to the south and Sonoma County to
      Service: 10
                                          the north. Access to Mill Valley is provided via three freeway inter-
   • Pet Care & Supplies: 9
                                          changes from Highway 101. The Mill Valley/Stinson Beach exit to
   • Real Estate: 8
                                          the south is the primary access route to coastal recreation areas
   • Grocery Stores: 5
                                          via Highway 1. The Redwood Highway Frontage Road/Seminary
   • Hotels & Visitor Lodging: 4
                                          Drive interchange provides access to Hamilton Drive in Mill Valley
   • Theaters & Clubs: 4
                                          and the Strawberry Peninsula to the east of Highway 101. The East
                                          Blithedale/Tiburon Boulevard exit provides access to the central
12

                                              Fra
                                                                                                                                                                                                              INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                                                                           Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                           I                  LAND USE
                                       Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                     Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                                                            COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                              VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                               NATURAL
                                                                     Mill Valley
                                                                     City Hall                                                                                           Edna                               ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                         Maguire Elem
                                                        Old Mill Elem                                                                                                    School
                                                        School                       Downtown
                                          Mill Valley
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CLIMATE
                                       Public Library                                                                                                                                   Alto
                                                                                                     Park Elem
                                                                                                                   E.
                                                                                                                        BL
                                                                                                                          ITH
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ACTION
                                                                                                                             ED
                                                                                                     School                    AL
                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                         Mill Valley
                                                                                                                                                                                                             HAZARDS &
              Muir Woods Park                                                                                               Middle                         Mill Valley
                                                                                                                            School                         Community
                                                                                                                                                           Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                                           Public Safety
                                                                                                                                       CAMINO ALTO
                                                                                                                                                                           Building
                                                                           Homestead
                                                                                                                                                                                               Strawberry
                                                                                                                                           MI
                                                                                                                                                     LLE
                                                                                                                  Tamalpais High                        RA
                                                                                                                                                          VE
                                                                                                                  School
                                                                                                                                                                                                              NOISE
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 2.1: Existing Land Use
                                                                                                                                                                                                             GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                               Almonte
      Single Family Residential                     Common Area               Common Area:
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ADMINISTRATION
                                                                              Open Space/ Privately owned/ or
      Multi-Family Residential                      Publicly Owned            associated with housing developments
      Commercial                                    Highway                   Publicly Owned:
                                                    Roads                     Open Space/ Public Facilities and
      City Boundary                                                           Service Areas/ Parks
                                                    Landmarks
                           0.5 Miles                                                                                                                                                                         Citations/
[
      0        0.25                                 Source: Marin Map, City of Mill Valley, 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Appendices
                                                                                                                                                                 MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                       13

                                               Mill Valley neighborhoods and the downtown area. East Blithedale
                                               Avenue, Miller Avenue, and Camino Alto are the community’s pri-
                                               mary arterial roadways.
                                               Residential Areas
                                               The existing residential areas are primarily made up of single-
                                               family detached homes with clusters of multi-family units located
                                               adjacent to the commercial areas or along arterial streets. Many
                                               residential areas are adjacent to neighborhood shopping districts.
                                               This provides residents the opportunity to walk to the commercial
                                               areas – a rare feature in most suburban communities.
                                               Overall, densities in Mill Valley’s single-family residential areas
                                               range from one home per ten acres in remote hillside areas to sev-
                                               en homes per acre on flat topography. Existing multi-family densi-
                                               ties generally range from six units per acre for duplexes and other
                                               attached dwellings to over 30 units per acre for apartment build-
                                               ings. The following discussion describes the land use character
                                               and typical existing densities for each of the residential neighbor-
                                               hoods delineated in Figure 2.2. Existing residential building inten-
                                                Trends in           #1
                                                                               Americans value
                                                                               walkability and
                                                Land Use                       sense of place.
                                                  •	 More than 75 percent of Americans consider having
                                                     sidewalks and places to take a walk a top priority when
                                                     deciding where to live.1
                                                  •	 Homes in close proximity to multiple destinations,
                                                     such as stores, libraries, parks, coffee shops, and
                                                     restaurants, are more valuable than similar homes in
                                                     neighborhoods where there is less to walk to.2
                                                  •	 In a 2010 survey, only nine percent of households
                                                     surveyed indicated that their ideal home size was over
                                                     3,200 square feet, while more than one-third said their
                                                     ideal size was less than 2,000 square feet.3
Top: Single family home on East Blithedale
Bottom: Multifamily homes on East Blithedale
14

                                                                                                                                                                                      INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                                                                      LAND USE
                                        Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                   Æ
                                                                                                                                                                   I
                                                                                                                                                                                      MOBILITY
                                                                                                                         Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                                    COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                                      VITALITY
                                                         Blithedale
                                                          Canyon
                                                                                                                                                                                       NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                                    ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                 Scott Valley/
                                                                                        Warner Canyon/
                                                                                                                                                     Alto
                          Cascade Canyon                                                   Kite Hill
                                                                                                                                                 Edna
                                                                          Mill Valley                                                            Maguire Elem
                                                     Old Mill Elem                                                                               School
                                                     School               City Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                    CLIMATE
                                           Mill Valley
                                        Public Library                 Downtown                                                                                 Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                    ACTION
                                                                                                       E.
                                                                                                            BL                 ALTO
                                                                                           Park Elem          ITH
                                                                      Miller/ Molino       School
                                                                                                                 ED
                                                                                                                   AL
                                                                                                                     E        INO              Bayfront/
                                                                                                    Sycamore/                CAM
                                                                                                                                           Enchanted Knolls/
                                                                                                                                                                                     HAZARDS &
                Muir Woods Park                                                            M
                                                                                                  Tamalpais Park                             Shelter Ridge
                                                                                            ILL
                                                                                               ER                                  Mill Valley
                                                                                                   E                               Community
                                                                                                                                                                                    PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                AV
                                                                                                                                   Center
                                                                                                                             Mill Valley           Public Safety
                                                                                                                             Middle                Building
                                                                      Homestead                                              School
                                                                                                                                                                       Strawberry
                                                                                                                            Tamalpais High
                                                                                                                                                                                      NOISE
                                                                                                                            School
                                                                                                                                                                                     GENERAL PLAN
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 2.2: Mill Valley Neighborhoods                                                                                                  Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                                    ADMINISTRATION
          City Boundary                         Highway
          Neighborhood Boundary                 Roads
          Landmarks                             Arterials
Source: Marin Map, 2012; David Parisi & Associates, 2011
                            0.5 Miles                                                                                                                                                Citations/
[
      0          0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                    Appendices
                                                                                                                                           MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                     15

                                                  sity is largely determined by the zoning, which regulates minimum
                                                  site area, building setbacks, maximum site coverage, and building
                                                  heights permitted in each zoning category.
                                                  Cascade and Blithedale Canyons
                                                  The characteristics of these two neighborhoods are quite similar –
                                                  each is characterized by narrow, circuitous roads, the visual promi-
                                                  nence of the redwoods and broadleaf evergreens that screen most
                                                  residential structures from full view, and the sense of containment
                                                  provided by the canyon walls. Each area also contains a great vari-
                                                  ety of housing types and styles.
                                                  Existing single-family residential densities near the canyon floor av-
                                                  erage approximately four to seven homes per acre. Low-density
                                                  single-family development on the surrounding hillsides is generally
                                                  one to two homes per acre and as low as one home per ten acres
                                                  in some of the steeper, more remote areas.
                                                  Miller/Molino Area
                                                  As in Cascade and Blithedale Canyons, the hillside roads in the
                                                  Miller/Molino area are narrow and circuitous. Here, however, veg-
                                                  etation is somewhat less dense. The slopes immediately above
                                                  Miller Avenue are covered with redwood and broadleaf evergreens,
                                                  while the balance of the area is more open. However, introduced
                                                  vegetation in the latter area is now gradually producing a lusher ap-
                                                  pearance similar to that of the redwood and broadleaf evergreen-
                                                  dominated area. Since development is located on the northeast-
                                                  facing slopes, broad views out over the central portion of Mill Valley
                                                  are provided from both the roadways and residences.
                                                  Existing single-family residential density on the hillside areas is
                                                  generally in the range of four to seven homes per acre, and multi-
                                                  family densities along Miller Avenue generally range from 10 to 30
                                                  units per acre.
                                                  Sycamore/Tamalpais Park
                                                  The relatively level topography and more conventional lotting pat-
                                                  tern of the Sycamore/ Tamalpais Park neighborhood creates a de-
                                                  sign character quite different from the hillside and canyon areas
Mill Valley Record Newspaper Advertisement (1904)
                                                  of Mill Valley. Other design features that distinguish this neighbor-
Source: Mill Valley Public Library,
Lucretia Little History Room                      hood are road layout and a variety of architectural styles and de-
                                                  sign details and landscaping that lend visual richness to the area.
16

                                                                                                             INTRODUCTION
Existing single-family residential densities in this area are generally
                                                                                                             LAND USE
four to seven units per acre.
Warner Canyon/Kite Hill
Two distinctive character areas occur within the Warner Canyon
                                                                                                             MOBILITY
area. In the lower, southern portion, development more closely
resembles that of the Sycamore Triangle. That is, residential de-
velopment is predominantly detached single-family and lots tend
to follow the more conventional subdivision pattern of rectangular
                                                                                                           COMMUNITY
lots aligned along the adjacent streets. Development along the
north side of East Blithedale Avenue contains a mix of low-intensity
office and commercial uses and interspersed multi-family develop-                                            VITALITY
ments that, over time, have become integrated into the neighbor-
hood. Existing open space areas and the City golf course farther
                                                                                                              NATURAL
up the canyon contribute to a more irregular pattern of lots, and
lot sizes increase such that, along the ridgelines, lot sizes are as
                                                                                                           ENVIRONEMENT
large as ten acres or more. In the main canyon portion, vegeta-
tion is less dense than in Cascade and Blithedale Canyons, and
introduced plant materials are predominant except along the creek
where riparian plant communities occur and along the upper edg-
es of the canyon where broadleaf evergreens are found.
                                                                                                           CLIMATE
                                                                                                           ACTION
Existing single-family residential densities generally range from an
average of one home per ten acres in the hillside areas to seven
homes per acre in the flatter areas. Multi-family densities in the
area generally range from 9 to over 30 units per acre.                                                      HAZARDS &
Scott Valley/Alto/Enchanted Knolls/Bayfront/Shelter                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
Ridge
The development pattern and appearance of this area differs from
                                                                                                             NOISE
other hill areas to the west because the area was built to contem-
porary subdivision standards. Development in these neighbor-
hoods ranges from larger-lot custom homes in the Scott Valley area
                                                                                                            GENERAL PLAN
to more traditional residential subdivision development patterns
in the Alto and Enchanted Knolls areas to large condominium and
apartment developments along the bayfront and above the com-
mercial frontage on Highway 101.
                                                                          54.4%
                                                                          of Mill Valley homes
                                                                                                           ADMINISTRATION
Existing single-family residential densities generally range from
one unit per two acres in the upper areas of Scott Valley to seven
                                                                          have at least
                                                                                                            Citations/
homes per acre in the flatter areas, and multi-family densities gen-
erally range from 8 to 30 units per acre.                                 3 bedrooms                       Appendices
                                                                                MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       17
                                                   Downtown (revised March 2016)
                                                   Downtown residential development wraps like a collar around the
                                                   downtown commercial core. Development varies considerably
                                                   in size and design, with residential units ranging from multiple
                                                   small cottages on a single parcel and small and moderately sized
                                                   apartments and condominiums to single-family homes on both
                                                   very small and very large lots. The mix of single-family and multi-
                                                   family residential in this area is approximately equal. Proximity to
                                                   nearby churches, schools, SLPs, parks, the Downtown Plaza, and
                                                   commercial activities make this a prime area for easy walkability
                                                   and embody the small town character that many associate with
                                                   Mill Valley. The mix of multi-family and single family housing close
 Trends in                          # 2 Small  bussinesses and towns
 Land Use
                                        are loved for a reason.
     •	 Small businesses employ 50 million people and 90 percent donate money to charity.4
     •	 Small businesses generate more than $11 trillion in receipts per year.5
     •	 Home-based businesses account for 52 percent of all small businesses.6
     •	 The latest figures show that small businesses create 75 percent of the net new jobs in our economy. Many
        of these small businesses are focused on health and wellness and celebrating local culture.7 For example:
            ◦◦ The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) reported in 2011 that the sales of “local foods”
               amounted to $4.8 billion in 2008 and was predicted to top $7 billion in 2011/2012.8
            ◦◦ Pilates and yoga studios were named the #4 top-growing industries in the U.S. by an April 2012 IBIS
               World report.9
            ◦◦ Locally produced crafts, independent manufacturing, local “flavor,” and nostalgia have influenced
               further growth and appreciation for local retailers.
     •	 The Bureau of Labor Statistics predicted in January 2012 that the fastest-growing industries would be
        professional services, health care, and education, with individual and family health care services and
        management/ scientific/ technical consulting services growing the most.10
     •	 The National Restaurant Association reported in April 2012 that more than 560,000 restaurant jobs have
        been added since the start of the employment recovery in March 2010, outpacing the overall economic
        recovery of recent months.11
     •	 Active, local travel (e.g., Blazing Saddles, organized hikes) creates more memorable, engaging, and
        authentic experiences in which people can be part of the community as opposed to just observing from
        afar.
     •	 Local foods, businesses, and shopping create a unique experience for residents and visitors alike.12
18

                                                                                                                       INTRODUCTION
to social and commercial activity is a defining physical and social
                                                                                                                       LAND USE
characteristic of the downtown residential areas, and the intent of
the General Plan is to continue to encourage this mix of residential
development; retain existing residential units; and encourage new
development to be in scale with existing development patterns.
Existing residential densities on scattered sites within the down-                                                     MOBILITY
town are generally in the range of 12 to 29 units per acre.
                                                                                                                     COMMUNITY
Commercial Areas
Mill Valley has four primary commercial areas: Downtown, Lower                                                         VITALITY
Miller Avenue, East Blithedale/Alto Center, and Redwood Highway
Frontage Road. These commercial areas generally consist of small,
                                                                                                                        NATURAL
local-serving businesses that provide goods and services oriented
primarily to the daily shopping, service, and entertainment needs of
                                                                                                                     ENVIRONEMENT
the area’s residents. They are considered a valuable asset by the
community and play a key role in shaping Mill Valley’s small-town
character and quality of life. Nearby residents can conveniently
walk to shopping opportunities because these areas are generally
surrounded by residential neighborhoods. Figure 2.3 shows the                                                        CLIMATE
location of these commercial areas.                                                                                  ACTION
Increasing competition from major shopping centers elsewhere in
                                                                                                                      HAZARDS &
Marin County, a greatly expanded commercial base in southern
Marin County, and the growing popularity of online shopping have
                                                                                                                     PUBLIC SAFETY
significantly affected small, local-serving businesses in Mill Valley
by increasing the supply of establishments providing similar goods
and services and thus making it more difficult for local businesses
to capture a sufficient portion of their respective markets. With ris-
                                                                                                                       NOISE
ing rents, existing local-serving businesses have trouble maintain-
ing or increasing profits.
                                                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN
A majority of the local-serving businesses in the area are owned
and operated by small, independent proprietors. Many are local
                                                                                                                     ADMINISTRATION
residents who have a sincere interest in the future of the town and
are therefore involved in local organizations and institutions, such
as the Mill Valley Chamber of Commerce, the Mill Valley School Dis-
trict, and local service clubs. Their activities help to build a type of
community feeling and strength that contributes to the small-town
character of Mill Valley.                                                  Top: The Depot on the Plaza                Citations/
                                                                                                                     Appendices
                                                                           Bottom: Shopper in Downtown Mill Valley
                                                                                         MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN        19

                                          Muir
                                           Downtown
                                                    Woods Park
                                           Mill Valley’s downtown is characterized by a tight configuration of
                                           one- and two-story buildings clustered around Lytton Square and
                                           the Depot Plaza. The variety of small businesses, the compatible
                                           architectural style of the buildings, and the unique natural setting
                                           give downtown the quality of a small village. Downtown Mill Val-
                                           ley is the community’s primary shopping, civic, and cultural center.
                                           Most downtown businesses are small-scale and oriented to provide       H
                                           a unique shopping and gathering place for local residents and re-
                                           gional visitors.
Lower Miller Avenue
                        Mill Valley General              Plan
                                           Lower Miller Avenue
                                           Lower Miller Avenue, from Locust Street to Camino Alto, functions
                        Figure 2.3: Existing Com
                                           as the full-service commercial area for the community. In addition
                                           to retail and restaurants, it also provides a range of professional
                                           and business office space and service and repair businesses that
                                           serve the entire community.
                                  Automotive/Gas Muir Woods Park                                                Misc
                                           The character of Lower Miller Avenue is different from that of down-
                                  Building town.
                                            Materials/Hardware/                   Gardenstyles and massing Med
                                                   Buildings have a range of architectural
                                           due to the difference in lot sizes and configurations and the dif-
                                  Eating/Drinking
                                           ferent eras in which the buildings were built. Parking in the Lower
                                           Miller Avenue area is a combination of public “on-street” parking,   Pers
Alto Center                                either in the center median of Miller Avenue or along the curb and,
                                  Exercise/Dance Studio
                                           where lots are large enough, private parking lots in front of or be- Resi
                                           hind the buildings. The adoption of the Miller Avenue Streetscape
                                  Finance/Real Estate
                                           Plan in 2010, which is incorporated into this General Plan by refer-
                                                                                                                Unk
                                           ence, will result in improved access to local businesses through
                              MillFood/Drug/Liquor
                                   Valley General Plan
                                           proposed street, sidewalk, bikeway, and public transit improve-
                                           ments, while maintaining the distinctive character of the various     Par
                              Figure               2.3: Existing Co
                                           “rooms” that characterize Miller Avenue from Almonte Boulevard
                                  General Merchandise
                                           to downtown Mill Valley.
                                                                                                                 Roa
                                  General East
                                           Oﬃce   Blithedale/Alto Center
                                      Automotive/Gas
                                           East Blithedale/Alto Center, since its development, has served as Hig
                                           both a neighborhood shopping center and a location for larger-scale
Redwood Highway Frontage Road     Hotel retail businesses that serve a more regional market. Currently, the
                                      Building Materials/Hardware/ Garden                                        Art
                                           East Blithedale/Alto Center area includes 204,000 square feet of
                                  Miscellaneous
                                           leasable space. Its location near the East Blithedale/Highway 101
                                      Eating/Drinking
                                           interchange makes it attractive for regional-serving businesses.        P
                                 0 Exercise/Dance
                                            0.25                 0.5 Miles                          Source: Ma
20
                          [           Finance/Real Estate
                                                               Studio                                              R

                                                                                  E.
                                                                                       BL
                                                                                         ITH
                                                                                               ED
                                                                                                                                                                                       INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                 AL
                                                                                                           E
                                                                  Lower Miller Avenue (inset)
          Downtown
            Downtown (inset)
                                             Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                    ÆRedwoo
                                                                                                                                                                    I                  LAND USE
                                                                                                                        Highway
                                                                                                                   EastFrontage
                                                                                                                                    ALTO
                                                                                                                            CAMINO
                                  Lower                                                                            Blithedale/
                                                                                                                        Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                                       MOBILITY
omestead
                                  Miller                                                                                  Road
                                                                                                                   Alto Center
                                  Avenue                                                    E.
                                                                                                                                                                                     COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                                       VITALITY
                                                                                                 BL                                  MI
                                                                                                   ITH                                       LLE
                                                                                                                ED
mercial Land Use
                                                                                                                  AL                            RA
                                                                                                                          E                       VE
                                                                                                                                                                                        NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                                     ENVIRONEMENT
 ellaneous/Parking                                              Downtown
 ical Oﬃce
                                                Tam Valley                                                         East
                                                                                                                   Blithedale/                                      Redw
                                                                                                                   Alto Center                     ALTO
                                                                                                                                                              Highway                CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                                                 Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                     ACTION
                                                                                                                                              CAMINO
 onal Service
                                                                                                                                                             Frontage
                                                                                                      E.
                                                                                                           BL
                                                                                                             ITH
                                         Lower
                                                                                                                ED
                                                                                                                  AL
                                                                                                                    E
dential
 Homestead
                        Muir Woods Park
                                         Miller                                                                             ALTO
                                                                                                                                             Redwood
                                                                                                                                          Highway                 Road
                                                                                                                                                              Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                                      HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                                                                                     PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                          CAMINO
                                                                                                                                         Frontage
                                         Avenue
                                                                             Lower
 nown/Vacant                                                Homestead
                                                                             Miller                                                         Road                        Strawberry
                                                                             Avenue
          Mill Valley General Plan                                                                                            MI
                                                                                                                                   LLE
                                                                                                                                                   MI
 cels Figure 2.3: Existing Commercial Land Use
                                                                                                                                      RA
                                                                                                                                        VE
                                                                                                                                                       LLE
                                                                                                                                                                                       NOISE
mmercial Land Use
                                                                                                                                                          RA
                Automotive/Gas                            Miscellaneous/Parking                                                                             VE
                                                                                  Tam Valley
 ds             Building Materials/Hardware/ Garden
                Eating/Drinking
                                                          Medical Oﬃce
                                                                                                                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN
                                                          Personal Service
                                                                                                                                              Almonte
                                                        City    Boundary
                Exercise/Dance Studio                    Residential
hway Finance/Real Estate
Miscellaneous/Parking                                    Unknown/Vacant
                                                                                                                                                                                     ADMINISTRATION
         Food/Drug/Liquor
                                                        Tam
                                                          Parcels
                                                                 Valley
erials Oﬃce
Medical
                General Merchandise
        General Oﬃce
                                                         Commercial
                                                          Roads
                                                          Highway
                                                                        Areas
                                                                         City Boundary
                Hotel
                                                           Arterials                   Commercial Areas
                                                                                                                                                                                      Citations/
 ersonal Service
          Miscellaneous
                              Source: Marin Map, City of Mill Valley, 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                     Appendices
                        Miles
      [ City of Mill Valley, 2012
                0        0.25      0.5
 rin Map,                                                                                                                                                               Almonte
 esidential
Unknown/Vacant                                                                                                                                 MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                  21

                         Redwood Highway Frontage Road
                         The Redwood Highway Frontage Road area has historically served
                         as a regional-serving office and commercial area. The uses tend to
                         be oriented to the Highway 101 frontage road and include a large
                         amount of professional office space and some regional freeway-ori-
                         ented commercial uses, such as hotels and car dealerships. This
                         area constitutes most of Mill Valley’s frontage on Highway 101.
                         Land Use Map & Designations
                         The purpose of the General Plan Land Use Map (Figure 2.4) is to
                         clearly illustrate the relationship between the basic land use poli-
                          Trends in         # 3 Our definition of
                          Land Use
                                                “urban” is changing.
                            •	 In 2012, two-thirds of the nation’s 51 largest cities
                               experienced twice as much growth within the urban
                               core (three miles from the urban center) as elsewhere
                               in the City, especially among young, well-educated 20-
                               and 30-year-olds.13
                            •	 This is a far cry from the early 1990s, when the 1990
                               census revealed that nearly half of U.S. population
                               lived in the suburbs, contributing to the ongoing
                               decentralization of American cities and development
                               patterns that had been ongoing for decades.14
                            •	 Urbanists in the early 1990s coined terms such as the
                               “Edge City” (Joel Garreau, 1991), and New Urbanism
                               was founded (by Andres Duany in 1993) to remind
         cities across         Americans of the value and benefits of traditional
                               neighborhood patterns.
         the US have        •	 The current urban trend was documented in 2002, when
         changed their         Richard Florida coined the term the “creative class” to
                               describe the young, well-educated populations, as well
zoning code to include         as retirees and empty-nesters, that were contributing to
                               the resurgence of American cities.15
Urban Agriculture
22

                                                                                                                 INTRODUCTION
cies and programs of a community and a given parcel of land within
                                                                                                                 LAND USE
that community. In other words, the Land Use Map tells at a glance
how a piece of property may be used and how intensively it might
be developed. The Land Use Map is not the sole basis for that
determination; other General Plan policies, zoning regulations, de-
sign guidelines, and other standards may also apply and influence
                                                                                                                 MOBILITY
the final size, scope, and appearance of a development project.
However, the Land Use Map is the starting point for understanding
not only how much development a parcel might accommodate but
                                                                       Centennial Documentary Photo Contest
                                                                                                               COMMUNITY
also how that parcel fits into an overall community-wide view of
                                                                       Source: Mill Valley Public Library
future growth and development opportunities.                           Photographer: Tapio Holma
                                                                                                                 VITALITY
	
Over the years, the California courts have determined that an effec-
tive General Plan Land Use Map must be built upon three universal
criteria: use, population density, and building intensity.
                                                                                                                  NATURAL
	
“Use” is determined through the creation of broad categories that
                                                                                                               ENVIRONEMENT
identify the principal or predominant land use within that category:
“residential,” “commercial,” “open space,” and so forth. Land use
categories or “designations” can be, and often are, more specific
                                                                                                               CLIMATE
 Trends in
                                                                                                               ACTION
                #4          We want hands-on
 Land Use
                            influence on our cities.
                                                                                                                HAZARDS &
                                                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY
    •	 The DIY (Do It Yourself) and “Tactical Urbanism”
       movements are reverberating across American
       cities, arming everyday people (i.e., non-planners)
       with the will and the power to enable physical                                                            NOISE
       change in the urban environment. Examples include:
       Park(ing) Day, Bike to Work Day, Pop-up retailers,
                                                                                                                GENERAL PLAN
       mobile vendors, temporary streetscapes, and public
       space interventions.16
                                                                                                               ADMINISTRATION
    •	 The open-data movement has encouraged the
       release of many government and policy data sources
       so that they are available to anyone, resulting in
       tech-savvy citizens taking initiative to combat social
       problems and enable change.17                                                                            Citations/
                                                                                                               Appendices
                                                                                    MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       23

   Table 2.2 | General Plan Land Use Categories
                                     MV2040 General Plan Land Use Category                                               Corresonding Mill Valley
           Title            Density Range   1,2
                                                                              Description                                    Zoning District(s)
    Single-Family       1 DU/10 acres to 1        Very low-density, large lot and estate residential develop-       RSP-1.5A; RSP-2A; RSP-2.5A;
    Residential – 1     DU/1.5 acres              ment                                                              RSP-3A; RSP-4A; RS-5; RSP-5A;
    (SFR-1)                                                                                                         RSP-10A; RS-10A
    Single-Family       1 DU/acre to 7 DU/acre    Low- to medium-density single-family residential                  RS-43; RSP-30; RSP-1A; RS-30;
    Residential – 2                                                                                                 RS-20; RS-15; RS-10; RS-7.5;
    (SFR-2)                                                                                                         RS-6; RSP-5, RP; Single Family
                                                                                                                    homes in the RM3.5 zoned area
                                                                                                                    between Sunnyside and Millwood
    Multi-Family        8 DU/acre to 15 DU/acre   Medium-density multi-family and attached single-family            RM-5.5; RM-5.0; RM-4.0; RM-3.5;
    Residential – 1                               residential                                                       RM-3.0
    (MFR-1)
    Multi-Family        17 DU/acre to 29 DU/      Higher-density multi-family and attached single-family            RM-2.5; RM-2.0; RM-1.5; PA (on
    Residential – 2     acre                      residential                                                       Miller Avenue and Corte Madera
    (MFR-2)                                                                                                         Avenue)
    Downtown            8 DU/acre (minimum)       A mix of medium density multi-family and single-family            RM2.5; RM3.0 transition areas
    Residential - 1     to 16 DU/acre; 1 DU       residential near the downtown. Single-family residential          between Downtown Residential
    (DR-1)              allowed on any vacant     allowed on vacant lots and lots currently developed with a        and Single Family Residential
                        parcel or any parcel cur- single-family residential use. Single-family residences are
                        rently developed with a   not allowed on lots currently developed with multi-family
                        single-family residence   units. Multi-family residential allowed on any lot in accor-
                                                  dance with minimum and maximum densities.
    Downtown            12 DU/acre (minimum)      A mix of medium density multi-family and single-family resi- RM-1.5; RM2.5 zones adjacent to
    Residential - 2     to 29 DU/acre; 1 DU       dential near downtown. Single-family residential allowed          Downtown
    (DR-2)              allowed on any vacant     on vacant lots and lots currently used as single-family
                        parcel or any parcel cur- residential use. Single-family residences are not allowed
                        rently developed with a   on lots currently developed with multi-family units.; Multi-
                        single-family residence   family residential allowed on any lot in accordance with
                                                  minimum and maximum densities.
    Downtown            17 DU/acre (minimum)      Lytton Square/Town Center area from 1989 General Plan,            C-N (this designation anticipates
    Commercial          to 29 DU/acre for mixed   plus Mill Valley Lumber properties between inbound and            the creation of the proposed new
    (CD)                use developments with     outbound Miller Avenue; small-scale, local-serving res-           “Downtown Commercial” zoning
                        residential component     taurants, commercial uses, and entertainment uses; and            district); PA (on Camino Alto and
                                                  residential units above or behind the ground floor                East Blithedale)
    Neighborhood        17 DU/acre (minimum)      Lower Miller Avenue area from 1989 General Plan, plus             C-N (this designation also an-
    Commercial          to 29 DU/acre for mixed   P-A zoned areas on East Blithedale Avenue and Camino              ticipates the creation of the pro-
    (CN)                use developments with     Alto; personal, business, and medical services; local-            posed new “Limited Commercial”
                        residential component     serving retail; and residential units above or behind the         zone on East Blithedale Avenue)
                                                  ground floor
    General             17 DU/acre (minimum)      East Blithedale/Alto Center and Redwood Highway                   C-G
    Commercial          to 29 DU/acre for mixed   Frontage areas from 1989 General Plan; Safeway Center
    (CG)                use developments with     (Camino Alto); local and regional commercial and office
                        residential component
    Open Space          N/A                       All designated public and private open space                      O-A
    (OS)
    Community           N/A                       All City facilities including City golf course, parks, City Hall, C-F; O-A; C-R
    Facilities                                    Community Center, Public Safety Building, etc.; public
    (CF)                                          schools and private schools
    1
      “DU” denotes “dwelling unit.” Density calculations (dwelling units per acre) for specific development proposals are rounded up to the
    nearest whole number if the calculation results in more than 0.50 of a unit; rounded down to the nearest whole number if less than
    0.50 of a unit. N/A denotes “not applicable.”
    2
      Density of a given development project may be approved at less than the stated minimum based on findings supported by evidence
    in the record set forth in Land Use Element Program LU 1-3.
24

                                                                                                                                                                      INTRODUCTION
                                    Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                   £I
                                                                                                                                                   Æ                  LAND USE
                                                                                                                                                                      MOBILITY
                                                                                                                       Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                    COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                      VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                                       NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                    ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                Alto
                                                                                                                                                                    CLIMATE
                                                                                                     E.
                                                                                                          BL
                                                                                                            ITH              ALTO                                   ACTION
                                                                                                               ED
                                                                                                                 AL         INO
                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                           CAM
                                                                                                                                                                     HAZARDS &
            Muir Woods Park                                                             M
                                                                                         ILL
                                                                                            ER
                                                                                              AV E
                                                                                                                                                                    PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                       Homestead
                                                                                                                                                       Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                      NOISE
Mill Valley General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                     GENERAL PLAN
Figure 2.4: General Plan Land Use                                                                                                   Almonte
      SFR-1 (Single-Family Residential - 1)           CD (Downtown Commercial)
                                                                                                                                                                    ADMINISTRATION
      SFR-2 (Single-Family Residential - 2)           CN (Neighborhood Commercial)                             City Boundary
      MFR 1 (Multi-Family Residential - 1)            CG (General Commercial)                                  Mill Valley Arterial Roads
      MFR 2 (Multi-Family Residential - 2)            CF (Community Facilities)                                Highway
      DR 1 (Downtown Residential - 1)                 OS (Open Space)
                                                                                                                                                                     Citations/
      DR 2 (Downtown Residential - 2)
[     0       0.25      0.5 Miles              Source: Marin Map, City of Mill Valley, 2014
                                                                                                                                                                    Appendices
                                                                                                                                     MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN           25

                                                            – for example, “Single-Family Residential” or “Neighborhood Com-
                                                            mercial” – but they are not intended to be as specific as zoning
                                                            districts that may, for example, further differentiate among single-
                                                            family residential uses based on minimum lot size.
                                                            	
                                                            “Population density” is determined by factors such as the natural
                                                            environment, proximity to major roads or services, and historical
                                                            development patterns. Typically, population density tends to be
                                                            higher closer to core services and facilities (shopping, schools,
                                                            transit, major roadways, etc.) than in places where circumstances
                                                            (including past land use decisions) may limit the type and intensity
Tam High from the Air (1929). Camino Alto is seen           of development.
directly in front of Tam High and Northwestern Pacific
                                                            	
Railroad tracks run through the center of the picture in
front of the gymnasium.                                     Finally, “building intensity” determines how much or how big a par-
Source: Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History ticular development might be. For residential development, a typi-
Room                                                        cal measure of building intensity is “dwelling units per acre (du/
                                                            ac)” or “density.” In non-residential land use categories (commer-
                                                            cial, open space, etc.), intensity is often determined by use and
                                                            then further regulated through the Zoning Ordinance. The devel-
                                                            opment review process in Mill Valley, particularly for single-family
                                                            residential development, is based much more on another measure
                                                            of building intensity known as “Floor Area Ratio (FAR),” which is a
                                                            measure of the relationship between the size of a proposed struc-
                                                            ture or structures (in square feet) and the size of the parcel on
                                                            which it is located. Density is strictly a measurement of numbers of
                                                            units per acre regardless of their floor area, so one of the principal
                                                            benefits of using density as a measure of building intensity in the
                                                            General Plan is that residential or commercial sites available for
                                                            development or redevelopment over time are used more efficiently.
                                                            The minimum and maximum densities described in Table 2.2 are
                                                            intended to ensure that under applicable development standards
Click Off (2008)                                            and guidelines, the number of units that can be developed on a
Shelter Bay                                                 given site will not result in a project with fewer, larger units and will
Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission                         be appropriate to the type and scale of development established by
                                                            the General Plan land use designation.
                                                            	
                                                            The MV2040 General Plan Land Use Map (Figure 2.4) identifies
                                                            nine land use categories based largely on existing development
                                                            patterns and zoning. Table 2.2 identifies the nine categories and
                                                            describes the allowed uses, development intensity, and corre-
                                                            sponding zoning.
26

                                                                                                                                        INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                        LAND USE
                                                                                                                                        MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                      COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                        VITALITY
                                                                                                                                         NATURAL
                                                                                                                                      ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                      CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                      ACTION
                                                                                                                                       HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                                      PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                        NOISE
                                                                                                                                       GENERAL PLAN
Alto intersection, October 1955, before the East Bilthedale overpass was built. East Blithedale branches off toward the right and     ADMINISTRATION
Tiburon Boulevard branches off to the left. The Strawberry Shopping Center is now located in the upper left hand corner and En-
chanted Knolls neighborhood is now located in the lower right-hand corner. In the upper right is Shelter Ridge. Contour lines on
                                                                                                                                       Citations/
hills at right are cow trails on dairy ranch grazing land. The homes to the left are part of Sutton Manor and were built by several
private contractors as residential homes and tract houses before and after World War II.
                                                                                                                                      Appendices
Source: Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Room
                                                                                                      MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN            27
   Land Use Goals, Policies & Programs
   LAND-1 | Community Character
   Protect and enhance the natural beauty and small-town character of Mill Valley.
   LU.1 Residential Development
   Residential development shall be compatible with, integrated into, and subordinate to its natu-
   ral setting.
        LU.1-1 Regularly evaluate and update residential development standards, construction
        management oversight, and single-family and multi-family design guidelines to ensure that
        new development and residential remodels are compatible with their natural surroundings
        and character of the adjoining neighborhood.
        LU.1-2 New residential development or remodels should avoid a design approach or ar-
        chitectural features that exaggerate height, bulk or mass and create incompatibilities in
        relation to neighboring properties, distant public views from across a canyon or other parts
        of the City, or views from the public right-of-way.
       Single family remodel in progress
28
                                                                                                                     INTRODUCTION
 LU.1-3 The residential density (dwelling units per acre) of a new or redeveloped residen-
 tial development project or residential development as part of a mixed- use project may
                                                                                                                     LAND USE
 be reduced to below the minimum density established by this General Plan where there
 is adequate evidence in the record that the physical characteristics of the site (including
 but not limited to lot size, slope, habitat value, soil conditions, flood hazard, etc.) or other
 conditions identified through the environmental review process clearly indicate that the
                                                                                                                     MOBILITY
 minimum density cannot be met without appropriate mitigation or is determined to be
 detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the community.
                                                                                                                   COMMUNITY
 LU.1-4 As part of the five-year General Plan review and update called for in the General
 Plan Administration Element, use the latest demographic and economic data available to
                                                                                                                     VITALITY
 assess the extent of the impact of the “demographic shift” in Mill Valley from older “empty
 nesters” to younger families with school-age children and the rate of residential develop-
 ment, including the availability of new and existing residential units, on traffic volumes,
 demand for recreational and other public services, school facilities, and any other related
                                                                                                                      NATURAL
 effects. The assessment shall also include recommendations to amend existing General
 Plan goals, policies, and programs or add new goals, policies, or programs to address iden-
                                                                                                                   ENVIRONEMENT
 tified impacts as necessary, consistent with the overall goals and community values of the
 General Plan.
                                                             Mill Valley Demographics
                                                                                                                   CLIMATE
Trends in
                                                                                                                   ACTION
                                                             (2010 Census, Total Population of 13,903)
             #5           Older and younger
Land Use
                          generations
                                                                                                                    HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                   PUBLIC SAFETY
  •	 Mill Valley’s median age has increased
     from 41 in 2000 to 47 in 2010, which is
     significantly older than California’s median
     population age of 35.                                                                                           NOISE
  •	 Almost 19% of Mill Valley is 65 years or older,
     compared to just over 11% for the State.
  •	 Mill Valley also has a substantial young                           65 years and over (18.9%)                   GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                   ADMINISTRATION
     population with almost 25% of the community                        40-64 years (42.5%)
     18 years or younger.
                                                                        20-39 years (13.8%)
  •	 School-age population (5-18 years) has                             5-19 years (18.9%)
     continued to increase from 13% in 1990 to
                                                                        under 5 years (5.9%)
                                                                                                                    Citations/
     18% in 2010.
                                                                                                                   Appendices
                                                              Source: US Census data (2010)
                                                                                        MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       29

       LU.1-5 The preservation of existing housing stock is encouraged to maintain the diversity
       of housing in the community. Therefore, the consolidation of existing multi-family dwellings
       to reduce the number of dwelling units is discouraged. (Added March 2016)
   LU.2 Commercial Development
   Provide commercial services in a convenient, safe, and attractive environment that comple-
   ments the small-town character of Mill Valley, supports local business development and growth,
   and strengthens the sense of community.
       LU.2-1 Within the context of Mill Valley’s unique community character, allow the market to
       dictate the success or failure of particular types of businesses, rather than setting numeri-
       cal or other regulatory limits that express an official preference for one type of use over
       another.
   Local business store fronts in Mill Valley (left and right)
30

                                                                                                                            INTRODUCTION
LAND-2 | Downtown
                                                                                                                            LAND USE
Maintain downtown Mill Valley as one of the social, commercial, intellectual, cul-
tural, and entertainment centers of the community.
LU.3 Community Gathering Space
                                                                                                                            MOBILITY
Sustain a diverse array of functions—shopping, dining, services, community events, entertain-
ment, and recreation—that will continue to attract locals and visitors to the downtown area.
   LU.3-1 Establish a streamlined special events policy and process that allows for a wider
   range of events and sponsors on the Plaza and throughout downtown and expands the                                      COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                            VITALITY
   hours and activities that are permissible.
   LU.3-2 Encourage a complete and well-integrated mix of uses (including retail, food and
   drink establishments, services, arts and cultural venues, and residential uses) that will
                                                                                                                             NATURAL
   create an attractive, vibrant, and walkable downtown experience that does not detract
   from the essential character and charm of downtown.
                                                                                                                          ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                          CLIMATE
                                                                                                                          ACTION
                                                                                                                           HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                          PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                            NOISE
                                                                                                                           GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                          ADMINISTRATION
   Left: Mill Valley Market, in its current location since 1954
   Right: Formal permitted use of the Plaza. Comedy in the Plaza (top) sponsored by the Arts Commission and
   Wine and Food Festival (bottom, picture by Gary Ferber) sponsored by the Chamber of Commerce.
                                                                                                                           Citations/
                                                                                                                          Appendices
                                                                                               MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       31

   LAND-3 | Commercial Areas
   Maintain and enhance the City’s principal commercial areas (Downtown, Miller Av-
   enue, Highway 101, East Blithedale/Alto Center).
   LU.4 Good Neighbor Policy
   Address potential conflicts between businesses and residents in or adjacent to commercial
   areas by recognizing the need for responsible business operations and practices; by acknowl-
   edging that residents who enjoy the value and convenience of living in or near commercial ar-
   eas may also experience noise, odors, parking constraints, and other issues not typically found
   in traditional residential areas; and by recognizing that the resolution of any conflict with adja-
   cent residents should take into account reasonable concerns and consider the importance of
   maintaining a vibrant commercial area.
        LU.4-1 Establish specific, project-related good neighbor conditions of approval as part of
        granting Conditional Use Permits (CUPs). For those uses that may not be subject to a CUP,
        establish good neighbor policies by resolution of the City Council.
        LU.4-2 Encourage neighbors to use neutral mediation services to resolve potential con-
        flicts among neighbors for matters that may involve the City but do not relate to enforceable
        City regulations or conditions of approval.
        LU.4-3 Strengthen the City’s code enforcement program and annually report to the com-
        munity on the progress toward resolving outstanding code violations.
        LU.4-4 Establish clear and consistent “good neighbor” practices (e.g., for noise, litter,
        waste disposal, customer conduct, etc.) for all businesses operating adjacent to estab-
        lished residential uses and make sure that property owners, business owners, and resi-
        dents acknowledge those practices and the operational commitment they represent.
   LU.5 Coordinated Strategy
   Create and implement a commercial development strategy for the City’s principal commercial
   areas that makes the most of their distinctive locations, amenities, and uses and results in a
   complete and complementary range of goods and services in the community.
        LU.5-1 Establish regulatory and aesthetic standards to ensure attractive, pleasant, safe,
        clean, and accessible commercial areas and adjacent public realm by:
        •	 Updating the City’s sign regulations to make them consistent with changes in state and
             federal law and related case law, to ensure that they recognize and regulate new sign
             technologies where necessary, and to reflect changes in community values;
        •	 Updating the City’s zoning and regulations and development standards to maintain
             the distinctive mix of commercial uses, building setbacks, building heights, and other
             development characteristics of the principal commercial areas;
32

                                                                                                          INTRODUCTION
•	 Adopting commercial design guidelines using the guidelines in the 1989 General Plan
   (See Appendix D) for the four principal commercial areas as a starting point;
•	 Establishing and implementing commercial development and public improvement                            LAND USE
   standards (e.g., for sidewalks, street lights and furniture, landscaping, parking and
   circulation, traffic signals, etc.); and
                                                                                                          MOBILITY
•	 Encouraging public/private partnerships for long-term maintenance and improvements
   beyond public standards.
LU.5-2 Establish a coordinated network of pedestrian and bicycle amenities and safety
improvements, including sidewalks, bike lanes, seating areas, trash receptacles, and bike               COMMUNITY
                                                                                                          VITALITY
parking, that will link local businesses and customers.
LU.5-3 Encourage a complete and well-integrated mix of uses along Miller Avenue that will
create an attractive, vibrant, and walkable experience and gathering spaces consistent
                                                                                                           NATURAL
with the adopted Miller Avenue Streetscape Plan, and that continues to provide a range of
goods and services that meet “everyday” local needs (e.g., auto repair, medical services,
                                                                                                        ENVIRONEMENT
recreation and fitness, etc.).
LU.5-4 Encourage property owners in the East Blithedale/Alto Center commercial area to
improve and modernize existing facilities so as to provide safe and efficient multi-modal
access and circulation and attract major community-serving tenants.                                     CLIMATE
                                                                                                        ACTION
LU.5-5 Work with the property owners along the highly visible Highway 101 commercial
area to enhance its appearance and connection to Mill Valley and to continue to attract
                                                                                                         HAZARDS &
local and regional office and business uses.
                                                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                          NOISE
                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                        ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                         Citations/
                                                                                                        Appendices
Pedestrian Crossing at Miller Avenue at LaGoma
                                                                             MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       33

   LAND-4 | Historic & Archaeological Resources
   Identify, preserve, and protect potential and listed historic and archeological re-
   sources Citywide.
   LU.6 Resources Inventory
   Work with the Mill Valley Historical Society to develop and implement a comprehensive inven-
   tory of potential historic and archeological resources.
       LU.6-1 Create a Mill Valley Historic Resources Inventory that includes a community-wide
       survey of property types and historic, architectural, or cultural contributions and an evalu-
       ation of the integrity and significance of these resources.
       LU.6-2 Make the inventory available to the public, City staff, and decision-makers and
       incorporate historic preservation considerations into the City’s decision-making process.
   LU.7 Protection of Historic and Cultural Resources
   Protect the historical and cultural value, architectural appearance, aesthetics, and unique
   character of historic and cultural resources.
       LU.7-1 Adopt and implement a historic and cultural preservation ordinance that could
       include regulations and procedures to address:
       •	 Standards and process for review of proposed additions and/or deletions to potential
            or listed resources;
       •	 The creation of a Historic Preservation Advisory Commission that includes the repre-
            sentation of both historic and cultural resource interests;
       The Outdoor Art Club (One West Blithedale). This building was added to the National Register of Historic
       Places in 1978. The building was designed in 1904 by the internationally known American architect Bernard
       Maybeck and is recognized for its unusual roof truss system and Maybeck’s creative use of natural materials.
34

                                                                                                                               INTRODUCTION
   •	 Establishment of a process for consultation on and the recovery and treatment of cul-
      tural resources before commencing construction activities in areas where cultural re-
                                                                                                                               LAND USE
      sources may be present; and
   •	 Definition of owner responsibilities for care and maintenance of designated historic
      properties to prevent demolition by neglect.
   LU.7-2 Establish regulations to postpone the demolition of potential or listed historic or                                  MOBILITY
   cultural resources while other alternatives are considered.
                                                                                                                             COMMUNITY
   LU.7-3 Establish development guidelines and standards that are consistent with the char-
   acter and significance of designated historic districts, landmarks, or neighborhoods.
                                                                                                                               VITALITY
   LU.7-4 Require reasonable efforts to salvage architectural elements that would otherwise
   be destroyed.
LU.8 Education and Appreciation                                                                                                 NATURAL
                                                                                                                             ENVIRONEMENT
Promote education about and greater appreciation of historic preservation and efforts to pro-
tect historic and cultural resources.
   LU.8-1 Seek private funding and grants in support of historic and cultural preservation.
                                                                                                                             CLIMATE
   LU.8-2 Promote the benefits of owning a historic property.                                                                ACTION
   LU.8-3 Promote heritage education in local schools.
   LU.8-4 Establish an awards program for local historic and cultural preservation efforts.                                   HAZARDS &
   LU.8-5 Establish guided or self-guided tours of local historic and cultural resources, dis-                               PUBLIC SAFETY
   tricts, and neighborhoods.
                                                                                                                               NOISE
                                                                                                                              GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                             ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                                              Citations/
                                                                                                                             Appendices
   The Carriage House, 230 Miller Avenue, originally built in 1895. On the left, a photograph from 1974.
                                                                                                  MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       35

   LAND-5 | Sphere of Influence & Annexation
   Maintain a Sphere of Influence for Mill Valley that supports the efficient provision of
   services and a logical City boundary (see Figure 2.5).
   LU.9 Coordination with LAFCO
   Work with the Marin County Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) and other affected
   agencies to resolve issues related to the efficient provision of services or related boundary is-
   sues.
       LU.9-1 Consider amending the City’s boundaries in those circumstances where annexa-
       tion is requested by residents, improves the efficiency of services, and is fiscally respon-
       sible (see Figure 2.5).
   LU.10 Provision of Services
   Discourage the provision of City services outside of the boundaries of the City.
       LU.10-1 Requests for City services to properties outside of the City’s boundaries shall be
       denied unless there are clear and compelling public health or safety reasons for those
       services.
       LU.10-2 In those instances where the City agrees to extend public services beyond the
       City’s boundaries, ensure that the full cost of the extension, including any and all legal, ad-
       ministrative, maintenance, and construction costs, will be borne by the applicant(s) and/
       or property owner(s).
36

                                                                                                                                                                    INTRODUCTION
                                           Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                 Æ
                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                    LAND USE
                                                                                                                  Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                    MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                  COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                    VITALITY
                                                               MILL VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                     NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                  ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                              Alto
                                                                                                E. BB
                                                                                                     LLIT
                                                                                                                           LTO
                                                                                                                        ININ
                                                                                                                                                                  CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                                                  ACTION
                                                                                                        ITHH
                                                                                                           ED              OO
                                                                                                             EADLE           ALA
                                                                                                                               TO
                                                                                                                 AL
                                                                                                                   E   C
                                                                                                                       CAAM
                                                                                                                          M
                                                                              M
               Muir Woods Park                                                  LEI
                                                                              ILM
                                                                                   LRL
                                                                                   EAR
                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                                                   HAZARDS &
                                                                                        LEU
                                                                                    VAEV
                                                                  Homestead
                                                                                                                                                                  PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                     Strawberry
Mill Valley General Plan                                                                                                                                            NOISE
Figure 2.5: Sphere of Influence                                                                                                     Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                   GENERAL PLAN
          City Boundary                         Highway
          Sphere of Inﬂuence                    Roads
                                                                                                                                                                  ADMINISTRATION
                                                Arterial
                               0.5 Miles
[
      0          0.25                           Source: Marin Map, 2012
                                                                                                                                                                   Citations/
                                                                                                                                                                  Appendices
                                                                                                                              MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                37

Mobilit
                                                                                                                                          INTRODUCTION
Purpose
All California cities and counties are required to address circulation                                                                    LAND USE
in their General Plans. As set forth in state law, the mandatory
Circulation Element must consider the topics listed in Table 3.1.
In the MV2040 General Plan, the term “mobility” is used instead                                                                           MOBILITY
of “circulation.” Mobility is defined as “the ability to move about,”
and that is the focus of this element of the General Plan. It
                                                                                                                                        COMMUNITY
describes Mill Valley’s existing roadway, pedestrian and bicycle,
transit and parking conditions; provides forecasts of future multi-
modal transportation circulation needs; and also considers the                                                                            VITALITY
variety of travel purposes in Mill Valley, including home-to-work
trips and non-work travel such as for shopping, educational, and                       Miller Avenue at Camino Alto
                                                                                                                                           NATURAL
recreational purposes. The Mobility Element responds to both
current and near-term future mobility needs in Mill Valley by
                                                                                                                                        ENVIRONEMENT
including goals, policies, and programs to improve the roadway
network and address parking supply and demand; transit service
and patronage; bikeways; pedestrian steps, lanes, and paths; and
truck routes.
                                                                                                                                        CLIMATE
The Mobility Element outlines a comprehensive “Complete Street”
                                                                                                                                        ACTION
transportation strategy with goals, policies, and programs that pro-
motes the development of a convenient, efficient, attractive, and
balanced multi-modal transportation system. System improve-
ments and better management of the transportation system are                                                                             HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
recommended to make walking, bicycling, and transit use safer,
Table 3.1 | State Requirements for Circulation Elements
    Circulation Element Content Requirements
                                                                             MV2040 General Plan Provisions
                                                                                                                                          NOISE
      (Government Code Section 65302(b))
Major thoroughfares, including streets and roads      See Figure 3.1 and related data, policies and programs.
Transit                                               See Figure 3.5 and related data, policies and programs.
                                                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN
Transportation routes, including truck routes,        See Figure 3.2 (roadways, including truck routes), Figure 3.3 (bicycle routes),
bicycle and pedestrian routes, transit routes         Figure 3.4 (pedestrian routes), and related data, policies, and programs. See
                                                      also Mill Valley Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation Plan.
                                                                                                                                        ADMINISTRATION
Parking                                               See parking-related data, programs, and policies.
Balanced, multi-modal transportation network          See figures, data, policies, and programs collectively described above.
Shipping, truck or air terminals                      Not applicable to Mill Valley.
Major utility pipelines and transmission facilities   Not applicable to Mill Valley.
                                                                                                                                         Citations/
Railroads                                             Not applicable to Mill Valley.
Navigable waterways                                   Not applicable to Mill Valley.
                                                                                                                                        Appendices
                                                                                                    MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                39

                                                    more attractive, and more efficient forms of transportation, while
                                                    also addressing the needs of motor vehicle drivers. This system
                                                    should improve mobility for Mill Valley residents by investing in
                                                    transportation infrastructure, providing viable alternatives to the
                                                    automobile, and managing congestion to improve travel times and
                                                    choices. Future road improvements to enhance the connectivity of
                                                    the transportation network will need to be balanced with goals of
                                                    protecting community character and environmental resources.
                                                    The Mobility Element is closely linked to the Land Use Element,
Miller Avenue at La Goma (1950’s)                   with future conditions for the year 2035 based upon development
Source: Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little assumptions as described in the Land Use Element. Projections
History Room
                                                    of future conditions are theoretical in nature; they forecast in-
Photographer: Ken Molino
                                                    creased traffic volumes but do not take into account development
                                                    constraints such as steep slopes, existing land ownerships, or the
                                                    presence of wetlands. Travel demand forecasts have been used as
       JUST THE FACTS                               a planning tool based on land use assumptions in order to gauge
                                                    potential transportation issues associated with future conditions
       A Picture of Mobility Trends in 2012
                                                    in the City.
     •P   rice of Gasoline
        $1.16/gallon in 1990
        $4.31/gallon in 2012                        Existing Conditions
     • National Fuel Economy Standard              Regional Transportation
        27.5 mpg in 2004                            Several state, regional, and local agencies play a role in Mill Val-
         35.5 mpg in 2012                           ley’s circulation. These agencies include the California Department
                                                    of Transportation (Caltrans); the Metropolitan Transportation Com-
     •A   verage Miles Per Gallon (Fleet)          mission (MTC); the Transportation Authority of Marin (TAM); the
        17mpg in 1990                               Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District; and the
        17 mpg in 2010                              Marin County Transit District (MCTD).
     • Parking Meter Rates                         Caltrans
        $.20 in 1990                                The California Department of Transportation, also known as Cal-
        $.75/hr. in 2010                            trans, manages California’s highway and freeway system. Just
                                                    outside of Mill Valley’s city limits, Caltrans owns and maintains
     • City Parking Revenues                       Highway 101 and State Route 1, the two primary regional routes
        $327,700 in 1990                            providing access to the City.
        $497,500 in 2010
                                                    Metropolitan Transportation Commission
     •G  olden Gate Bridge Toll
                                                    The majority of federal, state, and local financing available for
        $2 in 1990
                                                    transportation projects is allocated at the regional level by the
        $6 in 2010
                                                    Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC), the transportation
                                                    planning, coordinating, and financing agency for the Bay Area.
40

                                                                                                                     INTRODUCTION
Transportation Authority of Marin
                                                                                                                     LAND USE
The Transportation Authority of Marin (TAM) is Marin County’s Con-
gestion Management Agency and is responsible for programming
funding for all transportation programs in Marin County. It also
administers the Transportation Sales Tax Expenditure Plan funded
                                                                                                                     MOBILITY
by Measure A, a 20-year ½-cent sales tax. Mill Valley benefits from
Measure A-funded projects such as expanded bus service in Marin
County, completion of the Highway 101 carpool lane through San
Rafael, and the provision of regional and local roadway improve-
                                                                                                                   COMMUNITY
ments such as the Miller Avenue Streetscape Plan and improve-
ments that enable safer multi-modal access to schools.
                                                                                                                     VITALITY
The TAM Board includes representatives from each city and town in
Marin County, plus five members of the County’s Board of Supervi-
                                                                                                                      NATURAL
sors.
                                                                                                                   ENVIRONEMENT
Golden Gate Bridge Highway and Transportation District
The Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District oper-
ates the Golden Gate Bridge and two public transit systems: Gold-
en Gate Transit buses and the Golden Gate Ferry. Several Golden
Gate Transit routes connect Mill Valley with regional centers, in-                                                 CLIMATE
cluding destinations within Marin County and in San Francisco.                                                     ACTION
Marin County Transit District
                                                                                                                    HAZARDS &
The Marin County Transit District (MCTD) provides local transit ser-
vice within Marin County. Although MCTD has responsibility for lo-
                                                                                                                   PUBLIC SAFETY
cal services, it does not own any buses or facilities and does not
employ its own drivers. Instead, MCTD contracts with other provid-
ers, including Golden Gate Transit and Whistlestop Wheels, for lo-
cal bus and paratransit services.
                                                                                                                     NOISE
Circulation Characteristics
Roadway System
                                                                                                                    GENERAL PLAN
Mill Valley lies west of Highway 101, the major freeway connecting
Marin County to San Francisco to the south and Sonoma County to
                                                                                                                   ADMINISTRATION
the north. There are four freeway interchanges that connect the
area to Highway 101: East Blithedale/Tiburon Boulevard, North-
bound Redwood Highway Frontage Road, Southbound Redwood
Highway Frontage Road, and Shoreline Highway/Miller Avenue.
                                                                                                                    Citations/
                                                                       Centenial Documentary Photography Contest
                                                                                                                   Appendices
Mill Valley has over 61 miles of roadways. The City’s arterial road-   Source: Mill Valley Public Library
ways—Miller Avenue, East Blithedale Avenue, and Camino Alto—ac-        Photographer: Adam Brown
                                                                                   MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN            41

                                                      count for almost 10 miles of the City’s streets, with local streets
                                                      comprising the other 51 miles of roadways. “Arterial” streets (see
                                                      Figure 3.1) are higher-speed and higher-capacity roadways that link
                                                      the community to the larger regional roadway network. “Collector”
                                                      streets (see Figure 3.1) are streets that have relatively low traf-
                                                      fic volumes and provide circulation within and between neighbor-
                                                      hoods; they are intended for short trips to and from the arterial
                                                      network.
                                                      For many years, the City maintained a local classification system of
                                                      “A, B, C, and D” roadways based on various criteria such as right-
                                                      of-way status and physical condition. These criteria are no longer
                                                      applicable, and the system was discontinued in 2010, although the
                                                      City’s Department of Public Works still tracks maintenance expen-
                           Marin County has
                                 4   times
                                the state average      Trends in         #1
                                                                                   The automobile &
                                                                                   driving experience will
                                                       Mobility
                                    of hybrid car
                                      ownership                                    continue to change.
                                                         •	 By 2040, the number of hybrids and electric vehicles
            Marin County              State Average
                                                            will increase from about one percent today to nearly 50
                                                            percent.1
                                                         •	 In 2040, the average new car will get 48 miles per
                                                            gallon (MPG), compared to 27 MPG in 2010.2
                                                         •	 Mobile navigation software (e.g., Waze) that learns
                                                            from other users’ driving times to provide routing and
                                                            real-time traffic updates will allow drivers to avoid traffic
                                                            tie-ups.
                                                         •	 The trend toward autonomous (i.e., self-driving) cars is
                                                            expected to continue.
                                                         •	 Recent new cars include crash-avoidance and self-
                                                            parking technologies, and Google has tested completely
                                                            autonomous cars.
                                                         •	 Smart highways, such as those implemented in Seattle,
                                                            that have variable speed limits will be used to relieve
                                                            congestion and reduce accidents.
Hybrid vehicle in Mill Valley
42

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                INTRODUCTION
                                                 Fra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LAND USE
                                       Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                                          Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VITALITY
                                                                                                                                         Gl
                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                                                                                              D                     a
                                                                                                                                                                Vist
                                                                                                                                                                    Lin d
                                                                                                                                                r
                                                                                                                                                                         a Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NATURAL
                                                                            W
                                                                                     d                                                                                                                                           Underhill Dr
                                                                                 the
                                                                              Bli
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Alto
                                                                                   ale
                                                                            C or           e                                                                                                            m in
                                                                                                         ve
                                                                                         Av                 A                                               e
                                                                                                                                                          Av                                                o
                                                                             te
                                                                                                         ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                     r id                                                                                               Ca
                                                                              M
                                                                                    er
                                                                                                                                           Buen
                                                                                   ad
                                                                                               Eld
                                                                                                                                                a Vis
                                                                Summ                   ve
                                          Th                          it A           aA
                                            ro  ve n A      Tamalpai
                                                                           ve                                                                        ta
                                            ll A
                                          ve
                                          d      rto                s
                                       ca
                                        Lo mo                         ve                                                                                                                                         o Dr
                                   Ca s     ck
                                                                        A
                                                     r                                                                                                                                                         sc
                                                   eD  ve                                                                                           Manor                                                       Va
                                                                                     Be
                                                                                         rn
                                                                                            d                                                       Dr
                                                                                          ar                    Sunnyside Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dr
                                                                                                                             Carmelita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lom
                                                            M
                                                                ari
                                                                            Moli
                                                                                no                                              Ave                                                                                            Ashfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ACTION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ave
                                                                   on
                                                                                    Ave                                 Milwood                                         EB                                                         ve
                                                                                                                                                                          lith                                                   eA
                                                                    Av e                                                   St
                                                                                                                                                                              ed                                        eda
                                                                                                                                                                                   ale                                     l
                                                                                                                                                                                         Av                           i th
                                                                                                                                                                                           e                               l               g Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EB
                                                                                                                              M
                                                                                                                                ille
                                                                                                                Molin
                                                                                                                     o Ave        rA
                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ro                 Ki plin
                                                                                                                                                                                        ve                               e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HAZARDS &
               Muir Woods Park                                                                                                                                   aS
                                                                                                                                                                   t                  nA                              qu       Mo
                                                                                                                                                               m                    so                                              raes
                                                                                                                                                             Go S
                                                                                                                                                                             Nel               to                                       Dr
                                                                                                                                                          La      yca
                                                                                                                                                                                           Camino Al
                                                                                                                                                                      m      ore
                                                                                                                                                                                   Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Frontage Rd
                                                                                           Homestead
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       m ilton D                 Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               w o od Hw y
                                                                                                                                                                                                         lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                             rA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NOISE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Re d
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 3.1: Roadway Network
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Almonte
          City Boundary            Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ADMINISTRATION
          Downtown                 Collectors
          Highway                  Truck Routes
          Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Citations/
                           0.5 Miles
[
      0           0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Appendices
Source: US Census TIGER, 2012; David Parisi and Associates, 2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                                                     43

                                            ditures on so-called “B” roads to comply with annual funding com-
                                            mitments made by the City prior to 2010.
                                            Mill Valley’s roadway system is largely determined by the City’s lo-
                                            cation and topography. Because Mill Valley is nestled into the east-
                                            ern slopes of Mount Tamalpais, there are no arterial roadways that
                                            carry through traffic to the west, and Camino Alto provides the only
                                            connection to the north to Larkspur and Corte Madera. The pri-
                                            mary arterials into and out of Mill Valley are East Blithdale Avenue
                                            and Miller Avenue, which connect to Highway 101.
                                            Figure 3.1 illustrates Mill Valley’s roadway system, and Figure 3.2
                                            shows the City’s designated truck routes.
                                            Travel Modes and Commuting
                                            The U.S. Census provides information on commute patterns for
                                            the nation, as well as local counties and jurisdictions. Although
   MORE FACTS ...                           work-related trips are not the only trips generated in Mill Valley,
                                            census data can be used to illustrate travel choices and behav-
   A Picture of Mobility Trends in 2012     iors of residents. Table 3.2 compares commuter patterns by travel
   •	 Existing Bike Facilities              mode. Compared to the nation, state, region or county, the Mill Val-
       Total Bikeway mileage = 7.1          ley generally has a lower percentage of residents who drive to work
                                            (67.6 percent); a higher proportion of residents who walk, bicycle,
   •	 Existing Pedestrian Facilities        and take transit to work; and a substantially higher percentage who
                                            work from home (15.6 percent). Interestingly, while working from
       *	 Total Stair length in miles = 0.5
                                            home may reduce work-related traffic, it also may account for the
       *	 Total Lane and trail in           larger number of personal vehicle trips generated per household,
           length = 5.5                     as discussed below.
       *	 Total steps, lanes and
           trails mileage = 6               Table 3.3 shows a further breakdown of commute characteristics
                                            by vehicle type and travel time. While Mill Valley also has a lower
   •	 Golden Gate Transit Ridership         percentage of residents who drive alone to work when compared to
                                            Marin County, the Bay Area, the state, and the nation, the percent-
       *	 Avg weekday Golden Gate
                                            age of Mill Valley residents who carpool to work is also lower.
           Ridership: 1,994
       *	 # of Daily Bikes on GGT: 40       Existing Traffic Volumes
       *	 Total # Bike Commuter and         As previously discussed, Mill Valley’s topographic setting constrains
           Utilitarian riders: 228          the network of streets for through traffic. As a result, the heaviest
                                            traffic volumes occur on East Blithedale Avenue and Miller Avenue,
   •	 Total Daily Bike Commute              the two arterials that provide direct connection to Highway 101 and
       Trips: 456                           State Route 1. On a typical weekday, approximately 36,000 vehi-
                                            cles traverse East Blithedale Avenue to the west of Highway 101
44

                                                                                                                                          INTRODUCTION
Table 3.2 | Commute Patterns by Travel Mode
                                                                                                                                          LAND USE
                                             In-Vehicle                                         Public        Work at
 Geographic Area Total Workers                                    Pedestrian       Bicycle
                                      (car, van, motorcycle)                                    Transit        Home
Mill Valley                6,519                     67.6 %             4.5 %         3.0 %        9.0 %        15.6 %
Marin County            121,608                      75.7 %             3.3 %         1.5 %        8.5 %         9.9 %
                                                                                                                                          MOBILITY
Bay Area              3,522,748                      78.1 %             3.6 %         1.5 %        9.8 %         5.5 %
California           16,251,032                      84.7 %             2.8 %         1.0 %        5.1 %         5.1 %
U.S.               139,488,206                       86.3 %             2.8 %         0.5 %        5.0 %         4.2 %
Note: “Bay Area” constitutes nine counties: Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, Napa, San Francisco, San Mateo,
Santa Clara, Solano, and Sonoma. Percentage totals may not add to 100 percent because “other means” of
                                                                                                                                        COMMUNITY
travel not included in table.
                                                                                                                                          VITALITY
Source: 2007-2011 US Census Bureau American Community Survey, Workers by Means of Transportation to Work.
                                                                                                                                           NATURAL
                                                                                                                                        ENVIRONEMENT
Table 3.3 | Residents Commuting to Work by Driving
                   Mean Travel Time                        Drive
 Geographic Area                    Total Workers                       Carpool
                     (Minutes)                             Alone
Mill Valley                        25.5         6,519          61.6 %      6.0 %
                                                                                                                                        CLIMATE
Marin County                       26.5      121,068           67.0 %      8.7 %
                                                                                                                                        ACTION
Bay Area                         25.9       3,522,748          67.5 %     10.6 %                                    1990 Gasoline
California                       26.3      16,251,032          73.0 %     11.7 %                                 Prices (per gallon)
U.S.                             24.5     139,488,206          76.1 %     10.2 %
                                                                                                              $1.88
Source: 2007-2011 US Census Bureau American Community Survey, Work-
                                                                                                                                         HAZARDS &
ers by Means of Transportation to Work.                                                       Mill Valley
                                                                                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                      USA
                                                                                                              $1.68
Table 3.4 | 24-Hour Traffic Volumes
                                                                                                                                          NOISE
(Weekday & Saturday)                                                                                                  2010 Gasoline
                                                                                                                  Prices (per gallon)
                      Location                           Weekday        Saturday
                                                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                              $3.12
East Blithedale Avenue east of Lomita/Roque Moraes         36,000        32,500
                                                                                              Mill Valley
East Blithedale Avenue west of Camino Alto                 22,200        20,700
                                                                                                                                        ADMINISTRATION
East Blithedale Avenue west of Carmelita                   14,100        13,200
Miller Avenue west of Almonte                              19,700        17,400
                                                                                                              $2.81
Miller Avenue west of Camino Alto                          26,000        23,100                       USA
Miller Avenue west of Park Avenue                          12,900        11,900
Camino Alto south of East Blithedale                       22,300        19,900                                                          Citations/
                                                                                                                                        Appendices
Source: Parisi Associates, 2012.
                                                                                                          MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN          45

                                    and approximately 20,000 vehicles enter and exit the City via Miller
                                    Avenue. Table 3.4 summarizes existing (2012) traffic volumes on
                                    Mill Valley’s arterial roadways on weekdays and Saturdays. Figure
                                    F.1 in Appendix F shows the locations where the counts were con-
                                    ducted.
                                    Between 1950 and 1990, Mill Valley’s traffic volumes grew con-
                                    siderably. For example, traffic volumes on East Blithedale Avenue
                                    increased more than sevenfold during that period, from fewer than
                                    5,000 daily trips to over 35,000 (see Figure F.2 in Appendix F). Be-
                                    tween 1990 and 2000, daily traffic volumes along the City’s major
                                    arterial roadways rose less rapidly, increasing by 10 to 15 percent.
                                    Since 2000, traffic volumes on these key arterials generally have
                                    leveled off.
                                    Future Traffic Volumes
                                    In order to plan for the future, vehicular traffic volumes have been
                                    forecast for the year 2035 along Mill Valley’s arterial roadways and
                                    at key intersections. The forecasts were developed assuming ve-
                                    hicle trips generated from projected residential growth consistent
                                    with the City’s 2009-2014 Housing Element. The 2035 forecasts
                                    also assume that there will be some additional increase in “back-
                                    ground” traffic volumes associated with new non-residential devel-
                                    opment, other potential changes in land use, and general traffic
                                    increases of one-quarter of one percent (0.25%) per year. Alto-
                                    gether, these assumptions equate to about a six-percent increase
                                    in background (i.e., non-residential) traffic volumes over the next
                                    Table 3.5 | Projected 24-Hour Traffic Volumes
                                    (Weekday & Saturday, Year 2035)
                                                       Location                 Weekday Saturday Increase
                                     East Blithedale Avenue east of Lomita/
                                                                                 39,000  35,200      8.2%
                                     Roque Moraes
                                     East Blithedale Avenue west of Camino Alto  24,000  22,400      8.3%
                                     East Blithedale Avenue west of Carmelita    15,400  14,300      8.9%
                                     Miller Avenue west of Almonte               21,600  19,100      9.8%
                                     Miller Avenue west of Camino Alto           28,300  25,100      8.7%
                                     Miller Avenue west of Park Avenue           14,600  13,400    12.8%
Top: East Blithedale at Camino Alto  Camino Alto south of East Blithedale        24,000  21,500      7.8%
Bottom: Miller Avenue at Evergreen   Source: Parisi Associates, 2012.
46

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                INTRODUCTION
                                               Fra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I              LAND USE
                                      Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                                          Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VITALITY
                                                                                                                                       Gl
                                                                                                                                         en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NATURAL
                                                                                                                                            D                     a
                                                                                                                                                              Vist
                                                                                                                                                                     Lin d
                                                                                                                                              r
                                                                          W                                                                                             a Dr
                                                                                   d                                                                                                                                             Underhill Dr
                                                                               the
                                                                            Bli
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                 ale                                                                                                                             to
                                                                          C or           e                                                                                                              m in
                                                                                                       ve
                                                                                       Av                 A                                               e
                                                                                                                                                        Av                                                  o
                                                                           te
                                                                                                       ge
                                                                                                   r id                                                                                                 Ca
                                                                            M
                                                                                  er
                                                                                                                                         Buen
                                                                                 ad
                                                                                             Eld
                                                                                                                                              a Vis
                                                              Summ                   ve
                                        Th                          it A           aA
                                          ro  ve n A      Tamalpai
                                                                         ve                                                                        ta
                                          ll A
                                        ve
                                        d      rto                s
                                     ca
                                      Lo mo                         ve                                                                                                                                           o Dr
                                 Ca s     ck
                                                                      A
                                                   r                                                                                                                                                           sc
                                                 eD  ve                                                                                           Manor                                                         Va
                                                                                   Be
                                                                                                                                                  Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CLIMATE
                                                                                       rn
                                                                                        ard
                                                                                                              Sunnyside Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dr
                                                                                                                           Carmelita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ACTION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lom
                                                          M
                                                              ari
                                                                          Moli
                                                                              no                                              Ave                                                                                              Ashfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rd    Ave
                                                                 on
                                                                                  Ave                                 Milwood                                         EB                                                           ve
                                                                                                                                                                         lith                                                    eA
                                                                  Av e                                                   St
                                                                                                                                                                             ed                                         eda
                                                                                                                                                                                   ale                                     l
                                                                                                                                                                                         Av                           i th
                                                                                                                                                                                           e                               l               g Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EB
                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                              ille
                                                                                                              Molin
                                                                                                                   o Ave        rA
                                                                                                                                  ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ro                 Ki plin
                                                                                                                                                                                        ve                               e
               Muir Woods Park                                                                                                                                    aS
                                                                                                                                                                    t                 nA                              qu       Mo
                                                                                                                                                                 m                  so                                              raes
                                                                                                                                                              Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                                             Nel               to                                       Dr
                                                                                                                                                        La           Sy
                                                                                                                                                                       cam
                                                                                                                                                                                           Camino Al
                                                                                                                                                                             ore
                                                                                                                                                                                   Av
                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Frontage Rd
                                                                                         Homestead
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       m ilton D                 Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NOISE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               w o od Hw y
                                                                                                                                                                                                         lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                             rA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Re d
Mill Valley General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GENERAL PLAN
Figure 3.2: Truck Routes
          City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ADMINISTRATION
          Downtown
          Highway
          Roads
          Truck Routes
                          0.5 Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Citations/
[
      0           0.25                      Source: Marin Map, US Census TIGER, 2012; Parisi & Associates, 2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Appendices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                                                     47

                                                         22 years. These assumptions are consistent with the stable-to-low
                                                         growth in Mill Valley traffic volumes since 2000 (see Figure F.2 in
                                                         Appendix F).
                                                         Table 3.5 summarizes the estimated 2035 weekday and Saturday
                                                         daily traffic volumes along arterial roadways.
                                                         By 2035, daily traffic levels are estimated to increase by between
                                                         eight and nine percent along East Blithedale Avenue. Traffic vol-
                                                         umes are projected to increase by nine to ten percent along the
                                                         higher-volume segments of Miller Avenue, and by about 13 percent
                                                         along the lower-volume segments. Camino Alto traffic is estimat-
                                                         ed to increase by about eight percent. As noted above, about six
                                                         percent of the total growth is estimated to be general background
                                                         growth, i.e., not associated with additional residential development.
                                                         The above projections are based on Association of Bay Area Gov-
                                                         ernments (ABAG) population growth estimates, which show that
                                                         the City’s population will reach 14,800 by 2035. The projections
                                                         do not reflect the “demographic shift” population growth which Mill
                                                         Valley has been experiencing since 2007. Therefore, the popula-
                                                         tion should be continuously monitored. If the “demographic shift”
                                                         starts to significantly degrade the traffic conditions to the degree
                                                         that the levels of service identified in programs M.9-8 and M.9-9
                                                         cannot be sustained, then the goals, policies, and programs in this
                                                         element of the General Plan should be promptly reassessed.
                                                         Level of Service Definitions
Miller Avenue at Almonte                                 Level of service (LOS) describes the operations of an intersection
                                                         in terms of the average delay experienced by motorists using the
Table 3.6 | Intersection Level of                        intersection. Level of service is intended to measure traffic con-
Service Definitions                                      gestion based on the relationship between the number of vehicles
                 Control Delay per Vehicle (seconds)     traveling on a given segment of a roadway or through an intersec-
  Level of
  Service         Signalized           Unsignalized      tion during a given period of time and the estimated capacity of
                 Intersection           Intersection     the facility based on the number of lanes and other roadway and
      A                      < 10                   < 10 intersection design and operating factors.
      B                  > 10 - 20             > 10 - 15
      C                 > 20 - 35              > 15 - 25 The LOS concept was first developed for highways in the era of
      D                 > 35 - 55              > 25 - 35 rapid expansion in the use and availability of the automobile. It
      E                 > 55 - 80              > 35 - 50 was commonly held for many years that expanding the capacity
      F                      > 80                   > 50 of roadways and intersections (that is, adding more lanes) would
 Source: 2000 Highway Capacity Manual                    keep congestion in check and keep levels of service low.
48

                                                                                                        INTRODUCTION
Since the 1950s, level of service has been graded on a scale of
“A” through “F,” with “A” indicating fast speeds with no to slight
                                                                                                        LAND USE
delays and “F” representing capacity conditions with excessive de-
lays. According to the 2010 Highway Capacity Manual (produced
by the federal Transportation Research Board), for signalized inter-
sections LOS C is indicative of conditions when average motorist
                                                                                                        MOBILITY
delays are between 20 and 35 seconds, while LOS D equates to
average delays between 35 and 55 seconds. Average delays are
calculated by estimating the delays for all motorists using the inter-
                                                                                                      COMMUNITY
section; actual delays are usually lower for travelers along the main
arterial roadway compared to motorists waiting on the cross-street.
                                                                                                        VITALITY
Table 3.6 defines level of service categories for signalized and un-
signalized intersections. The level of service definitions for a stop
sign-controlled intersection are different from those used for a sig-
                                                                                                         NATURAL
    In 2001, the City of Mill Valley formed the Mill Valley Trans-                                    ENVIRONEMENT
    portation Committee, which prepared a study titled Solv-
    ing Transportation Problems in Mill Valley: A Community
                                                                                                      CLIMATE
    Responsibility. According to the study conclusions, Mill
    Valley’s traffic levels are a function of four types of traffic:                                  ACTION
    •	 Direct traffic caused by existing Mill Valley residents
       and businesses that are generating more vehicle trips
                                                                                                       HAZARDS &
       on a daily basis than in previous years.
    •	 Indirect traffic generated by residential and commer-
                                                                                                      PUBLIC SAFETY
       cial businesses (such as construction and remodel-                Solving Traffic Problems
                                                                         in Mill Valley:
       ing), activities, and other services like landscaping             A Community Responsibility
       and cleaning.
    •	 School-related traffic due to the high number of stu-
       dents being driven to and from school.                                                           NOISE
    •	 Local and short trips within Mill Valley made via driv-
                                                                                                       GENERAL PLAN
        ing instead of walking or bicycling due to an actual or
        perceived lack of good and/or safe walking and bicy-
                                                                                                      ADMINISTRATION
        cling routes or inclement weather.
    The Transportation Committee found that some neighbor-               January 2001
    hoods in Mill Valley were generating more than 11 vehicle
    trips per day per household. It was also discovered that             Prepared by:
                                                                         The Mill Valley
    26 percent of weekday morning peak hour traffic volumes
                                                                                                       Citations/
                                                                         Transportation Committee
    consist of school-related traffic.
                                                                                                      Appendices
                                                                           MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       49

                                           nalized intersection because drivers expect different levels of per-
                                           formance at signalized and unsignalized intersections.
                                           Existing Levels of Service
                                           Existing weekday AM, midday, and PM peak hour service levels
                                           were determined at 15 key intersections in Mill Valley (see Figure
                                           F.3 in Appendix F). Existing levels of service at these intersections
                                           are shown in Table 3.7.
                                           The “peak hour” identified in the traffic analysis is not just one
                                           hour, but a period of time during weekday mornings, midday, and
                                           evenings and weekend afternoons when traffic volumes typically
                                           reach their highest level in any given 24-hour period. The “peak
                                           hour” is a standard measurement and methodology used by traf-
                                           fic engineers when preparing a traffic study. The morning or “AM”
                                           peak is typically 6:00 to 10:00 AM; the midday peak is typically
                                           noon to 2:00 PM (sometimes later to account for school-related
                                           traffic); and the “PM” or evening peak is typically 4:00 to 7:00 PM.
                                           The weekend peak is typically measured in the afternoon between
                                           noon and 6:00 PM.
                                           Future Levels of Service
                                           Table 3.8 presents estimated year 2035 service levels for Mill Val-
                                           ley’s key intersections.
                                           Conditions at Signalized Intersections
                                           Comparing the LOS results from Table 3.7 (existing) and Table 3.8
                                           (year 2035), existing and future conditions at the Mill Valley’s ma-
                                           jor signalized intersections may be summarized as follows:
                                           •	 East Blithedale Avenue/Tower Drive-Kipling Drive. This inter-
                                                section currently operates at LOS C during peak periods and
                                                is expected to function at LOS D by year 2035. (Note: This
                                                intersection is under the jurisdiction of the County of Marin.)
                                           •	 East Blithedale Avenue/Lomita Drive-Roque Moraes Drive. The
                                                intersection currently operates at LOS D during peak periods.
                                                By 2035, it is expected to continue functioning at LOS D during
                                                peak periods.
                                           •	 East Blithedale Avenue/Camino Alto. The intersection currently
                                                operates at LOS D during peak periods. By 2035, it is expected
Miller at Camino near Alto Tam High School      to function at LOS E during all peak periods.
50

                                                                                                                                         INTRODUCTION
Table 3.7 | Existing Intersection Levels of Service (LOS), Year 2012
                                                                                                                                         LAND USE
                                                               AM Peak              Midday Peak             PM Peak
              Intersection                    Control
                                                            Delay    LOS           Delay    LOS          Delay    LOS
1. East Blithedale/Tower/Kipling               Signal          28.6       C          29.7       C          25.2       C
2. East Blithedale/Lomita/Roque Moraes         Signal          36.2       D           37.3      D          34.1       D
                                                                                                                                         MOBILITY
3. East Blithedale/Camino Alto                 Signal          48.5       D          49.9       D          48.4       D
4. East Blithedale/Elm Avenue                  Signal          11.5       B          11.5       B          11.3       B
5. East Blithedale/Carmelita Avenue            1-Stop          >50        F           >50       F           >50       F
6. East Blithedale/Sunnyside Avenue            2-Stop          22.1       C           27.4      D          22.3       C
                                                                                                                                       COMMUNITY
7. East Blithedale/Throckmorton Avenue         3-Stop          12.7       B          14.4       B          14.5       B
8. Miller Avenue/Bernard/Throckmorton          3-Stop          11.5       B          10.9       B          11.7       B
9. Miller Avenue/Sunnyside Avenue              3-Stop           8.9       A          10.8       B            9.8      A                  VITALITY
10. Miller Avenue/Locust Avenue                2-Stop          20.8       C          31.7       D          35.0       D
11. Miller Avenue/La Goma/Montford             4-Stop          30.0       D          38.7       E          48.4       E
                                                                                                                                          NATURAL
12. Miller Avenue/Evergreen Avenue             2-Stop          21.8       C          33.6       D          35.3       E
13. Miller Avenue/Valley Cir./Reed St.         2-Stop          25.4       D          31.9       D           >50       F
                                                                                                                                       ENVIRONEMENT
14. Miller Avenue/Camino Alto                  Signal          28.9       C          32.6       C          32.4       C
15. Camino Alto/Sycamore Avenue                Signal          34.6       C          40.4       D          33.1       C
Source: Parisi Associates, 2012
                                                                                                                                       CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                       ACTION
Table 3.8 | Projected Intersection Levels of Service (LOS), Year 2035
                                                               AM Peak              Midday Peak             PM Peak
              Intersection                    Control
                                                            Delay    LOS           Delay    LOS          Delay    LOS
                                                                                                                                        HAZARDS &
1. East Blithedale/Tower/Kipling               Signal          36.6       D          38.8       D          33.8       D
                                                                                                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
2. East Blithedale/Lomita/Roque Moraes         Signal          44.8       D          48.0       D          40.6       D
3. East Blithedale/Camino Alto                 Signal          56.0       E          55.0       E          55.7       E
4. East Blithedale/Elm Avenue                  Signal          12.4       B          12.2       B          12.4       B
5. East Blithedale/Carmelita Avenue            1-Stop          >50        F           >50       F           >50       F
                                                                                                                                         NOISE
6. East Blithedale/Sunnyside Avenue            2-Stop          25.7       D          35.1       E          26.4       C
7. East Blithedale/Throckmorton Avenue         3-Stop          14.7       B          16.5       C          20.3       C
8. Miller Avenue/Bernard/Throckmorton          3-Stop          13.0       B          11.8       B          13.8       B
9. Miller Avenue/Sunnyside Avenue              3-Stop           9.6       A          11.7       B          11.1       B
                                                                                                                                        GENERAL PLAN
10. Miller Avenue/Locust Avenue                2-Stop          30.7       D           >50       F           >50       F
11. Miller Avenue/La Goma/Montford             4-Stop          >50        F           >50       F           >50       F
                                                                                                                                       ADMINISTRATION
12. Miller Avenue/Evergreen Avenue             2-Stop          27.3       D          44.9       E           >50       F
13. Miller Avenue/Valley Cir./Reed St.         2-Stop          38.0       E           >50       F           >50       F
14. Miller Avenue/Camino Alto                  Signal          30.1       C          33.5       C          35.9       D
15. Camino Alto/Sycamore Avenue                Signal          35.0       D          43.3       D          33.5       C
                                                                                                                                        Citations/
Note: Level of service delay standards for signalized and unsignalized intersections differ ; see Table 3.5 for details.
                                                                                                                                       Appendices
Source: Parisi Associates, 2012
                                                                                                            MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       51
                                      •	 East Blithedale Avenue/Elm Avenue. The intersection currently
                                         operates at LOS B during all peak periods and is expected to
                                         continue functioning at LOS B by 2035.
                                      •	 Miller Avenue/Camino Alto. The intersection currently operates
                                         at LOS C during peak periods. By 2035, it is expected to func-
                                         tion at LOS D during the early evening peak hour.
                                      •	 Camino Alto/Sycamore Avenue. The intersection currently op-
                                         erates at LOS D during the afternoon school peak period and
                                         is expected to continue functioning at LOS D in this period in
                                         year 2035.  
                                       Trends in     #2          Attitudes toward the
                                                                 private automobile
                                       Mobility                  are shifting.
                       $4/               •	 The average annual vehicle miles traveled by young
                                            people (16- to 34-year-olds) in the U.S. decreased
                                            by 23 percent between 2001 and 2009, falling from
                       Gallon               10,300 miles per capita to 7,900 miles per capita.3
                                         •	 Between 2000 and 2010, the share of 14- to 34-year-
                                            olds without a driver’s license increased by 5 percent
could result in an additional 670
                                            (from 21 percent to 26 percent) according to the
million public transit passengers           Federal Highway Administration.4
                                         •	 A 2011 report from the American Public
                                            Transportation Association finds that $4-per-gallon
                                            gas prices could result in an additional 670 million
                                            public transit passenger trips, and $5-per-gallon gas
                                            could generate an additional 1.5 billion passenger
                                            trips.5
                                         •	 Car-sharing (e.g., Zipcar) is projected to continue
                                            to grow as an alternative to private ownership. Car-
                                            sharing membership in the U.S. rose by 117 percent
                                            between 2007 and 2009. About 4.4 million members
                                            are projected by 2016.6
Gas price in Mill Valley (May 2012)
52

                                                                                                                 INTRODUCTION
Conditions at Unsignalized Intersections
                                                                                                                 LAND USE
Similar to some of the above signalized intersections, four unsig-
nalized intersections are expected to continue to operate with high
delays for specific traffic movements, as follows:
•	 East Blithedale Avenue/Carmelita Avenue, Miller Avenue/Reed
                                                                                                                 MOBILITY
   Street, and Miller Avenue/Locust Avenue. Left turns from Car-
   melita Avenue onto East Blithedale Avenue will continue to av-
   erage over 50 seconds per vehicle during peak periods, as will
   left turns from Miller Avenue onto Reed Street and left turns
   from Locust Avenue onto Miller Avenue. The side-street left-                                                COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                 VITALITY
   turn volumes are low in comparison to the arterial roadway
   through traffic movements. Adding stop signs or traffic signals
   to control traffic on East Blithedale Avenue or Miller Avenue at
   these locations would result in a substantial amount of traffic
                                                                                                                  NATURAL
   being unnecessarily delayed, and could potentially divert some
   traffic to neighborhood streets to bypass new traffic controls.
                                                                                                               ENVIRONEMENT
   Thus, traffic control mitigation is not recommended.
•	 Miller Avenue/La Goma Street-Montford Avenue. The Miller
   Avenue/La Goma Street-Montford Avenue intersection, which
   has four-way stop sign-controlled approaches, consisting of a
   total of ten approaching vehicle lanes, currently operates at                                               CLIMATE
   LOS D during the morning peak hour and LOS E during the af-                                                 ACTION
   ternoon peak periods. The highest delays are experienced by
   traffic on the Miller Avenue approaches to the intersection. By
                                                                                                                HAZARDS &
   2035, this intersection is expected to degrade to LOS F during
   all peak periods. Installation of a traffic signal would improve
                                                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY
   the service level to LOS C or better conditions, including bet-
   ter service level conditions for through traffic on Miller Avenue.
   However, based on public input received during the develop-
   ment of the Miller Avenue Streetscape Plan, a traffic signal is
   not proposed at this location for the near future. The City will                                              NOISE
   continue to monitor the intersection’s operation and safety.
                                                                                                                GENERAL PLAN
Reevaluating 1989 General Plan Level of Service Policies
The 1989 General Plan included policies that required the City to
                                                                                                               ADMINISTRATION
maintain LOS C or better at all major signalized intersections except
for the East Blithedale Avenue/Camino Alto intersection, which was
to be maintained at LOS D or better.                                    Miller Avenue at La Goma
                                                                                                                Citations/
                                                                                                               Appendices
                                                                                    MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       53

                                                     In order just to maintain the 1989 General Plan level of service
                                                     policies for signalized intersections, immediate capacity enhance-
                                                     ments—that is, additional through and turn lanes— would be re-
                                                     quired at the East Blithedale Avenue/Lomita Drive-Rogue Moraes
                                                     Drive and Miller Avenue/Camino Alto intersections and, based on
                                                     expected traffic growth, additional capacity enhancements would
                                                     be required at the East Blithedale Avenue/Camino Alto and Cami-
                                                     no Alto/Sycamore Avenue intersections. Furthermore, unless traf-
                                                     fic demand decreases, application of the 1989 General Plan level
                                                     of service policies would require additional through travel lanes
                                                     along East Blithedale Avenue and added turning lanes on Lomita
                                                     Drive, Sycamore Avenue, and Camino Alto. These additional en-
                                                     hancements are physically and financially undesirable and would
                                                     dramatically alter the character of Mill Valley.
                                                     Policies that promote high automobile service levels ostensibly fa-
                                                     vor preserving motor vehicle level of service at the expense of tran-
                                                     sit, bicycle and pedestrian movements, and safety. There are sev-
                                                     eral quirks about level of service that contradict the development
                                                     and performance of the balanced, multi-modal transportation sys-
                                                     tem called for by this General Plan. For example, level of service
                                                     delay is measured at peak traffic hours. The concept reflects the
                                                     belief that a street or intersection should be designed for its most
                                                     congested hour(s) rather than configured to handle a wide range of
                                                     travel modes throughout the day.
                                                     Consistent with the community’s desire to create a sustainable
                                                     transportation network that balances the needs of all modes of
                                                     travel (see Goal MOBILITY-3), this General Plan revises the auto-
                                                     mobile level of service policy adopted in the 1989 General Plan to
                                                     accept LOS E+ conditions at the East Blithedale Avenue/Camino
                                                     Alto intersection and LOS D at all other signalized intersections.
                                                     Use of LOS E+, which would be unique to Mill Valley, would enable
                                                     average motorist delays of between 55 and 65 seconds but not
                                                     delays between 65 and 80 seconds. (LOS E is defined as average
                                                     delays between 55 and 80 seconds.) These conditions would be
                                                     deemed acceptable during the morning, after-school, and evening
                                                     one-hour peak traffic periods on weekdays, as well as during peak
                                                     periods on weekends. These standards align with other General
                                                     Plan mobility goals and policies that focus on the creation of a bal-
                                                     anced transportation network and support the concept of replac-
Pedestrian crossing East Blithedale at Tower/Kipling ing traditional motor vehicle LOS with a multi-modal assessment
54

                                                                                                                    INTRODUCTION
of capacity (see Program M.9-10). Multi-modal transportation is a
methodology that balances all modes of transportation, including
                                                                                                                    LAND USE
providing facilities for pedestrians and bicycles as well as vehicles.
Pedestrian and Bicycle Network
                                                                                                                    MOBILITY
Walking and bicycling are integral components of Mill Valley’s mo-
bility system. Maintaining and implementing Mill Valley’s non-mo-
torized transportation systems help reduce the number of vehicles
on the road. Mill Valley’s pedestrian network includes sidewalks
                                                                                                                  COMMUNITY
and a system of steps, lanes, and paths. The bicycle network in-
cludes both on- and off-street facilities.
                                                                                                                    VITALITY
Bicycle Routes
Mill Valley has three different classifications of bikeways. Class
                                                                                                                     NATURAL
I paths provide a completely separated right-of-way for exclusive
use by both bicyclists and pedestrians. Class II bike lanes, such as
                                                                                                                  ENVIRONEMENT
those on Miller Avenue, provide a striped lane for one-way travel on
a street or highway. Class III bike routes provide for shared use of
the vehicular travel lane, typically on lower-volume roadways.
Altogether, Mill Valley has approximately seven miles of bikeways                                                 CLIMATE
within the City’s boundaries. Figure 3.3 shows existing facilities as                                             ACTION
well as the proposed bicycle facilities identified in Mill Valley’s Bi-
cycle & Pedestrian Transportation Plan, which is incorporated by
                                                                                                                   HAZARDS &
reference as part of this General Plan.
                                                                                                                  PUBLIC SAFETY
The Bay Trail
The Bay Trail is an Association of Bay Area Governments project to
develop a 400-mile loop around the San Francisco Bay and its sur-
rounding area. The Mill Valley-Sausalito path, south of Sycamore
Avenue, is a segment on the Bay Trail, as is Sycamore Avenue be-                                                    NOISE
tween the Mill Valley-Sausalito path and Roque Moraes Drive. The
Bay Trail continues on Roque Moraes Drive to Highway 101 with a
                                                                                                                   GENERAL PLAN
spur off of Shelter Bay Avenue.
                                                                                                                  ADMINISTRATION
Pedestrian Routes
In Mill Valley, pedestrians walk on paved, Class I paths as well as
sidewalks. Existing Class I paths include the Alto Hill path, the Mill
                                                                          Mill Valley Click Off (1999)
Valley-Sausalito path, and paths adjacent to Sycamore Avenue and          Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission
                                                                                                                   Citations/
Camino Alto.                                                              Photographer: Jamie Mott
                                                                                                                  Appendices
                                                                                       MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       55

                                                           There are currently over 175 individual segments of steps, lanes
                                                           and paths (SLPs) in Mill Valley, providing over six miles of pedes-
                                                           trian access and connection throughout the City (see Figure 3.4).
                                                           Some of the SLPs date back to the City’s 19th-century beginnings.
                                                           Because of the City’s miles of hillside streets, the SLPs are espe-
                                                           cially important shortcuts for the many hillside walkers, including
                                                           children and others who cannot or do not wish to drive. The SLPs
                                                           function as the “sidewalks” for Mill Valley’s hillside neighborhoods,
                                                           providing a safe path of travel for pedestrians where one would
                                                           otherwise not exist.
                                                           The SLPs lend a special ambiance to the town and serve a number
                                                           of important purposes. Among other things, the SLPs provide:
                                                           •	 Direct access from the hillsides to key destinations such as
                                                              schools, transit stops, and commercial and recreational areas;
                                                            Trends in
                                                                            #3
                                                                                       Walking and biking will
                                                                                       continue to grow as a
                                                            Mobility                   preferred travel option.
                                                             •	 Between 2000 and 2009, 55 major U.S. cities saw
                                                                a 70-percent average increase in regular bicycle
                                                                commuters.9
                                                             •	 A recent national survey indicated that 60 percent
                                                                would choose a smaller home if it meant a commute of
                                                                20 minutes or less.10
                                                             •	 Two-thirds of survey respondents said that being within
                                                                an easy walk of shops and services was an important
                                                                factor in deciding where to live.11
                                                             •	 In 2010, the federal Department of Transportation
                                                                decreed that the needs of cyclists and pedestrians
                                                                must be placed alongside those of motorists in funding
                                                                transportation projects.12
                                                             •	 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention are
                                                                promoting “active transportation” systems that include
Pedestrian and bicycle bridge connecting local residents        walking and biking to promote public health.13
to the Miller Avenue corridor.
56

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        INTRODUCTION
                                                   Fra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I              LAND USE
                                         Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                                            Corte Madera                                                                                                MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VITALITY
                                                                                                                                           Gl
                                                                                                                                             en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                D                     a
                                                                                                                                                                  Vist
                                                                                                                                                                       Lin d
                                                                                                                                                  r
                                                                              W                                                                                            a Dr
                                                                                       d                                                                                                                                                 Underhill Dr
                                                                                   the
                                                                                Bli
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Alto
                                                                                     ale
                                                                              C or           e                                                                                                                  m in
                                                                                                           ve
                                                                                           Av                 A                                               e
                                                                                                                                                            Av                                                      o
                                                                               te
                                                                                                           ge
                                                                                                       r id                                                                                                     Ca
                                                                                M
                                                                                      er
                                                                                                                                             Buen
                                                                                     ad
                                                                                                 Eld
                                                                                                                                                  a Vis
                                                                  Summ                   ve
                                            Th                          it A           aA
                                              ro  ve n A      Tamalpai
                                                                             ve                                                                        ta
                                              ll A
                                            ve
                                            d      rto                s
                                         ca
                                          Lo mo                         ve                                                                                                                                                o Dr              Edna
                                     Ca s     ck
                                                                          A
                                                       r                                                   Mill Valley                                                                                                   sc                 Maguire Elem
                                                     eD  ve   Old Mill Elem                                                                           Manor                                                              Va                 School
                                                              School
                                                                                       Be                  City Hall                                                                                                      ½½            ½
                                                                                                                                                      Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CLIMATE
                                                                                           rn
                                                                                            ard                                                                                                                                                                                              ½
                                                                                            ½                     Sunnyside Ave                                                                                                   Dr    ½
                                            Mill Valley                                        ½                                                                                                                              ita                                Alto
                                                                                                                               Carmelita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ACTION
                                         Public Library                       ½             ½½                                                                                                                            Lom          ½
                                                                             ½ ½                             ½½                                                                                                                              ½                    ½
                                                              M
                                                                  ari
                                                                              Moli
                                                                                  no                                              Ave                                                                                              A½
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    shford                         ½
                                                                     on                                  ½           ½                                                                                                                     Ave                   ½
                                                                                                                              Milwood                                                                                              ½      ½
                                                                                      Ave                                 ½      St
                                                                                                                                                                          EB                                                            ve  ½                     ½
                                                                      Av e                                                                   Park Elem
                                                                                                                                                                            lith
                                                                                                                                                                                ed                                                   eA
                                                                                                                                                                                     ale                                          eda
                                                                                                                                             School                                        Av                                 ½
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l
                                                                                                                                                                                             e                                i th             g Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EB
                                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                                  Molin           ille
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ½
                                                                                                                       o Ave          ve                                                                                      Ro             Ki plin
                                                                                                                                    rA
                                                                                                                                                                                          ve                        Mill Valley   e
                  Muir Woods Park                                                                                                                                  aS
                                                                                                                                                                     t                  nA                          Community
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mo
                                                                                                                                                                 m                    so            to                           raes
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Camino Al
                                                                                                                                                               Go S                                                 Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                                               Nel                                                            Dr
                                                                                                                                                            La      yca
                                                                                                                                                                        m      ore                  ½
                                                                                                                                                                   ½                 Av                        ½ ½
                                                                                                                                                                                       e                                                     ½Public Safety
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ½ ½            ½
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Frontage Rd
                                                                                                                                                                          ½                           Mill Valley                           ½ Building
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Camino Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ½
                                                                                             Homestead                                                                                                         Middle
                                                                                                                                                                                                               School
                                                                                                                                                                                               ½                                                       Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m ilton D                    Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        w o od Hw y
Mill Valley General Plan                                                                                                                                                                     ½ ½
                                                                                                                                                                                              ½                Mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NOISE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lle
Figure 3.3: Bicycle Network
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                                                             Tamalpais Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                             High School                                                           Re d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ½
          City Boundary     Bicycle Facilities
                            Existing/Proposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GENERAL PLAN
          Downtown                          Class I Bike Path
          Parks                                 Class II Bike Lane                                                                                                                                             Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ADMINISTRATION
          Bay/Wetlands                          Class III Bike Route
          Landmarks                             Under Study
          Highway               ½               Bikeway Signs
          Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Citations/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Appendices
                             0.5 Miles
[
      0            0.25                         Sources: Mill Valley Bike & Pedestrian Master Plan, 2010; City of Mill Valley, 2010;
                                                Marin Map, 2012; US Census TIGER, 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                                                         57

                                                           •	 An alternative method of travel from an automobile;
                                                           •	 Direct access and routes away from danger when narrow
                                                                streets and roadways may not be readily accessible or usable
                                                                during an emergency;
                                                           •	 Venues for outdoor health and fitness activities, including the
                                                                annual Dipsea Race—the oldest trail race in America; and
                                                           •	 A sense of community, by connecting residents and neigh-
                                                                borhoods with pedestrian opportunities in areas not typically
                                                                served by sidewalks.
                                                           The City of Mill Valley and local volunteers continue to address
                                                           SLPs to maintain pedestrian connections throughout the City and
                                                           its hillsides. Some of the SLPs are owned in fee simple by the City
                                                           and some are City-owned easements. In some cases, the right-of-
                                                           way has become overgrown or been converted to gardens or other
                                                           uses by adjoining landowners, with or without City permission.
                                                           The Bicycle & Pedestrian Transportation Plan details the status of
                                                           the SLPs and identifies the top 25 SLPs selected for improvement.
                                                           The plan is updated on a regular basis.
                                                           Safe Routes to School
                                                           Mill Valley is part of the Safe Routes to School Program, which fo-
                                                           cuses on reducing school area congestion and encouraging healthy
                                                           exercise and transportation habits among school- age children.
                                                           This program has been very successful in both receiving funding
                                                           and completing important projects aimed at education, bicycle and
                                                           pedestrian facility improvements, incentives, and safety enhance-
                                                           ments.
                                                           Transit Network
                                                           In Marin County, there is local and regional bus service and ferry
                                                           service to San Francisco. Table 3.9 shows the number and percent
                                                           of Mill Valley residents who commute by bus or ferry to work com-
                                                           pared to the number and percent in Marin County as a whole, in
                                                           the Bay Area, statewide, and nationwide.
                                                           Mill Valley has a high percentage of transit commuters compared to
Top: Crossing guard on Miller Avenue.
Bottom: Local steps, lanes and paths network connect
                                                           California and the U.S. Having multiple transit options in the region
hillside residents to lower flatland areas, including com- and a large city like San Francisco likely influences the high public
mercial districts and schools.                             transit commute percentages. Since there are ferry commuting
58

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     INTRODUCTION
                                                    Fra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LAND USE
                                         Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Corte Madera                                                                                                  MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                    Gl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                      en
                                                                                                                                                         D                     a
                                                                                                                                                                           Vist
                                                                                                                                                                                  Lin d
                                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                    W                                                                                                a Dr
                                                                                             d                                                                                                                                                        Underhill Dr
                                                                                         the
                                                                                      Bli
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Alto
                                                                                           ale
                                                                                    C or           e                                                                                                                        m in
                                                                                                                 ve
                                                                                                 Av                 A                                                  e
                                                                                                                                                                     Av                                                         o
                                                                                     te
                                                                                                                 ge
                                                                                                             r id                                                                                                          Ca
                                                                                      M
                                                                                            er
                                                                                                                                                      Buen
                                                                                           ad
                                                                                                       Eld
                                                                                                                                                           a Vis
                                                                       Summ                    ve
                                           Th                                it A            aA
                                             ro                                   ve                                                                            ta
                                                          ve n A   Tamalpai
                                                      ll A
                                           d      m                        s
                                        ca     ck
                                                    ve orto
                                                                             ve                                                                                                                                                     o Dr
                                    Ca s
                                                                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Edna Maguire
                                                  Lo
                                            r                                                                                                                                                                                     sc
                                          eD                 ve                                                                                                Manor                                                               Va                    Elem School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CLIMATE
                                                                                             Be
                                                                                                 rn
                                                                                                Mill Valley
                                                                                                    d                                                          Dr
                                                                                                  ar   Sunnyside Ave
                                                                                  Old Mill Elem City Hall                                                                                                                                                                               Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dr
                                                                                                                                        Carmelita                                                                                                                                                                  ACTION
                                             Mill Valley                                                                                                                                                                                   ita
                                                                                  School                                                                                                                                                 Lom
                                          Public Library
                                                                   M
                                                                       ari
                                                                                    Moli
                                                                                        no                                                 Ave                                                                                                    Ashfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rd     Ave
                                                                          on
                                                                                            Ave                                    Milwood                                         EB                                                                   ve
                                                                                                                                                                                      lith                                                            eA
                                                                           Av e                                                       St
                                                                                                                                                      Park Elem                           ed                                               eda
                                                                                                                                                                                                ale                                           l
                                                                                                                                                      School                                          Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i th
                                                                                                                                                                                                        e                                     l                g Dr
                                                                                                                                                    veve                                                                                 EB
                                                                                                                         Molin                  r Ar A
                                                                                                                                o Ave     illeille                                                                                      Ro                   Ki plin
                                                                                                                                         MM
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ve                                     e
                  Muir Woods Park                                                                                                                                              aS
                                                                                                                                                                                 t                 nA                                    qu       M
                                                                                                                                                                                                 so
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                                              m                                             Mill Valley o raes
                                                                                                                                                                           Go
                                                                                                                                                                                          Nel                                                                Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Camino Al
                                                                                                                                                                     La           Sy                                        Community
                                                                                                                                                                                    cam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to
                                                                                                                                                                                          ore                               Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                  e                                                                Public Safety
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mill Valley                                 Building
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Middle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Frontage Rd
                                                                                                   Homestead                                                                                                           School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m ilton D                 Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Tamalpais High
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NOISE
                                                                                                                                                                                                      School M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    w o od Hw y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ille
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Re d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GENERAL PLAN
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 3.4: Pedestrian Network
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ADMINISTRATION
          City Boundary                  Trails                                                                         Highway                                                                                                         Almonte
          Downtown                       Pedestrian Trails                                                              Roads
          Parks                          Sidewalks
          Landmarks                      Steps Lanes Paths
                             0.5 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Citations/
[
      0            0.25                        Source: City of Mill Valley, Marin Maps, 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Appendices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                                                           59

                                                       options in Sausalito and Larkspur, Mill Valley has a relatively high
                                                       commute population by ferry (about 3 percent) compared to the
                                                       state and U.S. Mill Valley’s percentage of bus commuters (about
                                                       6 percent) is comparable to Marin County and Bay Area rates and
                                                       higher than California and U.S. rates.
                                                       Golden Gate Transit and Marin Transit provide transit service in
                                                       and around Mill Valley. Golden Gate Transit provides bus service
                                                       throughout Marin County, north to Sonoma County, south to San
                                                       Francisco, and southeast to the East Bay. Golden Gate Transit also
                                                       provides ferry service out of the Larkspur and Sausalito Ferry Ter-
                                                       minals. The ferries connect with the San Francisco Ferry Terminal.
                                                       Marin Transit provides local bus service in Marin County from Mill
                                                       Valley to West Marin. Table 3.10 summarizes the bus transit pro-
                                                       viders, service locations, bus frequencies, and time of weekday
                                                       and weekend service in Mill Valley. Figure 3.5 illustrates the bus
                                                       routes.
                                                       In 2002, the City of Mill Valley appointed a Task Force to determine
                                                       the feasibility of a citywide shuttle bus system. The Task Force con-
  Transit ridership
  has increased                                         Trends in         #4           Transit will capture
                                               28.7%                                   a larger share of
  nationally by                                         Mobility                       daily trips.
                                                           •	 National transit ridership increased by 28.7 percent
                                                              from 1991 to 2010. During the same period, federal
                                                              assistance applied to transit increased by nearly
                                                              74.3 percent.7
                                                           •	 Vehicle revenue miles increased by 18.1 percent
                                                              between 2001 and 2010 for all modes. Light rail
                                                              increased by 73.1 percent, commuter rail by 24.5
                                                              percent, and bus by 5.3 percent.8
                                                           •	 Real Time Passenger Information Systems, which
                                                              track bus and rail arrival times at stations and stops
                                                              and on smart phones, are making transit more
                                                              convenient and contributing to increased ridership.
Transit stop on Miller Avenue near Valley Circle
60

                                                                                                                                    INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                    LAND USE
                                                                                                                                    MOBILITY
Local transit access providing to the Mill Valley Community Center                                                                COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                    VITALITY
Table 3.9 | Residents Commuting to Work
via Ferry or Bus
 Geographic                                                       Total
                                                                                                                                     NATURAL
                     Total Workers      Ferry        Bus
    Area                                                        Ferry/Bus
 Mill Valley                6,519         3.2 %        5.8 %        9.0 %
                                                                                                                                  ENVIRONEMENT
 Marin
                          121,068         2.2 %        6.1 %        8.3 %
 County
 Bay Area              3,522,748          0.1 %        5.4 %        5.5 %
 California           16,251,032        0.03 %         3.8 %        3.8 %
 U.S.                139,488,206        0.03 %         2.6 %        2.7 %                                                         CLIMATE
 Source: 2007-2011 US Census Bureau American Community Sur-                                                                       ACTION
 vey, Workers by Means of Transportation to Work.
Table 3.10 | Bus Transit Routes Serving Mill Valley
 Provider Line                          Service                    Frequency        Weekday                 Weekend                HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                                  PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                   Every 5 to  5 AM - 8:45 AM
                4                    San Francisco                                                             NA
                                                                  30 minutes 3:30 PM - 9:00 PM
                                                                                                                                    NOISE
                                                                  Every 10 to
 Golden        17      San Rafael Transit Center / Marin City                   6:15 AM - 8:15 PM         8 AM - 10 PM
                                                                  60 minutes
  Gate
                                                                  Every 30 to
 Transit       219              Tiburon / Marin City                            7:30 AM - 9:15 PM      8:30 AM - 9:15 PM
                                                                  60 minutes
                                                                                                                                   GENERAL PLAN
                        San Rafael Transit Center / Sausalito       Every 60
               22                                                                  8 AM - 9 PM             8 AM - 9 PM
                                   Ferry Terminal                   minutes
                                                                                                                                  ADMINISTRATION
                                                                    Every 30
               36              San Rafael/Marin City                            7:15 AM - 5:30 PM              NA
                                                                    minutes
                                                                                                         9:15 AM - 9 PM
               61                Olema/ Marin City                 4 runs/day    7:30 AM - 7 PM
  Marin                                                                                             (March 15 to November 15)
                                                                                                                                   Citations/
  Transit                                                         Every 20 to                          9:35 AM - 6:40 PM
               66             Muir Woods / Marin City                                  NA
                                                                  30 minutes                          (May 5 to October 28)
                                                                                                                                  Appendices
 Source: Golden Gate Transit, Marin Transit
                                                                                                       MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       61
                                                      cluded that in order for a Mill Valley shuttle bus system to be sus-
                                                      tainable, it would best serve the community primarily as a school
                                                      bus shuttle connecting neighborhoods to Mill Valley schools. The
                                                      Task Force also found that additional weekday (midday and eve-
                                                      ning) and weekend service, along the City’s key arterial roadways
                                                      and connecting adjacent activity centers, would likely have only
                                                      marginal ridership. The Task Force recommended that the City
                                                      further engage the Mill Valley School District in exploring a part-
                                                      nership for a school shuttle bus system, develop a more refined
                                                      shuttle bus plan (consisting of routes, frequencies, vehicle types,
                                                      etc.), and explore alternative funding strategies.
Eastland Station at Miller and Sunnyside circa 1888
                                                       Trends in      #5          The SMART (Sonoma-
           SMART Route                                                            Marin Area Rail Transit)
                                                       Mobility                   train is coming.
  Cloverdale
                                         Phase 1          •	 The SMART train will provide new transit opportunities
                                         Phase 2             for Mill Valley residents, visitors, and workers, with
  Healdsburg                                                 the following two SMART stations less than ten miles
  Windsor                                                    from Mill Valley:
                                                                ◦◦ Downtown San Rafael SMART station,
                                                                     approximately seven miles/13 minutes away
                                                                     (with current bus connection to Mill Valley via
  North Santa Rosa - Coddingtown                                     Marin Transit Route 17)
  Santa Rosa - Railroad Square                                  ◦◦ Larkspur Ferry SMART station, approximately
                                                                     six miles/12 minutes away
  Rohnert Park                                            •	 According       to    Metropolitan    Transportation
  Cotati                                                     Commission (MTC) projections, 82 percent of the
                                                             employed residents in Marin and Sonoma Counties
  Petaluma - Corona Road (Phase II)
                                                             will travel to jobs within the SMART train district by
  Downtown Petaluma
                                                             2025. Meanwhile, the percentage of SMART District
                                                             commuters going to jobs in San Francisco will drop
  Novato - Atherton                                          to about 9 percent (from 14 percent in 2000).14
  Novato - Hamilton                                       •	 Each time an individual chooses to ride the SMART
                                                             train instead of driving alone, his or her carbon
  Marin Civic Center                                         emissions will be reduced by 70 percent.15
  Downtown San Rafael
  Larkspur Ferry
62

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      INTRODUCTION
                                                Fra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I                LAND USE
                                      Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                                             Corte Madera                                                                                             MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VITALITY
                                                                                                                                        Gl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NATURAL
                                                                                                                                          en
                                                                                                                                             D                     a
                                                                                                                                                               Vist
                                                                                                                                                                        Lin d
                                                                                                                                               r
                                                                           W                                                                                               a Dr
                                                                                    d                                                                                                                                               Underhill Dr
                                                                                the
                                                                             Bli
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Alto
                                                                                  ale
                                                                           C or           e                                                                                                                m in
                                                                                                        ve
                                                                                        Av                 A                                               e
                                                                                                                                                         Av                                                    o
                                                                            te
                                                                                                        ge
                                                                                                    r id                                                                                                   Ca
                                                                             M
                                                                                   er
                                                                                                                                          Buen
                                                                                  ad
                                                                                              Eld
                                                                                                                                               a Vis
                                                               Summ                   ve
                                         Th                          it A           aA
                                           ro  ve n A      Tamalpai
                                                                          ve                                                                        ta
                                           ll A
                                         ve
                                         d      rto                s
                                      ca
                                       Lo mo                         ve                                                                                                                                             o Dr
                                  Ca s     ck
                                                                       A
                                                    r                                                                                                                                                             sc
                                                  eD  ve                                                                                           Manor                                                           Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CLIMATE
                                                                                    Be
                                                                                        rn
                                                                                           d                                                       Dr
                                                                                         ar                    Sunnyside Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dr
                                                                                                                            Carmelita                                                                                                                                                               ACTION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lom
                                                           M
                                                               ari
                                                                           Moli
                                                                               no                                              Ave                                                                                                Ashfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rd    Ave
                                                                  on
                                                                                   Ave                                 Milwood                                           EB                                                           ve
                                                                                                                                                                            lith                                                    eA
                                                                   Av e                                                   St
                                                                                                                                                                                ed                                         eda
                                                                                                                                                                                      ale                                     l
                                                                                                                                                                                            Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i th
                                                                                                                                                                                              e                               l               g Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EB
                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                               ille
                                                                                                               Molin
                                                                                                                    o Ave        rA
                                                                                                                                   ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ro                 Ki plin
                                                                                                                                                                                           ve                               e
               Muir Woods Park                                                                                                                                       aS
                                                                                                                                                                       t                 nA                              qu       Mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                                                       so                                              raes
                                                                                                                                                               G   om           Nel               to                                       Dr
                                                                                                                                                         La             Sy
                                                                                                                                                                          cam
                                                                                                                                                                                              Camino Al
                                                                                                                                                                                ore
                                                                                                                                                                                      Av
                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Frontage Rd
                                                                                          Homestead
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          m ilton D                   Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NOISE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    w o od Hw y
                                                                                                                                                                                                            lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                rA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Seminary Dr.                   Re d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Park & Ride
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P                     P Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GENERAL PLAN
Mill Valley General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Center
Figure 3.5. Transit Network
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ADMINISTRATION
          City Boundary          Marin Transit Routes 17 and 22                                                                                                                                   Almonte                                                                            Pohono St.
                                 Golden Gate Transit Route 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Park & Ride
          Downtown                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                 Marin Transit Route 61                                                                                                                                                                                  Manzanita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Park & Ride
          Highway          P     Park & Ride Lots                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
          Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Citations/
                          0.5 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Appendices
[
      0           0.25                       Source: Marin Maps, US Census TIGER, 2012; David Parisi and Associates, 2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                                                            63

                      In 2009, the Transportation Authority of Marin examined the po-
                      tential for streetcar service for the Mill Valley-Sausalito corridor as
                      part of the Central and Southern Marin Transit Study. The study
                      concluded that typical densities that support higher-capacity tran-
                      sit, such as streetcar, appear limited in Mill Valley and Sausalito for
                      the next ten years.
                       Trends in      #6           Our thinking on how
                                                   to address parking is
                       Mobility                    evolving.
                          •	 Many communities are adopting off-street parking
                             requirements for new development (e.g., maximum
                             ratios, lower minimum ratios, shared parking, etc.) that
                             reduce the impacts on community character and cost
                             of development.
                          •	 The use of mechanical parking systems (e.g., parking
                             lifts) in developments is increasing in order to
                             accommodate parking while reducing costs per space.
                          •	 The use of variable pricing for parking (e.g., SFPark) is
                             expected to increase. This type of pricing sets higher
                             parking rates during periods of increased demand
                             to reduce congestion and create incentives for other
                             modes of travel.16
                          •	 The use of mobile parking applications for smart
                             phones and mobile devices that enable drivers to find,
                             reserve, and pay for parking remotely (e.g., SFPark) is
                             expected to increase.17
                          •	 The use of “guided parking” technologies (e.g.,
                             wireless sensing devices, in-car mapping devices),
                             such as Sausalito’s Streetline program, is expected
                             to increase. These technologies reduce congestion
                             by providing real-time information on the location of
                             available spaces.18
 Source: SFpark.org
64

                                                                                                                            INTRODUCTION
Parking
                                                                                                                            LAND USE
There are primarily three types of parking within the City: parking
for commercial use, residential parking, and parking for commuter
travel.
                                                                                                                            MOBILITY
Commercial Parking
Parking associated with commercial space varies based on the
type of business (e.g. retail, professional office, restaurant, etc.).
These parking requirements can act as a barrier (both positive and
negative) to businesses seeking to occupy commercial buildings                                                            COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                            VITALITY
that are for lease.
Public parking in the downtown commercial area contains four
parking categories: metered public parking lots, metered on-street
                                                                                                                             NATURAL
parking, employee parking, and residential parking. There are ap-
proximately 1,193 parking spaces in downtown of which 864 are
                                                                                                                          ENVIRONEMENT
public parking spaces and 329 are private off street parking spac-
es.11 Some areas near downtown have a residential parking sticker
program to allow residents to park on the street and be exempt
from parking time limits.
                                                                                                                          CLIMATE
Public parking along Miller Avenue from Camino Alto to Sunnyside         Mill Valley Residential Shopper Vehicle Permit   ACTION
Avenue consists of median and curbside parking that is unme-             Program
tered, but time limits are enforced. There are a total of 768 parking
                                                                                                                           HAZARDS &
spaces along Miller Avenue between Camino Alto and downtown.
                                                                                                                          PUBLIC SAFETY
A parking inventory study conducted in 2010 analyzed portions of
Miller Avenue (classified as “rooms”) and identified the following
numbers of parking spaces:
•	 Gateway (Camino Alto – Reed): 132 spaces
•	 Main Street (Willow – Reed): 278 spaces                                                                                  NOISE
•	 Parkway (Willow – Millwood): 192 spaces
                                                                                                                           GENERAL PLAN
•	 Passage (Millwood – Sunnyside): 166 spaces
                                                                                                                          ADMINISTRATION
The parking survey found that 76 percent of the 768 parking spac-
es were occupied during the peak parking period between noon
and 2:00 PM. Occupancy rates after 4:00 PM were less than 60
percent and continued to decline for the remainder of the day. For
                                                                                                                           Citations/
the entire street, the average length of time vehicles were parked
was 3.09 hours during the surveyed period.
                                                                                                                          Appendices
                                                                         Downtown parking meter
1
    Walker Downtown Parking Study, 2007.
                                                                                      MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                65

                                                    The greatest usage of public parking, on a percentage basis, is
                                                    within two Miller Avenue segments:
                                                    •	 Gateway: 80% during peak
                                                    •	 Main Street East: 79% during peak
                                                    Commuter Lots
                                                    There are four park-and-ride lots in the Planning Area: a lot on the
                                                    north side of Miller Avenue opposite Evergreen Avenue (42 spac-
                                                    es), the Manzanita lot near Highway and Shoreline Highway/State
                                                    Route 1 (303 spaces), the parking lot inside the Redwood Highway
                                                    Frontage Road interchange (37 spaces), and a small parking area
                                                    off on the corner of Miller and Almonte (approximately 15 spaces,
                                                    some of which are located within the County).
                                                    Residential Parking
                                                    Single-family residential development standards require two off-
                                                    street parking spaces, one of which can be a compact space. Multi-
                                                    family residential development standards require two off-street
Top: Commuter lot on Miller Avenue at Evergreen
                                                    parking spaces per dwelling unit plus ¼ of a parking space per unit
Bottom: Parking on residential street near Downtown for guest parking. Multi-family residential developments that are
Mill Valley                                         less than four units can utilize on-street parking to accommodate
                                                    guest parking requirements; projects with four units or more units
                                                    must provide guest parking on the property. Second units 700
                                                    square feet or less require one additional off-street parking space.
                                                    Residential parking standards currently do not address proximity to
                                                    transit and/or size of the dwelling unit(s).
66

                                                                                                                                  INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                  LAND USE
                                                                                                                                  MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                  VITALITY
                                                                                                                                   NATURAL
                                                                                                                                ENVIRONEMENT
Mount Tam Gravity Car on the Plaza with the Depot building in the background. The Mill Valley Depot Building was originally
constructed by Northwestern Pacific Railroad in 1929 as the passenger terminal for the electric and stream trains.
                                                                                                                                CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                ACTION
                                                                                                                                 HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                                PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                  NOISE
                                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                ADMINISTRATION
Gravity car approaching a tressle on the way to Muir Woods. From 1902 to 1929, gravity cars coasted from the top of Mount
Tamalpais down to Mill Valley through Blithedale Canyon (8 miles) or to Muir Woods National Monument (7 miles), forming a
                                                                                                                                 Citations/
very long roller coaster on the “Crookedest Railway in the World”. These unique wooden cars have all perished, but the wheels
& axels are authentic on this replica constructed by volunteers for the City of Mill Valley in 1990.
                                                                                                                                Appendices
Source: Mill Valley Historical Society, www.mvhistory.org, accessed March 2014
                                                                                                   MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN         67

   Mobility Goals, Policies & Programs
   The goals, policies and programs contained in this mobility element are intended to:
   •	 Foster safe and convenient personal mobility by foot, bicycle, assistive device, private ve-
        hicle and public transportation,
   •	 Reduce congestion,
   •	 Advances public health, and
   •	 Promote environmental sustainability.
   Mill Valley’s diverse topographical setting, constrained land use and roadway capacity, mild
   climate, and commuting patterns—among other characteristics—provide a framework for de-
   veloping transportation policies and programs that are geared toward modifying demand for
   additional vehicle trips by promoting alternative modes of transportation rather than adding
   vehicular capacity to Mill Valley’s roadways. This approach is also beneficial in reducing trans-
   portation-related emissions and creating a healthier and more efficient multi-modal transpor-
   tation system within the City.
   Highway 101
68

                                                                                                                           INTRODUCTION
MOBILITY-1 | Regional Transportation
                                                                                                                           LAND USE
Provide leadership within the region by influencing decisions to advance mobility,
safety, and sustainability for all travel modes.
M.1 Leadership and Coordination
                                                                                                                           MOBILITY
Take a leadership role in countywide and regional transportation planning and funding issues
that supports local needs and control while actively engaging with federal, state, regional,
and county transportation agencies; neighboring cities and towns; transit districts; and local
bicycle/pedestrian groups and organizations.
                                                                                                                         COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                           VITALITY
   M.1-1 Collaborate with the County and Caltrans, and work with the Transportation Author-
   ity of Marin, on transportation planning efforts that provide direct benefit to Mill Valley,
   including the Regional Transportation Plan and Highway 101 interchange improvements
   (e.g., at Highway 101/East Blithedale-Tiburon Boulevard).
M.2 Education and Training                                                                                                  NATURAL
                                                                                                                         ENVIRONEMENT
Ensure that staff, key decision-makers, and the community are well-informed of and trained in
new and innovative mobility policies and programs.
   M.2-1 Invite the Transportation Authority of Marin, Metropolitan Transportation Commis-
   sion, Golden Gate Transit, Street Smarts Marin, Safe Routes to School, local bicycle/pe-                              CLIMATE
   destrian groups and organizations, and other transportation agency-related staff and/or                               ACTION
   board members to City Council, Planning Commission, and Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory
   Committee meetings, as necessary, to present information on new mobility programs and
                                                                                                                          HAZARDS &
   initiatives.
                                                                                                                         PUBLIC SAFETY
   M.2-2 Provide budget support for City staff and decision-makers to attend periodic training
   sessions and conferences on transportation-related topics pertinent to Mill Valley.
                                                                                                                           NOISE
                                                                                                                          GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                         ADMINISTRATION
   Pictured above: A complete streets network that accommodates multiple modes of transportation, including               Citations/
                                                                                                                         Appendices
   bicyclists, pedestrians, vehicles, transit, and parking.
                                                                                              MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       69
   MOBILITY-2 | Sustainable Transportation
   Reduce transportation-related emissions by reducing traffic congestion and vehicle
   miles traveled while promoting the use of lower emission vehicles and non-automo-
   tive modes of travel.
   M.3 Leadership and Coordination
   Coordinate with cities and regional transportation leaders to identify, develop, and fund alter-
   native fuels and forms of transportation.
       M.3-1 Coordinate with the Transportation Authority of Marin, the County of Marin, cities,
       regional transportation leaders, and local bicycle/pedestrian groups and organizations to
       advance alternative fuel and non-motorized forms of transportation within the City and to
       identify, develop, and/or fund alternative transportation and transit opportunities within
       Marin County.
       M.3-2 Work with public and private schools, Marin Transit, and the Transportation Author-
       ity of Marin to offer better options for transporting students to and from school, such as
       carpooling, shuttle or school buses, Safe Routes to School, and staggered start times at
       local schools.
       M.3-3 Establish methodologies that are practical and acceptable to the community to
       track community progress in reducing vehicular emissions. Document and report periodic
       changes in vehicle miles traveled by local residents to identify and track potential changes
       in vehicular travel.
   M.4 Interconnected Transportation Network
   Foster an interconnected transportation system that allows for the safe and efficient transport
   of goods and people, as well as easy and effective transitions between modes of travel.
       M.4-1 Improve the efficiency and safety of the transportation network for all travel modes
       by using best available practices, design, and technology, such as traffic recognition tech-
       nology, transit and emergency signal priority, synchronized signal timing, improved signage,
       pedestrian crossings, bicycle detection at signalized intersections, and real-time transit
       data. Evaluate traffic signal timing and synchronization on a regular basis (every three
       years) to ensure that signals functioning at maximum efficiency for all users. Budget for
       regular upgrades to equipment and technology.
       M.4-2 Foster safe and efficient transportation links for cars, transit, bicycles, and pedes-
       trians from Mill Valley to regional transportation services and facilities, such as the imple-
       mentation of the Miller Avenue Streetscape Plan.
70
                                                                                                               INTRODUCTION
   M.4-3 Consider feasibility assessments for bicycle and pedestrian facilities and pathways,
   such as Alto Tunnel, Camino Alto, Horse Hill, and other possibilities that may provide safe
                                                                                                               LAND USE
   and convenient connections between Mill Valley and the rest of Marin County.
   M.4-4 Implement bicycle, transit, and pedestrian connections, pavement markings, and
   signage that increase the use, safety, and convenience of these transportation modes.
                                                                                                               MOBILITY
   M.4-5 Identify and improve local pedestrian and bicycle routes that link Mill Valley neigh-
   borhoods to high-activity centers such as schools, parks, the Community Center, City Hall,
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY
   the Public Library, and local business centers.
                                                                                                               VITALITY
   M.4-6 Determine the location, dimensions, and legal status of public rights-of-way, includ-
   ing streets and steps, lanes and paths, to develop appropriate standards for maintenance
   and improvements and to clarify right-of-way status, where necessary, for the benefit of the
   overall transportation network and the community.
                                                                                                                NATURAL
   M.4-7 Consider establishing a transportation mitigation fee, requiring all new projects to
                                                                                                             ENVIRONEMENT
   pay a pro rata share of needed multi-modal access improvements (a transportation mitiga-
   tion fee) in accordance with the burden created by such new projects. Once established,
   the transportation mitigation fee program would be periodically reviewed and updated on
   a regular and on-going basis to address multi-modal transportation impacts generated by
   new projects. (Added March 2016)                                                                          CLIMATE
                                                                                                             ACTION
M.5 Education and Technology
Encourage sustainable transportation and educate the community on ways to reduce vehicle
miles traveled.                                                                                               HAZARDS &
   M.5-1 Promote alternate travel modes (walking, cycling, public transit, ride sharing),                    PUBLIC SAFETY
   through education and outreach including provision of accessible information about bus
   schedules, pedestrian pathways, trails, the 511 Rideshare Program, and related vanpool
   incentive programs.
                                                                                                               NOISE
   M.5-2 Promote a sponsored bike share or informal carpool program for downtown and/or
   other location(s) in town.
                                                                                                              GENERAL PLAN
   M.5-3 Promote greater community participation in Street Smarts Marin, Safe Routes to
                                                                                                             ADMINISTRATION
   School, the Neighborhood Traffic Calming program, and similar safe driving and driver
   courtesy programs.
                                                                                                              Citations/
                                                                                                             Appendices
                                                                                  MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       71
   M.6 City Operations
   Reduce emissions of City vehicles.
       M.6-1 Make the purchase of high-efficiency vehicles a priority for the City fleet.
       M.6-2 Provide City employees with incentives to use alternatives to single-occupant vehi-
       cles, including flexible schedules, transit incentives, bicycle facilities, ridesharing services
       and subsidies, and telecommuting when practical, and encourage carpooling to meetings,
       events, and site visits.
   M.7 Low- and Zero-Emission Vehicles
   Encourage ownership of low- and zero-emission vehicles.
       M.7-1 Work with property owners to expand the number and convenience of low- and zero-
       emission fueling stations in the City.
       M.7-2 Use the City’s building and zoning codes and applicable development standards as
       an incentive for greater use of low- and zero-emission vehicles.
       M.7-3 Establish regulations that will accommodate innovations in alternative transporta-
       tion, vehicles, and fuels such as electric vehicle charging facilities and infrastructure, in
       public facilities and private development, including all new and redeveloped public and
       private parking lots.
   M.8 Compact Development
   Support new development and redevelopment of existing buildings through regulations and
   design guidelines that encourage alternative modes of transportation and/or discourage reli-
   ance on single-occupancy vehicle use.
       M.8-1 Modify the City’s parking regulations to allow the use of the latest parking “best
       practices” in concert with other City development standards and guidelines.
       M.8-2 Establish design guidelines and development standards that result in more efficient
       utilization of a project site for vehicle access and parking.
   MOBILITY-3 | Sustainable Transportation
   Create a safe and sustainable transportation network that balances the needs of
   pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, and transit users.
   M.9 Traffic Management
   Maintain a well-functioning roadway network that provides for the safe and efficient flow of
   vehicular traffic.
72

                                                                                                                          INTRODUCTION
M.9-1 Review and update commercial truck routes identified in the Municipal Code to pro-
vide for the safety and convenience of all facility users.
                                                                                                                          LAND USE
M.9-2 Collaborate with the County and Caltrans on Highway 101 interchange improve-
ments, including at Highway 101/East Blithedale-Tiburon Boulevard.
                                                                                                                          MOBILITY
M.9-3 Study ways to improve the flow of traffic and reduce congestion on major routes
such as Miller Avenue, Camino Alto (including at the entrance to the Community Center),
and East Blithedale Avenue. Monitor the effect of “demographic shift” population growth
                                                                                                                        COMMUNITY
on traffic conditions and levels of service and start remedial roadway improvements in suf-
ficient time to avoid frequent gridlock situations.
                                                                                                                          VITALITY
M.9-4 Enhance East Blithedale Avenue between downtown and Camino Alto to be a more
livable, comfortable, and safe environment for pedestrians, bicyclists, and those who re-
side adjacent to the roadway, while maintaining the vehicle mobility and access needs of
                                                                                                                           NATURAL
this arterial roadway. Enhancements to be considered would maintain the traffic capac-
ity of the roadway but improve existing conditions through tools such as roadway restrip-
                                                                                                                        ENVIRONEMENT
ing and curb extensions and educational programs that identify and recommend off-peak
travel options.
M.9-5 On East Blithedale Avenue between Camino Alto and the Highway 101 interchange,
improve mobility for vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians through:                                                     CLIMATE
                                                                                                                        ACTION
•	 Traffic signal coordination and timing;
•	 Separated facilities for bicyclists and pedestrians, where feasible; and
                                                                                                                         HAZARDS &
•	 Modification and/or expansion of travel lanes from Meadow Drive to the Highway 101
   South on-ramp.
                                                                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
M.9-6 Consider the use of the most cost-effective and environmentally sensitive landscap-
ing and pavement treatments when making modifications or improvements to the roadway
system.
                                                                                                                          NOISE
                                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                        ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                                         Citations/
East Blithedale at Tower Kipling approaching Highway 101   Repaving and restriping on East Blithedale
                                                                                                                        Appendices
on-ramps                                                   (2013)
                                                                                             MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       73

   M.9-7 Maintain a motor vehicle level of service (LOS) standard of “E+” at the intersection
   of East Blithedale Avenue and Camino Alto. LOS E+ means an average motorist delay of
   between 55 and 65 seconds during the morning (AM), after school, and evening (PM) one-
   hour peak periods on weekdays and during peak periods on weekends.
   M.9-8 Maintain a motor vehicle level of service (LOS) standard of “D” at all other signalized
   intersections in the City of Mill Valley.
   M.9-9 Consider replacing traditional motor vehicle-focused level of service standards with
   multi-modal considerations to ensure that roadway capacity is not overbuilt and all modes
   of transportation are considered when assessing traffic impacts and planning improve-
   ments.
   M.9-10 East Blithedale Avenue (between Elm Avenue at Park School and US Hwy 101) and
   Miller Avenue (between Park Avenue and Almonte Boulevard) are part of two City arterials
   providing access into or out of the City, and are considered critical corridors with respect to
   managing overall vehicular movement within Mill Valley. As such, specific provisions have
   been identified for new development fronting on these critical corridors that attempt to
   preserve or improve traffic operations and safety while also protecting significant environ-
   mental features and adjacent neighborhoods. As a component of the development review
   process, all new development in these corridors must satisfy the following criteria:
   •	 Parking design that emphasizes safety, minimizes traffic congestion, and does not
       negatively impact on-street parking, pedestrian, bicycle, and public transit circulation.
   •	 Access points and driveways connecting directly to the corridor shall be avoided or min-
       imized. Common driveways between adjoining properties shall be encouraged. When
       direct driveway access is proposed, it shall be located in such a manner to minimize
       interference with through traffic on the corridor, provide safe movements, and avoid
       increasing congestion or travel time delay.
   •	 Incorporation of roadway improvement(s) as mitigation, or as a condition of approval
       by the Department of Public Works established through the development review and
       approval process.
   •	 All new commercial development, and new residential development projects of four or
       more units, must submit a traffic study evaluating traffic operations for the surround-
       ing and adjacent roadway segments and intersections (roadway segments and inter-
       sections to be determined by the City’s Public Works Department), including but not
       limited to: (1) delay/queuing analysis (including intersection Level of Service and Level
       of Service for each turning movement); (2) vehicle counts for each turning movement;
       and (3) vehicle miles travelled of the affected roadway segment. The traffic study, to be
       reviewed and approved by the City’s Public Works Department will be used to evaluate
       the development project, pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, with the
       intent of minimizing and/or avoiding traffic congestion on these corridors.
   (Added March 2016)
74

                                                                                                                              INTRODUCTION
M.10 Bicycle and Pedestrian Access
                                                                                                                              LAND USE
Provide a consistent standard of pedestrian and bicycle access within the roadway network.
   M.10-1 Update encroachment policies and regulations to prohibit walls, fences, landscap-
   ing, utility boxes, and other structures that unreasonably impede roadway views, safety, or
                                                                                                                              MOBILITY
   access for pedestrians and bicyclists.
   M.10-2 Establish a sidewalk and public right-of-way inspection, maintenance, and repair
   program that includes a requirement for sidewalk installation, repair, or replacement where
                                                                                                                            COMMUNITY
   sidewalks already exist or where identified gaps in the existing sidewalk network can be
   closed.
                                                                                                                              VITALITY
   M.10-3 Coordinate with PG&E to underground utilities or, where possible, relocate utility
   poles to improve sidewalk accessibility. Explore assessment bonds or other financing op-
                                                                                                                               NATURAL
   tions to fund undergrounding costs.
                                                                                                                            ENVIRONEMENT
   M.10-4 Facilitate access for people with access and functional needs on public rights-of-
   way throughout the City. Continue to review all projects for access for the physically dis-
   abled and require the installation of ramps and curb cuts in accordance with Title 24 of the
   California Administrative Code and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1991.
                                                                                                                            CLIMATE
   M.10-5 Continue to renovate, repair and maintain the City’s steps, lanes and paths that
                                                                                                                            ACTION
   provide pedestrian connections to residential and commercial areas and complete emer-
   gency evacuation routes.
                                                                                                                             HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                              NOISE
                                                                                                                             GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                            ADMINISTRATION
   High visibility crosswalk being used by school   Bicyclist turning left at Miller Avenue at Reed                          Citations/
                                                                                                                            Appendices
   crossing guard in downtown Mill Valley
                                                                                                 MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       75

   M.11 Improved Pedestrian and Bicycle Network
   Establish and maintain a well-connected pedestrian and bicycle system that is accessible, easy
   to navigate, and comfortable for all types of users.
        M.11-1 Maintain an up-to-date Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation Plan to ensure eligi-
        bility for regional funding and coordination with the County of Marin and other Marin cities
        and towns.
        M.11-2 Continue to seek grants and other funding to support the implementation of the
        Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan.
        M.11-3 Use the Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan as a guide in setting priorities for bi-
        cycle and pedestrian improvements that are consistent with network and facility programs
        and improvements for other modes of transportation.
        M.11-4 Develop guidelines for crosswalk treatments to address pedestrian access and
        safety such as bulb-outs, paving, and striping, along with guidelines for using these treat-
        ments in both controlled and uncontrolled crossing locations.
        M.11-5 Develop a pedestrian and bicycle count program and collect counts every two years.
        M.11-6 Implement the Miller Avenue Streetscape Plan to provide pedestrian and bicycle
        connections between downtown and the County bike lane and multi-use path.
        M.11-7 Establish an ongoing repair and scheduled maintenance program for the City’s
        bicycle network and pedestrian system.
        M.11-8 Allow and provide information to establish bike parking at special events.
       Improvements to SLP 11 Mirabel           Volunteers making improvements to SLP 2
76

                                                                                                                 INTRODUCTION
M.12 Steps, Lanes and Paths Network
                                                                                                                 LAND USE
Maintain, preserve, and restore Mill Valley’s network of steps, lanes, and paths.
   M.12-1 The City shall preserve and restore its network of steps, lanes and paths. Official
   abandonment of any such easements or fee simple rights of way should occur only in the
                                                                                                                 MOBILITY
   most extraordinary circumstances and then only by vote of City Council.
   M.12-2 Provide adequate funding to keep the steps, lanes and paths network safe and
   accessible. Where appropriate, amenities such as benches, interpretive signs, and trash
                                                                                                               COMMUNITY
   receptacles shall be incorporated into the system.
   M.12-3 Encourage volunteer assistance in rebuilding currently overgrown or inaccessible                       VITALITY
   paths, when feasible, including by providing brush removal and/or modest site drainage or
   access improvements.
   M.12-4 Where new steps, lanes, or paths are created as a result of new development, the                        NATURAL
                                                                                                               ENVIRONEMENT
   project developer shall construct, and if appropriate, maintain the new facilities.
   M.12-5 The Bicycle and Pedestrian Committee, Parks and Recreation Commission and
   Emergency Preparedness Committee shall make recommendations for new priorities as
   the Top 25 SLPs projects identified in the Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation Plan are
                                                                                                               CLIMATE
   completed.
                                                                                                               ACTION
   M.12-6 Private landscaping improvements shall only be allowed through a revocable en-
   croachment permit and no structure of any permanence shall be built on or over the lane.
   Official abandonment of any such easement or fee simple rights of way should occur only                      HAZARDS &
                                                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY
   in the most extraordinary circumstances and then only by vote of the City Council.
M.13 Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety, Education and Outreach
Foster a common understanding among cyclists, pedestrians, drivers, and the police about the
                                                                                                                 NOISE
California Motor Vehicle Code and the rights and duties of all road users.
   M.13-1 Encourage bicyclists and drivers to safely share the road through enforcement of
                                                                                                                GENERAL PLAN
   applicable laws and adoption of ordinances such as the “vulnerable user protection,” by
   offering education and providing public service announcements through various media,
                                                                                                               ADMINISTRATION
   and through connections with local bike clubs and bike shops.
   M.13-2 Promote three-way collaboration among Safe Routes to School, the Bicycle and Pe-
   destrian Advisory Committee, and the Mill Valley Police Department to advance education,
   safety, and enforcement programs that encourage more walking and cycling.
                                                                                                                Citations/
                                                                                                               Appendices
                                                                                    MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       77

        M.13-3 Establish a page on the City website, linked to the Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory
        Committee page that provides evidence-based information for parents, educators, and the
        general public about bicycle and pedestrian safety and access.
        M.13-4 Ensure that educational content is regularly updated and consistent with current
        law, research and best-practice recommendations from professional in the fields of trans-
        portation and injury prevention.
        M.13-5 Evaluate and improve street lighting in areas of high pedestrian or bicycle traffic.
   M.14 Improved Transit Network
   Work with Marin Transit to support the continued development of and improvements to safe,
   efficient, and reliable transit service.
        M.14-1 Improve public transit infrastructure (e.g., lighting, benches, shelters, trash cans,
        safe and convenient bike racks and lockers, park and ride areas, news racks, real-time
        transit arrival information, etc.).
        M.14-2 Consider incorporating local art, heritage, and education into the design of transit
        stops.
        M.14-3 Coordinate with the regional transit providers and the Transportation Authority of
        Marin to pursue funding opportunities to expand local and regional bus routes and fre-
        quency.
        M.14-4 Meet regularly with Marin Transit to provide efficient and adequate commuter ser-
        vice for Mill Valley residents and employees.
        M.14-5 Support the creation of a “Safe Routes to Transit” program that is modeled on the
        same principles and practices of Safe Routes to School.
        M.14-6 Work with the Mill Valley Library, Community Center, and local businesses and
        hotels to provide pamphlets and maps to share information on transit options available
        within the City.
   M.15 Local Shuttle Service
   Study and plan a shuttle system that connects local neighborhoods, cultural and recreational
   facilities, services, and adjacent communities.
        M.15-1 Identify and consider the feasibility of a local shuttle operation through various
        program and/or funding opportunities, including but not limited to:
78

                                                                                                                 INTRODUCTION
   •	 Pilot projects;
                                                                                                                 LAND USE
   •	 Dial-a-ride and on-call shuttle service programs (providing service from neighborhoods
      to arterial streets);
   •	 Shared use of existing community shuttle services (e.g., Redwoods shuttle);
   •	 Joint use of shuttles, such as working with schools to use shuttles in between peak
                                                                                                                 MOBILITY
      times of commuter use;
   •	 Public, private, and subscription funding sources; and
   •	 Service connections with regional transit systems.
                                                                                                               COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                 VITALITY
M.16 Funding
Seek funding from all possible sources for continued improvements and ongoing maintenance
of roadways and bicycle, transit, and pedestrian facilities.
                                                                                                                  NATURAL
   M.16-1 Continue to use a long-term Capital Improvement Program (CIP) to set priorities
   and program funds for roadway improvements and maintenance.
                                                                                                               ENVIRONEMENT
   M.16-2 Continue to support the reauthorization of the Municipal Services Tax and con-
   sider other funding options in support of local transportation maintenance and operations.
   M.16-3 Use a “Complete Streets” approach to funding roadway improvements and main-                          CLIMATE
   tenance that result in safe and efficient travel for all users (vehicles, pedestrians, transit              ACTION
   riders, and bicyclists), and a regular and consistent standard of maintenance for the City’s
   transportation network.
   M.16-4 Pursue state and federal funding and other possible grant opportunities.                              HAZARDS &
                                                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                 NOISE
                                                                                                                GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                               ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                                Citations/
   Activities to promote walking and biking to school (left and right)
   Source: Safe Routes to School
                                                                                                               Appendices
                                                                                    MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       79

       M.16-5 Regularly update the “Road Impact Fee” to ensure that it adequately addresses
       funding for identified maintenance and improvements and keeps pace with changes in
       the cost of construction and materials. Establish development standards that require all
       new development, redevelopment, or rehabilitation to contribute a “fair share” to identified
       transportation network improvements through fees or actual construction.
   MOBILITY-4 | Parking
   Recognize on- and off-street parking as a finite resource and effectively manage
   parking demand and capacity for all uses.
   M.17 Parking
   Establish new parking requirements for vehicles and bicycles and parking programs that en-
   hance local economic vitality and manage parking demand and capacity.
       M.17-1 Study parking management strategies, including but not limited to shared park-
       ing, “unbundled” parking in commercial and multi-family residential projects, maximum
       parking requirements rather than traditional minimum requirements, payments in lieu of
       providing parking, reciprocal or shared parking opportunities, credits for on-site car shar-
       ing, and variable pricing of on- and off-street parking, to ensure adequate parking for cus-
       tomers, patrons, or employees during peak demand periods and community activities and
       events and to prevent “spillover” parking into residential areas adjacent to commercial
       areas.
       M.17-2 Establish parking enforcement programs and regulations that not only provide suf-
       ficient parking meter and citation revenue but also incorporate effective parking manage-
       ment strategies and best practices.
       M.17-3 Survey existing striping and curb cuts to locate opportunities for new auto, motor-
       cycle, and bicycle parking spaces.
       M.17-4 Provide adequate public, on-street disabled/accessible parking spaces and an ac-
       cessible path of travel to adjacent homes and shops.
       M.17-5 Provide secure bicycle parking downtown and near popular citywide destinations,
       including public facilities, schools, commercial and business centers, transit stops, and
       recreational areas.
       M.17-6 Create opportunities to allow shared and reciprocal use of public and private park-
       ing spaces that serve more than a single location or use.
       M.17-7 Investigate policies that could be used to strongly encourage the use of residential
80

                                                                                                                INTRODUCTION
parking garages for their intended purpose of vehicle parking rather than storage, work
space, or other uses.
                                                                                                                LAND USE
M.17-8 Evaluate the residential parking permit programs and fees for residential neighbor-
hoods.
                                                                                                                MOBILITY
M.17-9 Require new multi-family, mixed-use, and commercial redevelopment projects to
include secure bicycle parking and facilities.
                                                                                                              COMMUNITY
M.17-10 Establish regulations that will accommodate innovations in alternative transpor-
tation, vehicles, and fuels, such as electric vehicle charging facilities and infrastructure, in
                                                                                                                VITALITY
all new and redeveloped public and private parking lots.
M.17-11 Continue to work with public and private schools within Mill Valley, and local
schools with Mill Valley students, to identify incentives to reduce student driving and en-
                                                                                                                 NATURAL
courage carpooling (thereby reducing emissions, parking demand, and traffic congestion
at pick-up and drop-off).
                                                                                                              ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                              CLIMATE
                                                                                                              ACTION
                                                                                                               HAZARDS &
                                                                                                              PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                NOISE
                                                                                                               GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                              ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                               Citations/
Top Left: Bicycle parking at City Hall
Bottom Left: Parking enforcement in Downtown
                                                                                                              Appendices
Right: Signage for commercial parking
                                                                                   MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       81
Community Vitalit

                                                                                                                          INTRODUCTION
Purpose
Mill Valley has long been recognized for its vibrant culture, its eco-                                                    LAND USE
nomic well-being, and its integral relationship with its natural set-
ting. The continued vitality of the Mill Valley community will depend
                                                                                                                          MOBILITY
on its ability to continue to sustain all of these features. Doing so
will require a fiscally sound approach to governance that balances
revenues and expenditures while allowing the City to continue to
invest in the enhancement and maintenance of the community’s
                                                                                                                        COMMUNITY
physical assets and to create an attractive environment for busi-
ness and homeowner investment.
                                                                                                                          VITALITY
Mill Valley’s vitality is a function of not only its fiscal health, but
also the community’s physical health and cultural vibrancy. Main-
                                                                                                                           NATURAL
taining the community’s physical health means providing a safe
physical environment in which to live. It also involves support for
                                                                                                                        ENVIRONEMENT
initiatives that promote more active lifestyles, improved access to
healthy food, and safe and convenient services for all ages. Main-
taining the community’s rich cultural heritage means not only sup-
porting Mill Valley’s cultural institutions, but also promoting educa-
tion and cultural literacy that will generate tomorrow’s artists and
                                                                                                                        CLIMATE
cultural advocates.
                                                                                                                        ACTION
This Community Vitality Element discusses how the City will con-
tinue to support and promote a community that is fiscally, physi-
cally, and culturally healthy and vibrant. The “Existing Conditions”                                                     HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
section describes the context as it relates to each of these areas.
Goals and policies for community vitality have been developed to          Top: Starduster Orchestera at the Community
address how the City will continue to provide the support needed          Center
to sustain an even healthier and more culturally rich environment.        Bottom: Wednesdays on Stage Library Program
                                                                                                                          NOISE
Existing Conditions
Economic Well-Being
                                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN
Employment in Mill Valley
                                                                                                                        ADMINISTRATION
Mill Valley is generally a prosperous community with high house-
hold incomes and low unemployment. The City does not have a
particularly strong employment base, however, and would be clas-
sified as a “bedroom” community, with nearly half (46 percent) of
                                                                                                                         Citations/
all Mill Valley workers commuting to jobs outside Marin County. In
2012, Mill Valley had approximately 1,080 local businesses, the
                                                                                                                        Appendices
vast majority (67 percent) of which were quite small—employing
                                                                                       MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN             83

small business create                      four or fewer people. Only nine businesses employed more than
75% JOBS
                                           100 people. Altogether, local businesses generated 4,336 jobs in
                     of the net new        2010, or approximately half a job (0.54) per working age adult (age
                                           18 to 64) in Mill Valley.
in our economy                             “Management, business, science and art” type jobs are the most
                                           common (23 percent), followed by “health care and social assis-
                                           tance” (12 percent) and “retail” (11 percent). The majority of the
                                           community’s businesses provide goods and services to meet the
    JUST THE FACTS                         needs of local residents. Employment data from the 2010 U.S.
                                           Census indicate that the majority of local jobs (88 percent) are filled
   A snapshot of the Mill Valley Community
   (when compared to statewide averages    by people who live outside Mill Valley (i.e., only 518 local jobs are
   based on the 2010 Census)...            filled by local residents). These statistics, however, do not include
                                           the estimated 1,000 local jobs of residents who work at home.
   •	 We tend to be older and
      younger—the median age is 47
                                           Economic Vitality Initiatives
      with 19% of the population 65
      years or older and approximately     Since 2008, City-appointed economic vitality groups such as the
      24% of the community is under        Business Task Force and the Business Advisory Board have re-
      18 years of age.                     searched and advocated for various economic vitality initiatives in-
   •	 We are really well                   cluding marketing campaigns, parking management, and business
      educated—73% of Mill Valley          regulation streamlining. More recently the revived local Chamber
      adults have a bachelor degree        of Commerce, with which the City just entered a three-year service
      and 38% have a graduate              agreement, has helped the City balance the needs of residents
      degree.                              with those of businesses and non-profits contributing significantly
   •	 We are more similar than not—        to the economic, cultural, and social health and fabric of Mill Valley.
      nearly 90% of the population         These three groups have created a body of valuable research and
      identified themselves as “white”     analysis that will continue to inform local policies, priorities, and
      and 46% reporting being              implementation efforts.
      California natives.
   •	 We are more prosperous than          Tourism and the Arts: Drivers of the Local Economy
      most—Mill Valley’s median            Tourism and the City’s arts sector are major drivers of the local
      household income is $105,500.        economy. Together they support hundreds of local jobs, contribute
   •	 We have many individuals             millions of dollars in direct expenditures to the local economy, and
      living alone—33% of total 6,084      provide a vital share of the City’s tax base. The arts sector draws
      households in Mill Valley report     thousands of local residents and visitors into town each year to
      living alone (half of which are 65   patronize Mill Valley stores and restaurants. Mill Valley’s reputation
      years old or older).                 for excellence in the arts and its natural beauty work hand-in-hand
   •	 The community is relatively          to increase the community’s property values.
      safe—Between 1999 and 2010,
      the crime index declined 41
      percent.
84

                                                                                                                       INTRODUCTION
Fiscal Stability
                                                                                                                       LAND USE
Perhaps it is not surprising, given the community’s prosperity, that
the City has a history of being fiscally stable and well-managed.
The City’s revenues have increased 146 percent since 1990—from
$12.5 million to $30.7 million. The City’s operating expenditures
                                                                                                                       MOBILITY
have increased 194 percent between 1990 and 2012, from $8.7
to $16.9 million. Historically, the largest single line item in the
City’s budget has been for public safety—typically about 40 percent
of the budget. The second largest line item in the City’s budget
                                                                                                                     COMMUNITY
is parks and recreation, which has increased from 11 percent in
1990 to 21 percent in 2012. Between 1990 and 2012, the City’s
Capital Improvement Program has consistently budgeted between                                                          VITALITY
$2 to $3 million for public improvements, with half or more of the
budget being dedicated to street repairs/improvements.
Consistent with the high property values in Mill Valley, the City’s                                                     NATURAL
                                                                                                                     ENVIRONEMENT
primary revenue source is property tax, which contributed 38 per-
cent of the City’s total revenue in 2012. This is up 10 percent from
1990.
User fees are the second largest contributor to City revenues, con-
                                                                                                                     CLIMATE
sistently generating approximately 20 to 30 percent of the City’s
                                                                                                                     ACTION
revenue. Sales tax revenues have historically accounted for approx-
imately 11 percent of the City’s budget. Sales tax revenues grew
by 25 percent, an average annual growth of 2.8 percent, between
2000 and 2008, from $2.06 million to $2.57 million. The reces-                                                        HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                     PUBLIC SAFETY
sion caused a significant decline in 2009 and 2010, when sales
tax revenue dropped by a combined 25 percent, down to $1.94
million. The years 2011 and 2012 saw a recovery, with sales tax
increasing by a combined 21.4 percent to $2.37 million.
The City’s pension is administered under contract with the Cali-                                                       NOISE
fornia Public Employee Retirement System (CalPERS). The most
recent CalPERS actuarial report identified the total pension liability
                                                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN
for the City at $85.2 million with a funding level of 88 percent. The
CalPERS Board approved recent funding policy revisions intended
                                                                                                                     ADMINISTRATION
to achieve 100-percent funding levels by the year 2043.
Cultural Vitality
                                                                                                                      Citations/
The Community Vitality Element confirms the City’s commitment to
nurture, support, and celebrate the artistic and cultural resources
the artistic and cultural resources in the community and to provide      Mill Valley City Hall                       Appendices
                                                                                          MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       85

                                                    equal and abundant opportunities for broad artistic and cultural
                                                    engagement. Arts and culture give the community an authentic,
                                                    connected, and unique sense of place; contribute greatly to quality
                                                    of life; and serve as an important economic driver.
                                                    Community Center, Aquatics & Fitness Center, and Library
                                                    Mill Valley’s Community Center, Aquatics & Fitness Center, and
                                                    Public Library provide access to a wide range of cultural activities
                                                    and functions for the community. The Community Center includes
                                                    outdoor sports fields and two recreation buildings. The Community
                                                    Center and Aquatics & Fitness Centers host a wide range of public
                                                    and private events, including wedding receptions, children’s birth-
                                                    day parties, fitness classes, educational classes/lectures, public
                                                    meetings, art displays, and swimming and outdoor sports activi-
First Friday Library Program                        ties.
                                                    The Mill Valley Public Library is known for its beautiful architecture
                                                    in the idyllic setting of the redwoods and is an important cultural
                                                    center of the City’s literacy, artistic, and intellectual community. As
                                                    noted in Marin Magazine (September 2012), “Marin County librar-
                                                    ians agree that the future of libraries lies beyond books, regardless
                                                    of their format, and that each library must embrace its role as a
                                                    public center of culture, learning, community, experience and imag-
                                                    ination.” The Mill Valley Public Library provides access to books,
                                                    media, and digital content and serves an increasingly important
                                                    role as a physical space for people to gather, collaborate, create,
                                                    and invent in a variety of ways. Through innovative programming
Eggstravaganza at the Community Center              and creative collaborations, the Library is becoming an information
                                                    common—a natural evolution of the Library’s traditional mission.
                                                    The Library has prominently placed itself at the intersection of in-
                                                    spiration and invention.
                                                    Arts Institutions, Facilities, and Events
                                                    In the past century, Mill Valley has spawned and supported a wide
                                                    array of arts institutions, facilities, and events that have contrib-
                                                    uted to the City’s reputation as an arts destination. These include,
                                                    among others, the Marin Theatre Company, the O’Hanlon Center
                                                    for the Arts, Throckmorton Theatre, Sweetwater Music Hall, The
                                                    Outdoor Art Club, the Mill Valley Fall Arts Festival, the Mill Valley
                                                    Film Festival, the Mill Valley Arts Commission, the Dipsea Race,
                                                    the Milley Awards for Creative Achievement, the Mill Valley Cham-
Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission, 2009 Paint Off ber Music Society, and the Mill Valley Philharmonic. Mill Valley’s
86

                                                                                                                        INTRODUCTION
public schools provide extraordinary arts education thanks to the
                                                                                              Several
                                                                                                                        LAND USE
community’s commitment and support through KIDDO!, Tam High
United Music Boosters (THUMB), Patrons of the Arts at Tam High                                  major events
(PATH), Conservancy Theatre Ensemble (CTE) and the Academy of                                   attract
Integrated Humanities and New Media (AIM). The City also enjoys
a wealth of art galleries, visual and performing arts schools, and                            thousands
                                                                                of visitors annually                    MOBILITY
art providers.
Diverse artists and art forms are essential to a vibrant creative en-
                                                                                                                      COMMUNITY
vironment. Variety and invention are necessary to reflect and serve
our community’s wide range of artistic appreciation and to expand
                                                                                                                        VITALITY
artistic horizons. Cultural activities encourage community spirit
and a heightened appreciation for diversity, thereby strengthening
community cohesiveness. The provisions of this General Plan pro-
mote and encourage artistic diversity and free artistic expression.
                                                                                                                         NATURAL
Well-established and supported arts organizations instill civic pride
                                                                                                                      ENVIRONEMENT
and promote economic stability by fostering strong relationships
while allowing for growth and productive change through shared
experiences and open communication.
Arts education promotes creative thinking and academic achieve-                                                       CLIMATE
ment and helps people live successful, rewarding lives. Learning                                                      ACTION
about and participating in local creative endeavors also help to
forge meaningful connections that strengthen the community. Arts
                                                                                                                       HAZARDS &
education is a key way to continue to cultivate the City’s artistic
character.
                                                                                                                      PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                         Comedy Night in the Plaza sponsored by the
Artwork and performances in public places and in the physical            Arts Commission
environment, as well as in traditional venues, enhance the City’s
unique sense of place and encourage human interaction. Art and
artistry in the built and physical environment are encouraged in or-                                                    NOISE
der to enhance the City’s artistic identity and distinguishing beauty,
to integrate public and private buildings into the community land-
                                                                                                                       GENERAL PLAN
scape, and to ensure equal access to these artistic resources.
                                                                                                                      ADMINISTRATION
Throughout Mill Valley’s history, the City has been a magnet for a di-
verse array of established and emerging artists, including legends
in their industries. Increasingly, most local artists cannot afford to
live in town, and this undermines the artistic vibrancy of the com-
                                                                                                                       Citations/
munity. This Community Vitality Element, in conjunction with the
Land Use and Housing Elements, supports the creation of more
affordable live/work places for artists.                                 Fall Arts Festival                           Appendices
                                                                                         MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN         87

 Trends in
 Community                                      #1          Mill Valley has an active
                                                            arts and cultural life.
 Vitality
     •	 Mill Valley is not only an attractive place to live, it is a popular cultural destination for the region offering a
        wealth of events that attract thousands of visitors annually, including, among others:1
           ◦◦ Mill Valley Film Festival
           ◦◦ Dipsea Race
           ◦◦ Mountain Play
           ◦◦ Mill Valley Fall Arts Festival
           ◦◦ Mill Valley Shakespeare in Old Mill Park
           ◦◦ Mill Valley Wine & Gourmet Food Tasting
           ◦◦ First Tuesday Artwalk
           ◦◦ Summer Concerts on the Plaza
           ◦◦ Click Off
           ◦◦ Annual Comedy Night in the Plaza
           ◦◦ DjangoFest Mill Valley
     •	 The Mill Valley community supports an array of cultural institutions that provide and support world-class
        theater, music, comedy, film, fine arts exhibitions, and more in the community.  Notable examples include:
           ◦◦ Marin Theatre Company
           ◦◦ The Outdoor Art Club
           ◦◦ Throckmorton Theatre
           ◦◦ Sweetwater Music Hall
           ◦◦ Mill Valley Arts Commission/Milley Awards for Creative Achievement in Mill Valley
           ◦◦ Mill Valley Chamber Music Society
           ◦◦ Mill Valley Philharmonic
           ◦◦ O’Hanlon Center for the Arts
     •	 The Mill Valley community is deeply committed to arts education and donates well over $2 million annually
        to sustain top-quality arts instruction in the public schools through such organizations and programs as:
           ◦◦ KIDDO!
           ◦◦ Tam High United Music Boosters (THUMB)
           ◦◦ Patrons of the Arts at Tam High (PATH)
           ◦◦ Conservatory Theatre Ensemble (CTE)
           ◦◦ Academy of Integrated Humanities and New Media (AIM)
     •	 In addition, Mill Valley is home to numerous organizations and businesses that provide high-quality instruction
        in a wide variety of visual and performing arts for all ages.
88

                                                                                                                         INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                         LAND USE
                                                                                                                         MOBILITY
                                                                                                                       COMMUNITY
•	 Mill Valley’s creative atmosphere has long been a magnet for a broad spectrum of artists and arts
   businesses that further enrich the cultural environment.
•	 As in much of the Bay Area, food and dining is not only big business, it’s an integral part of Mill Valley            VITALITY
   culture.  In 2011, there were 5,260 restaurants and 492 bars within 15 miles of Mill Valley—twice as
   many as the average for CNN/Money’s 100 best places to live.2
                                                                                                                          NATURAL
•	 The Mill Valley Public Library is an important cultural center and gathering place for the community.  
   It is a place for people of all ages, backgrounds, and interests to gather, connect through shared
                                                                                                                       ENVIRONEMENT
   experiences, and be part of an environment that lays the groundwork for a life-long love of
   reading and discovery. The Library also supports the local business community and new business
   development through its services and collaboration efforts.  Most importantly, the Mill Valley Public
   Library continues the important legacy of public libraries by providing free and equal access to all
   of its innovative programs and services in order better the community as a whole. Notable facts                     CLIMATE
   include the following:                                                                                              ACTION
       ◦◦   Over 80 percent of the Mill Valley population has library cards.
       ◦◦   The Library includes more than 108,000 books.
                                                                                                                        HAZARDS &
       ◦◦   The Library offers 778 programs and sees a quarter of a million visits each year.  
       ◦◦   The Library offers a constantly evolving collection, available in new formats as technology shifts,
                                                                                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
            designed to meet the needs of an educated, sophisticated community.
       ◦◦   An array of alternative and innovative collections engage the public in new ways of seeing or
            experiencing the world around them.
       ◦◦   The Library offers technology education on a variety of topics to help patrons stay current and feel
                                                                                                                         NOISE
            competent in their personal and professional lives, along with programs that support and celebrate the
            literary arts and the spoken word including creative writing, poetry, storytelling, and reading.
       ◦◦   After-hours events provide adults and teens with opportunities to experience compelling lectures and
            performances and engage with presenters in an intimate setting.
                                                                                                                        GENERAL PLAN
       ◦◦   The Lucretia Little History Room offers access to the City’s rich heritage through archives and
            showcases of local history, including oral histories, paintings, local author collections, documents,
                                                                                                                       ADMINISTRATION
            maps, and over 4,000 historical photographs.
       ◦◦   The Library provides an impressive breadth and depth of programs for children and teens, supporting
            their development (social, literary, educational, and creative) from infancy through high school.
       ◦◦   Access to larger collections of materials and digital content is available through the shared resources
            of library cooperatives.
       ◦◦   Programs that support and celebrate the visual and performing arts include performances of all kinds,       Citations/
            art exhibits, art and theater lectures, and films.
                                                                                                                       Appendices
                                                                                            MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       89

                                                         Trends in
                                                                          # 2 Staying safe and fit.
         3
                                                         Community
                                                         Vitality
For                            consecutive               •	 In Marin County, 95 percent of adults and youth report
                               years                        living walking distance to a park, playground, or open
                                                            space, and 85 percent report visiting one in the last
Marin has been named the                                    month.3
healthiest county in                                     •	 For three consecutive years, Marin has been named
                                                            the healthiest county in all of California by a national
all of California                                           study (University of Wisconsin and the Robert Wood
                                                            Johnson Foundation).4
                                                         •	 The rate of adult diabetes in Marin County is 7 percent,
                                                            compared to 11.3 percent nationally.5
                                                         •	 The rate of adult obesity rate in Marin County is 17
                                                            percent, compared to 36 percent nationally.6
                                                         •	 Marin County’s rate of breast cancer has historically
                                                            been among the highest in the nation.7  Rates for white
                                                            women in Marin are 28 percent higher than rates in
                                                            other Bay Area counties and 38 percent higher than in
                                                            other urban areas in California.8
                                                         •	 Between 1991 and 1999, breast cancer rates in Marin
                                                            increased by 60 percent, compared to increases of less
                                                            than 5 percent in other areas of California.9
                                                         •	 In recent years, the number of Bay Area kindergartners
                                                            who have been immunized against diseases like
                                                            whooping cough (pertussis) and measles has declined.10
                                                         •	 Marin County has the lowest rate of immunizations
                                                            (83 percent) in the nine-county Bay Area, and a rate of
                                                            “personal belief” vaccine exemptions that is more than
                                                            three times the state average.11
                                                         •	 Marin County has been particularly hard hit by an
Top: Yoga on the Plaza, Mill Valley Recreation program
Bottom: Using poles for walking, mobility & outdoor         outbreak of pertussis, having the second-highest
exercise, Mill Valley Recreation senior program             case rate in the state, which is nearly eight times the
                                                            statewide average.12
90

                                                                                                                                 INTRODUCTION
As reflected in the goals, policies, and programs of this Commu-
                                                                                                                                 LAND USE
nity Vitality Element, this General Plan is intended to ensure the
continued success and growth of the City’s arts and culture sec-
tor by, among other things, recognizing and promoting the City’s
artistic identity, encouraging and supporting cultural development
and arts-related commerce and tourism, fostering and facilitating
                                                                                                                                 MOBILITY
the activities of arts providers, building positive community involve-
ment with and support for the arts, and supporting City-sponsored
activities and facilities.
                                                                          The US could avoid
                                                                                                                               COMMUNITY
Community Health
Community health as discussed in the General Plan addresses the
                                                                          $550 billion                                           VITALITY
physical, mental, and social well-being of the community, not just        in projected medical costs by
the absence of disease. It involves the quality of the air we breathe,    maintaining the
                                                                                                                                  NATURAL
opportunities for physical activity, the availability of healthy food
choices, high-quality education, healthy housing, safe places to          current obesity
                                                                          rate of 36%
                                                                                                                               ENVIRONEMENT
play, and access to preventive health services. It is about creat-
ing social and physical environments that support good health and
enhanced quality of life by promoting healthy development and
healthy behaviors across all life stages.
                                                                                                                               CLIMATE
Physical Health                                                                                                                ACTION
While health statistics for the City of Mill Valley are not maintained,
those for Marin County indicate that the population is generally
                                                                                                                                HAZARDS &
quite healthy. For three consecutive years, Marin has been named
the healthiest county in all of California by a national study (Univer-
                                                                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY
sity of Wisconsin and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation). The
rate of adult diabetes in Marin County is 7 percent compared to
11.3 percent nationally, and the rate of adult obesity rate in Marin
County is 17 percent compared to 36 percent nationally. Both of
these diseases have been shown to have a direct relationship to                                                                  NOISE
a community’s level of physical activity and its access to healthy
food.
Two anomalies in the county’s health picture are the unusually high                                                             GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                               ADMINISTRATION
rates of breast cancer and whooping cough. Marin’s rate of breast
cancer has historically been among the highest in the nation.
Rates for white women in Marin are 28 percent higher than rates in
                                                                          Top: Dipsea finish line (date unknown)
other Bay Area counties and 38 percent higher than in other urban
                                                                          Source Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little
                                                                                                                                Citations/
areas in California. Between 1991 and 1999, breast cancer rates           History Room
in Marin increased by 60 percent, compared to increases of less           Bottom: Dipsea start line (date unknown)
than 5 percent in other areas of California.                              Source: Active Rain Corp                             Appendices
                                                                                         MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                  91

                                      Marin County also has been particularly hard hit by an outbreak of
                                      whooping cough (pertussis), having the second-highest case rate
                                      in the state, which is nearly eight times the statewide average. In
                                      recent years, the number of Bay Area kindergartners who have
                                      been immunized against diseases like whooping cough (pertussis)
                                       Trends in
                                       Community            #3          Public health will
                                                                        continue to rise as
                                                                        a priority.
                                       Vitality
                                         •	 The percentage of U.S. residents who are obese is
                                            expected to reach 42 percent by 2030, raising the
                                            number of U.S. adults who are obese from 78 million in
                                            2012 to more than 100 million by 2030.13
                                         •	 The U.S. could avoid $550 billion in projected medical
                                            costs by maintaining the current obesity rate of 36
                                            percent.14
                                         •	 Forty-eight percent of likely California voters responding
                                            to a Field Poll said unhealthy eating habits and a lack of
                                            exercise are the biggest threats to children’s health.15
                                         •	 Seventy-three percent of respondents to the Field Poll
                                            said they believe it is a community’s responsibility to
                                            address childhood obesity.16
                                         •	 Fifty-sevent percent of respondents said local
                                            governments should be able to tax sales of alcohol,
                                            cigarettes, junk food, or sweetened beverages to pay for
                                            anti-obesity programs, if the proposals were approved
                                            by a majority of voters.17
                                         •	 In 2010, health spending in California reached $230
                                            billion, triple 1991 levels.18
                                         •	 California’s per-capita health spending of $6,238 was
Top: Click Off (2008)                       the ninth lowest in the nation.19
Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission      •	 In 2013, Marin County ranked #1 among the nation’s
Bottom: Click Off (1999)
Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission
                                            healthiest communities for kids.20
Photographer: Tammy Merritt
92

                                                                                                                            INTRODUCTION
and measles has declined. During this time, Marin County had the
                                                                                                                            LAND USE
lowest rate of immunizations (83 percent) in the nine-county Bay
                                                                                                 7.1
Area, and a rate of “personal belief” vaccine exemptions that is
more than three times the state average.
Parks, Open Space, and Community Recreation
                                                                                                 miles                      MOBILITY
                                                                        of bike trails
Many in Mill Valley choose to live here because of the rich natural
setting, the strong orientation to the outdoors, and the healthy, ac-
tive lifestyle that these support. Public parks and open space are
treasured assets within the community and include hiking trails,                in Mill Valley                            COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                            VITALITY
play structures, BBQ and picnic areas, creekside access, tennis
and basketball courts, sports fields, a dog run, a skate park, a golf
course, a community garden, an outdoor stage, and the downtown
Plaza. Figure 4.1 identifies parks within the Planning Area, and Fig-
                                                                                                                             NATURAL
ure 4.2 shows the locations of community facilities.
                                                                                                                          ENVIRONEMENT
To meet the community’s recreation needs, the City of Mill Val-
ley provides approximately 110 acres of parks, open space, and
recreational facilities, including 44 acres of improved parkland,
24 acres of natural areas, and the 42-acre municipal golf course
(see Figure 4.1). The total area represents 7.89 acres of parkland                                                        CLIMATE
per 1,000 residents, which is below the ten acres of park space                                                           ACTION
per 1,000 residents recommended by the National Recreation
and Parks Association but considerably higher than the amount of
                                                                                                                           HAZARDS &
parkland provided by many communities.
                                                                                                                          PUBLIC SAFETY
Mill Valley is surrounded by state and federal parklands on three
sides. These nearby lands—which include Golden Gate National
Recreation Area, Muir Woods National Monument, and Mount Ta-
malpais State Park—augment Mill Valley’s open space and recre-
                                                                                                                            NOISE
ational resources and provide the community with unsurpassed
opportunities for activities such as hiking, running, bicycling, and
horseback riding.
Complementing these open space resources, Mill Valley’s pedes-                                                             GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                          ADMINISTRATION
trian system includes 18 miles of sidewalks and a unique network
of Steps, Lanes, and Path that extend the sidewalk system into the
hillside neighborhoods. This network includes 5.5 miles of lanes
and trails and 0.5 mile of steps. In addition, the City has 7.1 miles
of bikeways, consisting of 2.5 miles of Type I bike paths, 0.85 mile
of bike lanes, and 3.75 miles of Type III routes. The 2008 Bicy-        Top: Mill Valley Golf Course, 5th Hole             Citations/
                                                                                                                          Appendices
cle and Pedestrian Transportation Plan calls for an additional 3.4      Bottom: Bike and pedestrian path in Mill Valley
                                                                                      MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                93

                                                     Fra
                                               Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                       Æ
                                                                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                                 Corte Madera
                                                     Blithedale
                                                      Canyon
                                                        Park
      Cascade Canyon                                                                                          Scott
        Open Space                                                                                          Highlands
                                                                                                              Park
                                 Cascade
                                   Park                                                                      Mill Valley
                                                                                                             Golf Course
                                          Three Wells
                                                                             Miller
                                                                           Grove Park
                                            Earnscliffe                     Ernest Bloch
                                           Canyon Park                      Memorial Park
                                                                              Downtown             Boyle Park
                                                                                                                                                                    Alto
                                                                              Lytton Square
                                             Edgewood        Old Mill
                                               Park            Park
                                                                                                              E.
                                                                        Kathleen Norris                            BL
                                                                                                                     ITH
                                                                                                                         ED
                                                                                                                                          ALTO
                                                                        Memorial Park                                      AL
                                                                                                                             E           INO
                                                                                                                                        CAM
                                                                                                                        Freeman
                                                                                          Molino                          Park                     Mill Valley
                        Muir Woods Park                                                    ParkM
                                                                                                   ILL                                         Community Center /
                                                                                                    ER
                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                Friends of Fields
                                                                                                     AV
                                                                                                                                Skate
                                                                                                                                Park
                                                                                                         Sycamore
                                                                                                           Park
                                                                         Homestead
                                                                                                                                         Bayfront Park /
                                                                                                                                          Hauke Park                       Strawberry
     Mill Valley General Plan
     Figure 4.1: City Parks                                                                                                                      Almonte
                City Boundary              Highway
                Parks                      Roads
     Source: City of Mill Valley, Marin Maps, 2012
     [
            0            0.25      0.5 Miles
94

                                                                                                                                                                                                         INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                                                                     Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                     I                   LAND USE
                                            Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                        Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                                                                                                       COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                         VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NATURAL
                                                                                    Mill Valley
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                      Mill Valley
                                                                                    Fire Station                                                    Edna
                                                           Old Mill   City Hall
                                                                                    #6
                                                                            ñsn
                                                           Elementary                                                                       Maguire Elem
                                                           School                      Greenwood
                                                                                       School
                                                                                                                                                  School
                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                           {n                                                                                                                                          CLIMATE
                                             Mill Valley
                                          Public Library   n                                                                                                                   Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ACTION
                                                                                                                   Park Elementary
                                                                                                                   School
                                                                                                             n        E.
                                                                                                                           BL
                                                                                                                             ITH                ALTO
                                                                                                                                ED
                                                                                                                                  AL           INO
                                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                            CAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                        HAZARDS &
                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                       ILL
                                                                                                        ER                  Mill Valley
                Muir Woods Park                                                                          AV E                  Middle             Mill Valley
                                                                                                             LUE
                                                                                                                               School             Community
                                                                       Marin Horizon
                                                                              School   n                                                    n     Center
                                                                                                                                                                s
                                                                                                                                                                _     Mill Valley
                                                                                                                                                                      Fire Station
                                                                                                                                                                      #7
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                          Mill Valley
                                                                             Homestead                                                                    Police Department
                                                                                                                                                                                        Strawberry
                                                                                                              Tamalpais High            n
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NOISE
                                                                                                              School
                                                                                                                           n       Mount
                                                                                                                                   Tamalpais                             £
                                                                                                                                                                         n           Seminary Dr.
                                                                                                                                                                                     Park & Ride
                                                                                                                                   School
                                                                                                                                                                                                        GENERAL PLAN
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 4.2: Community Facilities                                                                                                                       Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                                       £ Pohono
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                                                                                                                 St.
    City Boundary Highway n School n
                                   £ Transit Center                                                                                                                                      Park & Ride
           Sphere of Inﬂuence               Roads                _ Police           s      Fire Station                                                          Manzanita
                                                                                                                                                                              £
                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                    n
                                                                 { Library
                                                                                                                                                                Park & Ride
           Open Space*                       Arterial
                                                                                    ñ      City Hall
*Includes land owned by the City, Mill Valley School District, and other public entities
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Citations/
Source: Marin Map, City of Mill Valley, 2012; WRT, 2013
[                                                                                                                                                                                                      Appendices
       0         0.25         0.5 Miles
                                                                                                                                                         MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                          95

                                                            miles of Class II and III facilities to be developed. Together, the
                                                            pedestrian and bicycle networks connect the community’s many
                                                            park and open space resources and promote pedestrian and bi-
                                                            cycle activity.
                                                            Mill Valley is also home to the oldest trail race in America—the “Dip-
                                                            sea Race.” Established in 1905, the Dipsea Race recently held its
                                                            104th race. The 7.4-mile course extends from Mill Valley to Stinson
                                                            Beach and includes the Dipsea stairs, which are part of Mill Val-
                                                            ley’s Steps, Lanes and Paths network.
                                                            Mill Valley’s Community Center also is a focus of community and
                                                            recreational activity. The Community Center is comprised of a
                                                            large reception hall, teen and senior centers, meeting spaces, and
                                                            activity rooms. The Aquatics & Fitness Center is dedicated to swim-
                                                            ming and fitness and includes a gym, an indoor swimming pool
                                                            with retractable roof, a 120-foot spiral waterslide, a Jacuzzi spa,
                                                             Trends in
                                                             Community               #4           Mill Valley’s
                                                                                                  demographics
                                                             Vitality
                                                                                                  are changing.
                                                               •	 Mill Valley’s population increased by 651 during the six-
                                                                  year period from 2007 to 2013, based on U.S. Census
                                                                  and California Department of Finance data. Since the
                                                                  number of occupied housing units has increased by
                                                                  only 60 units in the same timeframe, this growth is due
                                                                  primarily to a “demographic shift” in the population,
                                                                  with young families replacing empty-nesters in existing
                                                                  housing.  
                                                               •	 Because much of the population growth will include
                                                                  school-age children, Mill Valley’s demographic shift could
                                                                  have a significant impact on the City’s most constrained
Top: Mill Valley Aquatics & Fitness Center
                                                                  resources: streets, schools, and recreational facilities.  
Source: Click Off (2003) Mill Valley Arts Commission
Photographer: Hugh Kuhn
                                                                  This trend should be closely monitored and the General
Middle: Fitness programs at the Aquatics & Fitness Center         Plan revised as necessary if it continues.
Bottom: Teen Zone Room at the Community Center
96

                                                                                                                  INTRODUCTION
and an outdoor patio. Between 2005 and 2010, use of the aquatic
                                                                                                                  LAND USE
facilities increased 37 percent to roughly 273,000 users, while the
use of the rest of the facilities increased 85 percent to more than
181,000 users.
                                                                                                                  MOBILITY
In addition to active recreation, the Community Center provides a
community garden that offers 35 plots where community members
can grow their own produce. While it has a limited number of plots,
the garden reaches many more people. Many families share in
                                                                                                                COMMUNITY
the gardening of a plot, or the garden is shared between two fami-
lies. At harvest time, many gardeners share their harvest unself-
ishly throughout the community, contributing to programs such as                                                  VITALITY
Meals of Marin.
Another source of healthy, locally grown produce is the Mill Valley
                                                                                                                   NATURAL
Farmers Market, a full-service farmers market that offers a large
range of produce, meat, and other food items from numerous local
                                                                                                                ENVIRONEMENT
vendors. The market occurs once a week year-round.
 Trends in                                                            Top: Mill Valley Farmer’s Market
                                                                                                                CLIMATE
                          #5
                                                                      Bottom: Community Garden
                                       Recreation is
 Community
                                                                                                                ACTION
                                       on the rise.
 Vitality                                                                                                        HAZARDS &
   •	 Recreation programs: Over 1,655 classes offered with more                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
      than 11,285 people participating annually.   Classes total
      over 15,600 hours of arts and recreation by more than 125
      local instructors.  Over 165 members in the Teen Zone and
      180 members in the Senior Club.                                                                             NOISE
   •	 Private events: The Community Center hosts over 2,500
      rentals per year with over 130,000 people in attendance.
   •	 Aquatics and fitness center: Over 100,000 visitors annually                                                GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                ADMINISTRATION
      with over 2,900 pass holders and 30,000 drop-ins.
   •	 Parks and fields: 3,000+ individual bookings with 325,000
      visitors totaling 16,820 hours of use each year.  
   •	 Youth sports: utilize over 9,000 allocated hours annually.
   •	 Scholarships: $182,000 in scholarships to 3,500 recipients.                                                Citations/
                                                                                                                Appendices
                                                                                     MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       97

   Community Vitality Goals, Policies & Programs
   VITALITY-1 | Economic Vitality
   Maintain a strong, diverse, and vibrant local economy that welcomes those who want
   to make a positive economic impact, create sustainable commercial success, sup-
   port Mill Valley’s small-town character, and enhance the quality of life of the com-
   munity.
   CV.1 Business Attraction and Retention
   Create a transparent operational, informational, and regulatory framework to attract and re-
   tain businesses (including, but not limited to, local-serving businesses and entreprenurs that
   provide goods, services, or medical, educational, cultural, artistic, entertainment, or recre-
   ational amenities for the community).
       CV.1-1 Establish a partnership among the City, the Chamber of Commerce, and the busi-
       ness community that promotes effective communication and a collaborative, entrepreneur-
       ial approach to business attraction and retention issues, and opportunities to strengthen
       and revitalize commercial areas through targeted funding, regulatory improvements, tem-
       porary or “pop-up” uses, and other incentives.
       Annual Holiday Arts and Craft Fair sponsored by Mill Valley Recreation and Co-sponsored by the Mill Valley
       Seniors’ Club
98

                                                                                                                INTRODUCTION
   CV.1-2 Work with the Chamber of Commerce, Marin Economic Forum, and other organiza-
                                                                                                                LAND USE
   tions to develop policies and programs that facilitate the successful development of locally
   based “start-up” companies and related business growth opportunities.
   CV.1-3 Create a “Doing Business in Mill Valley” page on the City’s website or use other
                                                                                                                MOBILITY
   technology that provides a central source of information on local business-related pro-
   grams, policies, and procedures; identifies opportunities to share local jobs, goods, and
   services; promotes a “go local first” approach to meeting needs; and monitors available
                                                                                                              COMMUNITY
   commercial space by size, location, amenities, constraints, and other pertinent features.
                                                                                                                VITALITY
   CV.1-4 Encourage “green” businesses that are non-polluting, offer or support environmen-
   tally sustainable goods or services, and/or actively promote telecommuting, alternative
   work schedules, and alternative transportation modes.
                                                                                                                 NATURAL
   CV.1-5 Create unique gateway design treatments (using landscaping, signage, public art,
   etc.) for the key entryways into the City that communicate a sense of arrival and welcome
                                                                                                              ENVIRONEMENT
   to Mill Valley.
CV.2 Economic Development
Continue to leverage the economic contributions of the arts sector as a key component of the
                                                                                                              CLIMATE
City’s economy.
                                                                                                              ACTION
   CV.2-1 Undertake a public awareness campaign to build community understanding and
   support for the arts as a significant contributor to the local economy.
                                                                                                               HAZARDS &
                                                                                                              PUBLIC SAFETY
   CV.2-2 Promote cultural tourism essential to sustain top-quality cultural offerings and eco-
   nomic vibrancy.
                                                                                                                NOISE
                                                                     Dining
                                                              is an integral
                                                              part of Mill Valley                              GENERAL PLAN
                                                              economy                                         ADMINISTRATION
   Advertisement on Mill Valley storefront supporting local                                                    Citations/
                                                                                                              Appendices
   business.
                                                                                   MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       99

    VITALITY-2 | Civic Vitality
    Supported by balanced City budgets and ongoing two-way communications with the
    community, create a built environment and civic structures that encourage a high
    quality of life, promote healthy living and physical activity, and strengthen opportuni-
    ties for social interaction and building of community relationships.
    CV.3 Community Collaboration and Communication
    Support the work of community institutions, government agencies, non-profits, and local busi-
    nesses that contribute to the quality of life of Mill Valley residents.
        CV.3-1 Use technology and new methods of public participation to strengthen the quality
        of communication, civil discourse, and problem-solving by embracing open communica-
        tion, transparency, and mutual respect.
        CV.3-2 Build local and regional leadership by expanding opportunities to collectively ad-
        dress matters of local and/or regional importance through community participation and
        volunteerism.
        CV.3-3 Strengthen the network of neighborhood, community, and business associations,
        including fostering the creation of new associations in areas where none exist, and support
        activities and programs that enhance the quality and consistency of communication and
        interaction.
    CV.4 Public/Commercial Space and Events
    Create well-designed, accessible public and private spaces that will encourage and support
    community interaction and activity for all ages.
        CV.4-1 Use the City’s special events policy to allow neighborhood associations, groups of
        neighbors, and other community organizations to periodically close streets or use public
        parking lots for block parties and similar neighborhood and community events.
        Pacific Boys Choir performance at the Mill Valley     Annual Memorial Day Pancake Breakfast hosted
        Public Library                                        by the Mill Valley Volunteer Firefighters Association
100

                                                                                                                        INTRODUCTION
   CV.4-2 Maintain and support local events like the Memorial Day Parade, Winterfest, Mill
   Valley Fall Arts Festival, Mill Valley Film Festival, and others that enhance community pride
                                                                                                                        LAND USE
   and interaction.
   CV.4-3 Encourage new development, particularly in infill areas, to provide small plazas,
   pocket parks, civic spaces, and other gathering places that are available to the public to
                                                                                                                        MOBILITY
   help meet recreational demands.
CV.5 City Budget and Prudent Fiscal Policies
                                                                                                                      COMMUNITY
Maintain Mill Valley’s tradition of prudent fiscal management and use the City budget process
as an opportunity to identify operational improvements and efficiencies, evaluate and set prior-
ities for General Plan program implementation, and involve the community in addressing fiscal                           VITALITY
issues and funding strategies, including government pensions and other benefits programs.
                                                                                                                         NATURAL
   CV.5-1 Maintain a regularly updated schedule of fees for all City services and permits that
   reflects actual service costs, remains consistent with the rate of inflation, and provides suf-
                                                                                                                      ENVIRONEMENT
   ficient revenue to maintain and enhance City programs and operations, consistent with the
   General Plan and the budget priorities and core values of the City Council.
                                                                                                                      CLIMATE
                                                                                                                      ACTION
                                                                                                                       HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                      PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                        NOISE
                                                                                                                       GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                      ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                                       Citations/
                                                                                                                      Appendices
   The Plaza in Downtown Mill Valley. Winterfest 2013 hosted by the Chamber of Commerce.
                                                                                           MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       101

        CV.5-2 Use the Capital Improvement Program (CIP) as one of the means to rank and fund
        identified General Plan programs.
        CV.5-3 Establish outreach programs and procedures that will constructively engage and
        inform the community about important fiscal issues and decisions.
    CV.6 Consistent Public Improvements
    Improve Mill Valley’s appearance and charm through City policies, regulations, and standards
    that promote consistently high-quality design and construction.
        CV.6-1 Establish and maintain public improvement and development standards that em-
        phasize the City’s attention to detail and design excellence and result in an aesthetically
        consistent appearance and quality of materials for public roads, sidewalks, pathways,
        street lights, street furniture, and other features of the public realm.
        CV.6-2 Update and expand the City’s design guidelines to address all types of new develop-
        ment (not just single-family residential), redevelopment, and public improvements.
       Story poles used as part of residential design review to articulate the footprint and roof line for a redevelop-
       ment project.
102

                                                                                                                  INTRODUCTION
VITALITY-3 | Healthy Community
                                                                                                                  LAND USE
Maintain a broad range of public and private programs that meet diverse community
needs, including mental health, arts, recreational, intellectual, educational, and cul-
tural programs.
                                                                                                                  MOBILITY
CV.7 Diverse Programs and Services
Continue to place high priority on programs and facilities that serve the entire community, and
ensure that programs and services meet the diverse needs in the community for users such
as seniors, youth, and special needs groups, with facilities and/or amenities planned and de-
signed to accommodate a range of ages and abilities and changing definitions of recreation.                     COMMUNITY
   CV.7-1 Develop joint-use agreements or other collaborative means between the City and                          VITALITY
   the owners of identified facilities to allow the use of existing community facilities (the Pub-
   lic Library, Community Center, Golf Course, parks, churches, and schools) on a formal and
                                                                                                                   NATURAL
   informal basis to expand opportunities for physical or social activities during off-peak hours
   in proximity to neighborhoods and to create additional revenue sources for enhancing and
                                                                                                                ENVIRONEMENT
   maintaining existing facilities.
   CV.7-2 Consider establishing a “Youth Commission” to address safe and responsive en-
   tertainment/recreation services and facilities that meet the needs of the City’s youth, and
   assist in collaboration efforts between local schools and the City to better serve youth and                 CLIMATE
   the neighborhoods in which schools are located.                                                              ACTION
   CV.7-3 Continually monitor and analyze the overall needs of the City’s senior citizen popu-
                                                                                                                 HAZARDS &
   lation in order to meet the needs of this segment of the community. Provide the appropri-
   ate type, quantity, schedule, and class size of senior programs and activities.
   CV.7-4 Enhance recreational, cultural, and educational programming to help meet the rec-                     PUBLIC SAFETY
   reational needs and interests of Mill Valley’s residents, workforce, and visitors by strength-
   ening partnerships, coordination, and outreach among the non-profit, public, and private
                                                                                                                  NOISE
   sectors.
   CV.7-5 Ensure that the collaborative partnership with and adequate funding from the
                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN
   County of Marin will continue to allow residents from the unincorporated areas adjacent
   to Mill Valley affordable access to recreational, cultural, and related services provided by
                                                                                                                ADMINISTRATION
   the City.
CV.8 Health Considerations in Planning and Design
Make public policy decisions that promote positive health outcomes.
   CV.8-1 Coordinate with paramedics, community-based organizations, and County and City                         Citations/
                                                                                                                Appendices
                                                                                     MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       103

    staff to identify residents most at risk for falls and provide them with assessments of their
    homes and regular check-ins to reduce the risk of injuries related to falls.
    CV.8-2 Create “Safe Routes for Seniors” by identifying routes that older adults take to
    access medical care, food, and social events in the community and making those routes
    safer.
    CV.8-3 Develop facilities that support continuing engagement, personal enrichment, and
    independence of older residents.
    CV.8-4 Work with Marin County Health & Human Services, local schools, and residents
    as appropriate, to implement new policies and enforce existing proven policies to reduce
    alcohol abuse, tobacco use, and illicit drug use, including but not limited to targeting teen
    parties, expanding smoke-free spaces, and increasing prescription drug take-back.
    CV.8-5 Work with the Chamber of Commerce, local businesses, community organizations,
    and residents to promote “Healthy Retail,” a local food processing and distribution network
    that connects local agriculture to local retailers, restaurants, schools, hospitals, and other
    institutions.
    CV.8-6 Support the establishment of urgent and preventative health care facilities and
    services for local residents with limited access to traditional facilities and services.
    CV.8-7 Promote community gardens, edible schoolyards, and edible landscapes that sup-
    port sustainable and organic farming practices.
    CV.8-8 Minimize the impact of epidemic or pandemic outbreaks of disease through public
    education and outreach and support of immunization and other preventative programs.
    Library After Hours program
104

                                                                                                                INTRODUCTION
VITALITY-4 | Healthy Community
                                                                                                                LAND USE
Provide a complete and integrated system of community facilities, public parks, and
open space areas throughout Mill Valley that provide opportunities for both passive
and active recreation.
                                                                                                                MOBILITY
CV.9 Parks and Cultural Facilities
Design and implement parks and recreational facilities to meet the unique and anticipated
needs and interests of residents.
   CV.9-1 Create a standardized and readily identifiable way-finding program for all public                   COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                VITALITY
   recreational and cultural facilities, pathways, and Steps, Lanes and Paths.
   CV.9-2 Establish maintenance standards that minimize graffiti and trash problems and
   promote a “pack-it-out” sensibility for users of Steps, Lanes and Paths and other open
                                                                                                                 NATURAL
   space areas.
                                                                                                              ENVIRONEMENT
   CV.9-3 Integrate recreation and community facilities with other public spaces and rights-of-
   way (e.g., Steps, Lanes and Paths, bikeways, sidewalks, trails, bridges, and transit routes)
   that are easily accessible by alternative modes of transportation and can be used for ex-
   ercise.
                                                                                                              CLIMATE
   CV.9-4 Work with local organized sports groups to ensure that local facilities are used ef-                ACTION
   ficiently, serve local demand to the greatest extent possible, and preserve the quality and
   safety of the facility.
CV.10 Library                                                                                                  HAZARDS &
                                                                                                              PUBLIC SAFETY
Continue to support and enhance the role of the Mill Valley Public Library as an important cul-
tural and intellectual center of the community.
   CV.10-1 Provide opportunties (physical and virtual) for collaboration, invention, and cre-
   ative endeavors at the Library.                                                                              NOISE
   CV.10-2 Advocate for a literate population and build community through programs that
                                                                                                               GENERAL PLAN
   help people connect and find common ground.
                                                                                                              ADMINISTRATION
   CV.10-3 Preserve the City’s cultural heritage by collecting, archiving, and showcasing local
   art, culture, and history at the Library.
   CV.10-4 Regularly update a strategic plan for programs, services, and facilities that keep
                                                                                                               Citations/
   the Library at the forefront of the community’s intellectual needs and priorities.
                                                                                                              Appendices
                                                                                   MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       105

    VITALITY-5 | Healthy Community
    Support a complete and integrated system of youth and adult sports leagues and
    activities that focus on the needs of Mill Valley residents.
    CV.11 Sports Leagues
    Support youth and adult sports leagues that contribute to Mill Valley’s community health and
    economic vitality.
        CV.11-1 Support, sustain, and develop excellent sports facilities.
        CV.11-2 Work with local organized adult and youth sports leagues to ensure that local
        facilities are used efficiently, serve local demand to the greatest extent possible, and pre-
        serve the quality and safety of the facility.
        CV.11-3 Continue to establish and promote local partnerships and working relationships,
        such as those already created with Friends of Fields, Boyle Park Tennis Courts, and Mill
        Valley Golf Club, that help maintain and promote local sports programs and facilities.
       Click Off (2003)
       Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission
       Photographer: Ken Rosenberg
106

                                                                                                                  INTRODUCTION
Arts & Culture Goals, Policies & Programs
ARTS-1 | Arts and Culture Identity                                                                                LAND USE
Maintain a strong identity for Mill Valley as a regional destination for excellence in
the arts, culture, and arts education.
ART.1 Contribution of Arts and Culture to Mill Valley’s Community Vitality                                        MOBILITY
Identify and record, on an ongoing basis, the contribution of the arts, culture, and arts educa-
tion to the City’s history, character, economic vitality, and quality of life.
                                                                                                                COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                  VITALITY
    ART.1-1 Conduct an initial and, thereafter, periodic arts census to document and dissemi-
    nate information about art-related events, assets, activities, organizations, and venues.
    The census may include:
                                                                                                                   NATURAL
    •	 Determining and monitoring the economic impact of the arts upon the City’s economy;
    •	 Inventorying facilities and creating an availability matrix;
                                                                                                                ENVIRONEMENT
    •	 Producing and maintaining a City arts guide with a directory of local artists based on
       the census;
    •	 Exploring resource pooling to minimize the cost of producing and participating in arts
       events;
                                                                                                                CLIMATE
    •	 Surveying arts and culture spending on related programs in similar-sized communities;                    ACTION
       and
    •	 Conducting an annual roundtable among City and arts leaders to develop shared arts
                                                                                                                 HAZARDS &
       sector priorities.
                                                                                                                PUBLIC SAFETY
    ART.1-2 Catalog the City’s art history, including arts, artists, and arts education.
ART.2 Facilities
Support, sustain, and develop excellent arts and culture facilities.
                                                                                                                  NOISE
    ART.2-1 Develop cooperative use agreements for public and private facilities.
                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                                 Citations/
                                                                                                                Appendices
                                                                                     MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       107

    ART.3 Outreach and Promotion
    Work with artists and art organizations to promote and publicize the City’s arts, entertainment,
    and cultural assets, both within and outside the community.
       ART.3-1 Develop gateway and informational signs and other media to support and pro-
       mote the City’s cultural identity and resources.
       ART.3-2 Implement and update outreach tools such as a central informational and ticket-
       ing kiosk, develop a local arts and entertainment website, and emerging technology ap-
       plications.
       ART.3-3 Provide news and listings for arts organizations in City publications and commu-
       nications.
       ART.3-4 Coordinate and simplify permit procedures for signs, banners, and other materials
       used to promote local cultural resources and events.
       Mural at 142 Throckmorton
108

                                                                                                               INTRODUCTION
ARTS-2 | Leadership
                                                                                                               LAND USE
Establish and maintain strong and cooperative civic arts leadership, working collab-
oratively with public and private arts providers.
ART.4 Roles and Relationships
                                                                                                               MOBILITY
Define and support a strong, clear role for the Arts Commission, including meaningful support
from appropriate City department(s) and well-defined relationships with other City entities.
   ART.4-1 Initiate a strategic plan for the Arts Commission, which would include creating
   clear roles, guidelines, and responsibilities, and administration and oversight of the arts               COMMUNITY
                                                                                                               VITALITY
   and culture provisions of the MV2040 General Plan.
   ART.4-2 Expand volunteerism and its provision and coordination.
                                                                                                                NATURAL
   ART.4-3 Strengthen communication and the working relationship between the Arts Com-
   mission and other City departments.
   ART.4-4 Foster cooperation and collaboration with and among members of the arts com-                      ENVIRONEMENT
   munity.
ART.4 Partnerships                                                                                           CLIMATE
Encourage and support partnerships among the arts, business, and the schools.                                ACTION
   ART.5-1 Improve communication, coordination, and sharing of resources among the arts,
                                                                                                              HAZARDS &
   education, and business communities.
                                                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                               NOISE
                                                                                                              GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                             ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                              Citations/
                                                                                                             Appendices
   Tam High Honors Drawing & Painting Exhibition   Bloom-A-Thon Volunteers
   at the Mill Valley Public Library
                                                                                  MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       109
    ARTS-3 | Funding and Other Support
    Facilitate the delivery and enjoyment of the arts through robust public and private
    funding.
    ART.6 Funding and Services
    Support adequate public and private funding for the continued growth of the arts.
       ART.6-1 Develop necessary funding and staff support to enable the Arts Commission to
       effectively carry out the responsibilies identified in Program ART.4-1.
       ARTS.6-2 Facilitate the efforts of local artists and arts orginizations to obtain private fund-
       ing.
       ARTS.6-3 Provide supportive services and other incentives to facilitate the delivery and
       enjoyment of the arts, culture, and arts education, where feasible.
                                                                           Above: Concerts in the Plaza
                                                                           sponsored by the Mill Valley
                                                                           Arts Commission
                                                                           Left (top): Poster for comedy in
                                                                           the Plaza sponsored by the Mill
                                                                           Valley Arts Commission
                                                                           Left (bottom): 1st Tuesday
                                                                           Art Walk sponsored by the
                                                                           Art Commission, Click Off
                                                                           photography competition award
                                                                           winners on display at the
                                                                           Community Center
110
                                                                                                                     INTRODUCTION
ARTS-4 | Education
                                                                                                                     LAND USE
Reflect and encourage arts, culture, and arts education in the City’s environment.
ART.7 Integration of Art in Building, Design, and Public Spaces
Facilitate the integration of artwork and performances in public and publicly accessible spaces
                                                                                                                     MOBILITY
(e.g., public buildings, parks and squares, rights-of-way), and encourage the inclusion of art-
work and artistry in the planning and design of new and existing buildings and structures.
   ART.7-1 Initiate a program for temporary public art, with varied and changing art installa-
   tions and performances Citywide.                                                                                COMMUNITY
   ART.7-2 Develop a Public Arts Ordinance with the participation of the local arts community                        VITALITY
   and stakeholders that will accomplish the following without compromising First Amend-
   ment guarantees of artistic expression:
                                                                                                                      NATURAL
   •	 Define the role of the Arts Commission;
                                                                                                                   ENVIRONEMENT
   •	 Include the Arts Commission when selecting art in public places;
   •	 Enable the Arts Commission to participate in the approval process for artistic compo-
      nents of major public or private development projects;
   •	 Identify standards for incorporating permanent and temporary public art throughout
      the City, such as along the Miller Avenue corridor;                                                          CLIMATE
                                                                                                                   ACTION
   •	 Encourage artistic diversity;
   •	 Provide incentives for the inclusion of artwork in development projects; and
                                                                                                                    HAZARDS &
   •	 Accommodate the incorporation of artwork in buildings and structures.
                                                                                                                   PUBLIC SAFETY
   ART.7-3 Support performances and events in public spaces and non-traditional settings.
ART.8 Arts Education
Support community opportunities for artistic enrich-
ment through arts education.                                                                                         NOISE
   ART.8-1 Support and promote educational work-
                                                                                                                    GENERAL PLAN
   shops and lectures.
                                                                                                                   ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                                    Citations/
                                                        Art display outside a commercial building in
                                                        Downtown Mill Valley                                       Appendices
                                                                                        MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       111

    ARTS-5 | Cultural Environment
    Attract and support diverse art forms, artists, and audiences to sustain a vibrant
    cultural environment.
    ART.9 Artistic Diversity and Variety
    Support and encourage a wide variety of established and emerging art forms and artists that
    include varied ethnic, cultural, age, gender, and economic populations among the users and
    providers of the City’s arts, culture, and arts education offerings.
        ART.9-1 When enacting City regulations, ensure support for artistic freedom, variety, and
        eclecticism.
        ART.9-2 When promoting the arts, also promote the value of artistic diversity to encourage
        creativity, expand horizons, and accommodate a wide variety of artistic tastes.
        ART.9-3 Provide low-cost opportunities for artists to display and sell their work in public
        and at events.
        		
        ART.9-4 Host and support multi-cultural arts events, performances, and displays.
        ART.9-5 Encourage local arts community leaders and providers that reflect the diversity of
        established and emerging art forms and artists.
        ART.9-6 Support and reflect artistic expression that draws upon the cultural diversity as
        found in the community’s workforce.
    ART.10 Accessibility
    Promote access to the arts, culture, and arts education for all members of the community.
        ART.10-1 Explore and support the provision of accommodations such as priority seating
        and closed captioning at public events.
        ART.10-2 Consider low-cost ticketing, empty seat programs, and other means to promote
        greater access to local arts and cultural events and facilities.
        ART.10-3 Encourage the use of technology to engage the broader community in the arts.
112

                                                                                                                                     INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                     LAND USE
                                                                                                                                     MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                   COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                     VITALITY
                                                                                                                                      NATURAL
                                                                                                                                   ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                   CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                   ACTION
The Sweetwater Music Hall with Mose Allison (1983)
Source: Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Room
                                                                                                                                    HAZARDS &
The Sweetwater opened in 1972 in a rustic, downtown Mill Valley storefront previously occupied by a local watering hole called
“the Office.”  On its opening night, the Sweetwater presented an acoustic folk-rock group that played for a crowd that lined up
                                                                                                                                   PUBLIC SAFETY
halfway down the block to get in.  While the Sweetwater enjoyed a most auspicious beginning, it wasn’t until a decade later that
the tiny 90-seat tavern with a stage earned its rightful place in music history.  
In the 1980’s, new owner Jeannie Patterson took over the reins of the Sweetwater and show by show, cemented the Sweetwater’s
reputation as the little room adored by the biggest names in rock n’ roll, including Bob Weir, Aaron Neville, Big Mama Thorton,
Carlos Santana, Clarence Clemons, Elvis Costello, Etta James, Gregg Allman, Huey Lewis, Jerry Garcia, John Hiatt, John Lee           NOISE
Hooker, Maria Muldaur, Mimi Farina, Odetta, Ramblin’ Jack Elliot, Richie Havens, Robert Cray, Sammy Hagar, Townes Van Zandt,
Van Morrison, among many more musical luminaries.  Times of London hailed the Sweetwater as one of the best nightclubs in
America.
In September 2007 the Sweetwater closed its doors, and after four years of continued community interest and support, a new          GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                   ADMINISTRATION
Sweetwater opened its doors under new ownership and relocated in a renovated lower floor of Mill Valley’s Masonic Temple
(opposite Mill Valley’s City Hall) on January 21, 2012.  The inaugural music event featured local musician Austin De Lone’s band
with guest performers including Jerry Harrison (local resident and former lead guitarist for The Talking Heads).
(Source: http://www.sweetwatermusichall.com/the-sweetwater/, accessed March 4, 2014)
                                                                                                                                    Citations/
                                                                                                                                   Appendices
                                                                                                   MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN            113

Natural Environmen

                                                                                                                                             INTRODUCTION
Purpose
Nestled between the salt marshes of the San Francisco Bay and                                                                                LAND USE
the slopes of Mount Tamalpais, Mill Valley exists where it does be-
cause of the attraction of the natural environment. From the ear-
                                                                                                                                             MOBILITY
liest settlements of the Coast Miwok Indians in the territory that
became known as Eastland to the present day’s urban settlement,
the natural environment supports the essence of Mill Valley.
                                                                                                                                           COMMUNITY
Mill Valley’s natural environment has evolved due to the unique
combination of climate changes, habitat adaptation, landslides
and earthquakes, rise in sea level, and fire. Over a century of ur-                                                                          VITALITY
banization has created changes to the landscape and settlement,
but Mill Valley’s vitality hinges on our ability to sustain the ecosys-              View of Mount Tam, circa 1900
                                                                                     Source: Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little
                                                                                                                                              NATURAL
tem. At the same time, natural and manmade disruptions and dan-
                                                                                     History Room
gers need to be recognized, anticipated, and addressed. Human
                                                                                                                                           ENVIRONEMENT
endeavors balanced with natural processes will create a dynamic
Mill Valley.
The goals, policies, and programs in this element of the General
Plan are specifically intended to:
                                                                                                                                           CLIMATE
•	 Protect, where possible within the urbanized community of                                                                               ACTION
   Mill Valley, the populations, stands, groves, and heritage speci-
   mens of native species. These species include coast live oak,
                                                                                                                                            HAZARDS &
   redwood, and madrone and the habitats for common wildlife
   that they support.
                                                                                                                                           PUBLIC SAFETY
•	 Protect and restore the waters, stream corridors, and marsh-
   lands and maintain healthy riparian zones, such as those ad-
   jacent shoreline habitats of upper Richardson Bay. These con-
Table 5.1 | State Requirements for Conservation and Open Space Elements                                                                      NOISE
           Conservation & Open Space
         Element Content Requirements                                        MV2040 General Plan Provisions
                                                                                                                                            GENERAL PLAN
  (Government Code Sections 65302(d) & 65563)
Identification, conservation, and use of water         Resources are managed by Marin Municipal Water District (MMWD); see
                                                                                                                                           ADMINISTRATION
resources                                              related policies and programs regarding coordination with MMWD on water
                                                       conservation.
Identification, conservation, and use of waterways     See Figure 5.2 and related policies and programs.
Identification and conservation of soils and forests   See Figures 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5 and related policies and programs.
                                                                                                                                            Citations/
Identification and conservation of wildlife            See Figure 5.7 and related policies and programs.
Preservation and conservation of open space for        See Figure 5.8 and related policies and programs. See also Community Vital-
                                                                                                                                           Appendices
recreation and public health and safety                ity Element.
                                                                                                     MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                  115

                                             stitute some of the most significant biotic and wildlife habitat
                                             resources of the area: they serve as major visual, recreational,
       Marin County (southern)
             Bird Count                      and educational resources and form a natural link to the Rich-
            2010: 67,612
                                             ardson Bay and San Francisco Bay ecosystem.
           2011: 65,638                  •	 Protect and restore the stream corridors and drainage network
                                             of the Mill Valley watershed, from their origins along the ridge-
                                             lines to the principal points of discharge in upper Richardson
                                             Bay.
                                         •	 Create and enhance opportunities for enjoyment of scenic vis-
                                             tas of natural areas, including the bay, Mount Tamalpais, and
                                             riparian corridors.
                                         •	 Maintain a diversity of vegetation types and wildlife habitats on
                                             the remaining open space lands, keeping the grasslands free
                                             of brush encroachment and protecting woodlands and chapar-
                                             ral, thereby limiting the increased threat of fire in the wildland-
                                             urban interface (WUI) zone while preserving and enhancing the
                                             biodiversity and protection of our natural resources.
    JUST THE FACTS                        
                                         The Natural Environment Element addresses the statutory General
   •	 Marin County’s ecological          Plan content requirements for Conservation and Open Space El-
      footprint (i.e., the amount of     ements listed in California Government Code Sections 65302(d)
      land and sea needed to produce     and 65563, as shown in Table 5.1.
      the resources to support one
      person) is estimated to be about
      27 global acres per person. The    Existing Conditions
      U.S. average is about 20 acres,
      and the world average is 5.4       Natural Resources in Mill Valley
      acres.1                            Mill Valley is located between the upper end of Richardson Bay,
                                         a shallow arm of San Francisco Bay, and the southeast face of
   •	 Marin County generates more        Mount Tamalpais (see Figure 5.1). The smaller valleys that make
      garbage per person than any        up the area are the result of long erosion of the Mount Tamalpais
      other county in the U.S.2          land mass and deposition of alluvium in the lowlands, which to-
                                         gether with marine sediments of the bay formed the once extensive
   •	 The 2012 annual Christmas          marshlands and mudflats around the bay. Mill Valley is a branched
      bird count for southern Marin      watershed; major stream systems and their tributaries drain the
      identified 72,624 birds and 185    southeast flank and ridges of Mount Tamalpais into Richardson
      different species in a single day- Bay. An additional stream system drains the southwest flank, form-
      -including 2,672 birds and 85      ing the unincorporated areas immediately south of the city limits,
      different species counted in Mill  as shown in Figure 5.2.
      Valley and Mill Valley Marsh.3
116

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     INTRODUCTION
                                            Fra
                                                                                                                                       Richardson Bay Watershed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LAND USE
                                                                                                                                             #VMt Tamalpais                             Blithedale
                                                                                                                                                2571 ft                                                                                                                                                                    San
                                                                                                                                                Ca
                                                                                                                                                     scad                                Summit
                                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                             Cre                                 W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pablo
                                                                                                                                                                                  yo              arn
                                                                                                                                                                              Arro
                                                                                                                                                               ek                         OSP
                                                                                                                                                                                                     er C
                                                                                                                                                      ARROYO                                             an
                                                                                                                                                                                                           yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Camino
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sutton M
                                                                                                                                                         Old        M                                                       Alto
                                                                                                                                                                     ill                 rte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                      Co                                    OSP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               an
                                                                                                                                                             CORTE MADERA                                                                        or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Horse Hill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ring Mountain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BEL
                                                                                                                                                                     B                                                                              OSP
                                                                                                                                                                           Cree
                                                                                                                                                                                         E. lithed
                                                                                                                                                                                  k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SUTTON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OSP
                                                                                                                                                                                               Mad ale AvRYAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                                                                                                  era    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       West Cree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AIRE
                                                                                                                                                                           DEL                  M             CREEK            Alto      MANOR                                     Ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ve                                                                            st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   an
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ille
                                                                                                                                                                                               Reed
                                                                                                                                                                                                     rA          Ry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      de
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l         Creek                                                                              TI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BU
                                                                                                                                                                            PRESIDIOCreek                                 Camino    Pre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         io
                                                                                                                               s Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LV                    N
                                                                                                                                                                                      Shoreline
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Tib
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ur     ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ER
                                                                                                                                                                             ¬
                                                                                                                                                                             «
                                                                                                                                                                                                        y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¤                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bothin
                                                                                                                                                                               1                                  Almonte                                                                                         B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Marsh
                                                                                                                                                                                               COYOTE                                                    101                                                      lvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OSP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Coyote
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Creek
                                      Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                                          Tam Valley
                                                                                                                                                                                                 CREEK                                Valley Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Marin City
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         so n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oa                                                               rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                     yh              ne                kw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ew                       ha ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                        an             ss                         od                     dg                            B
                                                                     Larkspur Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ee                         Va               Bri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       lley
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ek   Te                                                                ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cre         n                                      Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Blv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SAUSALITO
                                                                                                                                                  Watershed Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                  Road
                                                                                                                                                  City or Town
      Galena Creek                                                                                                                         City Boundary
                                                                                                                           Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                  Mill Valley
                                                                                                                                                  Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                  Tiburon
                                                                                                                                                  Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                  Sausalito
                                                                                                                                           Parks & Open Space
                                                                                                                                                  County Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ³
                                                                                                                                                  Water District
                                                                                                                                                  State Park
                                                                                                                                                  National Park                                                                                                                             Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                           1                        2
   Cascade Creek                                                                                                                       Richardson Bay Watershed                                                                                                                                            County of Marin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Department of Public Works
                                                                                                                                       Map for general purposes only; not for site-specific planning purposes.                                                                                             www.marinwatersheds.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NATURAL
                                                       Arroyo /
    Old Mill Creek                                     Corte Madera/              Warner Canyon
                                                       Del Presidio                   Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ENVIRONEMENT
                                    Old Mill Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CLIMATE
                                                                        Downtown                                                                                                                                                                                  Alto                                                                             ACTION
                                                                                                      E.
                                                                                                           BL                         ALTO
                                                                                                             ITH
                                                                                                                ED
                                                                                                                  AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                       E         INO
                                                                                                                               CAM
                Muir Woods Park                       Reed Creek                         M
                                                                                            ILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                             ER
                                                                                              AV E
                                                                   Homestead
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NOISE
                     Redwood Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                       Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                  Coyote Creek
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 5.2:
       5.1: Creeks  & Wetlands
            Mill Valley Watershed & Subwatersheds
        City Boundary             Perennial Stream            Mill Valley Watershed
                                                                      Arroyo Corte Madera
                                                                                                     [
                                                                                                                   0             0.25                                        0.5 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Citations/
                                                                       Del Presidio Subwatershed
        Highway                   Ephemeral Stream            Ross Valley Watershed
                                                                       Sutton Manor Subwatershed
        Roads                                                 Waterbody or Wetlands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Appendices
                                  Richardson Bay & Wetlands                                                        Source: Marin Map, 2012
                                                                                                                   County of Marin, Department of Public Works 2013
                                                                       Ryan Creek Subwatershed
                                                                                                                                                       MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                                        117

                                    The combination of natural conditions – Mount Tamalpais, with its
Mill Valley is blessed              ridges, valleys, and waterways, and the bay marshlands – compos-
with a natural setting              es the physical and aesthetic setting for the community. The merg-
rich in resources from              ing of the town with the flatlands and shoreline of Richardson Bay
wooded slopes, to                   links Mill Valley and the unincorporated Tam Junction area to the
riparian corridors, to              greater San Francisco Bay region, with its diversity of topology and
                                    vegetation types, micro-environments, and habitats, from open bay
marshy bayfront.                    water to steep, dry, chaparral ridges and deep, moist redwood ra-
                                    vines.
                                    A survey of the existing natural resources in the Planning Area in-
                                    dicates that many of the native communities and habitats of the
                                    Bay Area are represented in Mill Valley. As it has throughout the
                                    Bay Area, the natural landscape of Mill Valley has been altered by
                                    development, road construction, agriculture, and modification of
                                    native processes (such as fire and flood regimes). Natural succes-
                                    sion—the process by which a plant or animal community alters its
                                    own environment to the extent that the changed conditions lead
                                    to replacement by species that are better adapted—has occurred.
                                    “Unnatural” succession has also occurred, to the extent that hu-
                                    mans have consciously or unconsciously brought about changed
                                    conditions, such as introducing “exotic” and invasive (non-native)
                                    plants, suppressing periodic fires, and grazing domestic livestock.
                                    The urban extent of Mill Valley and the unincorporated areas imme-
                                    diately south of the City now surrounds the tip of Richardson Bay,
                                    leaving an ever-narrowing margin of shoreline habitats as part of
                                    the City’s natural heritage.
                                    The principal open space resources in the community include its
                                    creek systems, which have both functional (drainage and flood
                                    control) and aesthetic values; the community’s biotic resources,
                                    which include vegetation and diverse wildlife habitats; and other
                                    open space areas with natural habitat and scenic vistas. Native bi-
                                    otic resources include redwood groves, mixed stands of broad-leaf
                                    evergreens, oak woodland, chaparral, coastal scrub, grasslands,
                                    marshes, and mudflats. Non-native, introduced species also con-
                                    tribute to the biotic resources, and, in fact, dominate the urban
                                    portions of the setting. (A more detailed description of these biotic
                                    resources is provided on a sub-area basis later in this element.)
Click Off (2008)
Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission The locations of biotic communities found in Mill Valley are shown
Photographer: Abby Wasserman        in Figure 5.3 and descriptions are provided in Appendix E. Land
118

                                            Fra
                                                                                                                                                                            INTRODUCTION
                                      Larkspur
                                                                    Larkspur Creek
                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                         Æ
                                                                                                                                                                            LAND USE
      Galena Creek
                                                                                                                         Corte Madera
   Cascade Creek                                                                                                                                                            MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                          COMMUNITY
                                                      Arroyo /
    Old Mill Creek                                    Corte Madera/              Warner Canyon
                                                                                                                                                                            VITALITY
                                                      Del Presidio                   Creek
                                    Old Mill Creek                                                                                                                           NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                          ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                       Downtown                                                                       Alto
                                                                                                                                                                          CLIMATE
                                                                                                    E.
                                                                                                         BL                    ALTO
                                                                                                           ITH
                                                                                                              ED
                                                                                                                AL            INO
                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                                             CAM
                                                                                                                                                                          ACTION
                Muir Woods Park                      Reed Creek                        M
                                                                                        ILL
                                                                                           ER
                                                                                            AV E
                                                                  Homestead                                                                                                HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                                                                          PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                             Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                            NOISE
                     Redwood Creek
                                                                                                                                      Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                           GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                          ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                Coyote Creek
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 5.2: Creeks & Wetlands
        City Boundary             Perennial Stream           Mill Valley Watershed
                                                                                                                                                                           Citations/
                                                                                                   [
                                                                                                                 0            0.25        0.5 Miles
        Highway                   Ephemeral Stream           Ross Valley Watershed
                                                                                                                                                                          Appendices
        Roads                                                Waterbody or Wetlands                               Source: Marin Map, 2012
                                                                                                                                        MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN              119

                                    cover types found within the City are shown in Figure 5.4, and the
                                    soil types and geology of the area are presented in Figure 5.5.
                                    Mill Valley is committed to the protection of its biological heritage.
                                    To this end, the City strives to ensure the protection of its natural
                                    resources. Vegetative communities develop over time based on a
                                    delicate interaction among the climate, topography, geology, and
                                    ecology of a given area. With its unique and varied landscape,
                                    Mill Valley has 13 distinct vegetative communities. Native commu-
                                    nities include oak/bay woodland, Douglas fir/redwood woodland,
                                    coastal scrub, oak woodland, Douglas fir woodland, and coastal
                                    salt marsh. These habitats are afforded some protection under
                                    state or local laws and ordinances.
                                    Within the vegetative communities of Mill Valley, there have also
                                    been observations of rare plant species, and there is potential for
                                    additional rare species to occur as well. Examples of such spe-
                                    cies include Marin manzanita (Arctostaphylos virgata), Mount Ta-
                                    malpais manzanita (Arctostaphylos montana ssp. montana), Point
                                    Reyes bird’s beak (Chloropyron maritimum ssp. palustre), Napa
                                    false indigo (Amorpha californica var. napensis), San Francisco Bay
                                    spineflower (Chorizanthe cuspidata var. cuspidata), Marin checker
                                    lily (Fritillaria lanceolata var. tristulis), and diablo helianthella (He-
                                    lianthella castanea).
                                    Additionally, the generalized locations of threatened and endan-
                                    gered plant species are shown in Figure 5.6.
                                    Natural features are the primary ingredients that establish the vi-
                                    sual character of Mill Valley. Major ridgelines, which still have rela-
                                    tively few residential structures on them, sharply define the north,
                                    west, and south limits of the community. This sense of visual con-
                                    tainment and separation from adjoining communities is reinforced
                                    by lower hill forms such as Alto and Kite Hills and Shelter Ridge,
                                    which help define the entrance points to the community. The flat
                                    marshlands, mudflats, bayfront parklands, and water of upper
                                    Richardson Bay contrast with the rugged hill landscape and open
                                    up opportunities for expansive views toward San Francisco and,
Click Off (2004)
Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission from the opposite direction, the chance to view all of these open
Photographer: Abby Wasserman        space features as a unit.
120

                                                                                                                                                                        INTRODUCTION
                                      Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                        LAND USE
                                                                                                                                                         £
                                                                                                                                                         Í
                                                                                                                       Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                        MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                      COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                        VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                                         NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                      ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                  Alto
                                                                                                                                                                      CLIMATE
                                                                                                     E.
                                                                                                          BL
                                                                                                            ITH
Muir Woods Park                                                                                                ED
                                                                                                                 AL
                                                                                                                                                                      ACTION
                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                         M
                                                                                          ILL
                                                                                             ER
                                                                                              AV E
                                                                                                                                                                       HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                       CAMINO ALTO
                                                                                                                                                                      PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                    Homestead
                                                                                                                                                         Strawberry
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 5.3: Vegetative Communities                                                                                                                                      NOISE
      Montane Hardwood                      Saline Emergent Wetland
                                                                                                                                      Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                       GENERAL PLAN
      Montane Hardwood-Conifer              Lacustrine
      Eucalyptus                            Barren
                                            Urban
                                                                                                                                                                      ADMINISTRATION
      Coastal Oak Woodland
      Redwood                               Water
      Mixed Chaparral                       City Boundary
      Coastal Scrub                         Mill Valley Arterials
      Annual Grass                          Highway
[                                                                                                                                                                      Citations/
      0     0.25        0.5 Miles   Source: US Department of Agriculture Forest Service, 2000 and 2007
                                                                                                                                                                      Appendices
                                                                                                                                     MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN             121

                                                 Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                           £
                                                                                                                                                           Í
                                                                                                                          Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                    Alto
                                                                                                     E.
                                                                                                          BL
                                                                                                            ITH
                                                                                                                ED
                                                                                                                  AL
                                                                                                                    E
      Muir Woods Park
                                                                                         M
                                                                                          ILL
                                                                                             ER
                                                                                              AV E
                                                                                                                        CAMINO ALTO
                                                                      Homestead
                                                                                                                                                           Strawberry
                                                                                                                                      Almonte
 Mill Valley General Plan
 Figure 5.4: Land Cover Types                                                                                  *Developed, Low Intensity: Areas with a mixture of
                                                                                                               constructed materials and vegetation. Impervious
         Open Water                                    Shrub/Scrub                                             surfaces account for 20% to 49% percent of total cover.
                                                                                                               These areas most commonly include single-family
         Developed, Open Space                         Grassland/Herbaceous                                    housing units.
         Developed, Low Intensity*                     Emergent Herbacous Wetlands
                                                                                                               **Developed, Medium Intensity: Areas with a mixture of
         Developed, Medium Intensity**                 City Boundary                                           constructed materials and vegetation. Impervious
                                                                                                               surfaces account for 50% to 79% of the total cover. These
         Developed, High Intensity; Barren***          Mill Valley Arterials
                                                                                                               areas most commonly include single-family housing units.
         Barren Land (Rock/Sand/Clay)                  Highway
                                                                                                               ***Developed, High Intensity: Highly developed areas
                                                [
         Deciduous Forest                              0       0.25       0.5 Miles                            where people reside or work in high numbers. Examples
         Evergreen Forest                                                                                      include apartment complexes, row houses and
                                                                                                               commercial/industrial. Impervious surfaces account for
         Mixed Forest                           Source: USGS National Land Cover Database, 2006                80% to 100% of the total cover.
122

                                                                                                                                                                      INTRODUCTION
                                                   Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                   £
                                                                                                                                                   Í
                                                                                                                                                                      LAND USE
                                                                                                                    Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                      MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                    COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                      VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                                       NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                    ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                Alto
       Muir Woods Park
                                                                                                                       ! !!
                                                                                                                                                                    CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                                                    ACTION
                                                                                                                       ! !!
                                                                                                                       ! !!
 Mill Valley General Plan                                                                                                          !!
 Figure 5.5: Soils & Geology                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                                                                                     HAZARDS &
 Geology
                                                                                                                                          !!!
                                                                            Homestead                                                     !!!
                                                                                                                                                                    PUBLIC SAFETY
         Artificial fill over Bay (Historic)                                                                                              !!!
                                                                                                                                          !!!
                                                                                                                                                       Strawberry
         Franciscan complex, melange
!!!    !!
!!!    ! !Franciscan complex, chert (Cretaceous and Jurassic)
!!
! !!
   !   !!
       ! !!
!!!    ! !Franciscan
          !          complex, greenstone (Jurassic)
!!!    !! !
!!!    !! !
          Coast Range ophiolite, serpentinite (Late and Middle Jurassic)
 Soil Name                                                                                                                                                            NOISE
           Cronkhite-Barnabe Complex, 30-50% Slopes                               Hydraquents, Saline
           Dipsea-Barnabe Very Gravelly Loams, 50-75% Slopes                      Water                                         Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                     GENERAL PLAN
           Dipsea-Urban Land-Barnabe Complex, 30-50% Slopes                       Xerorthents, Fill
           Los Osos-Bonnydoon Complex, 30-50% Slopes                              Xerorthents-Urban Land Complex, 0-9% Slopes
                                                                                                                                                                    ADMINISTRATION
           Los Osos-Urban Land-Bonnydoon Complex, 15-30% Slopes                   Tocaloma-McMullin Complex, 30-50% Slopes
           Maymen-Maymen Variant Gravelly Loams, 30-75% Slopes                    Tocaloma-McMullin Complex, 50-75% Slopes
           Saurin-Bonnydoon Complex, 30-50% Slopes                                Tocaloma-McMullin-Urban Land Complex, 15-30% Slopes
           Saurin-Urban Land-Bonnydoon Complex, 15-30% Slopes                     Tocaloma-McMullin-Urban Land Complex, 30-50% Slopes
           Saurin-Urban Land-Bonnydoon Complex, 30-50% Slopes
                                                                                                                                                                     Citations/
                                                                                  Tocaloma-Saurin Association, Very Steep
  [
           0           0.25           0.5 Miles                            Source: Marin Map, 2012
                                                                                                                                                                    Appendices
                                                                                                                                MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                123

                                       Richardson Bay Watershed
                                       Mill Valley, Tiburon, Sausalito, Marin City, Tamalpais Valley, and Bel-
                                       vedere are linked together by the watershed lands draining to Rich-
                                       ardson Bay, a shallow, protected, biologically rich wildlife preserve.
                                       Richardson Bay is considered one of the most “pristine estuaries
                                       on the Pacific Coast in spite of its urbanized periphery.”1 The bay
                                       is recognized as an Important Bird Area (IBA) and is located on the
                                       Pacific Flyway, an important migratory bird corridor. During the win-
                                       ter months, the bay supports hundreds of thousands of waterbirds,
                                       including shorebirds and waterfowl.
                                       The watershed supports a number of special-status plants and ani-
                                       mals. Of particular interest are the occurrences of species found in
                                       coastal marsh in the lower watershed. Noteworthy species include
                                       California black rail, San Pablo song sparrow, salt marsh harvest
                                       mouse, and Point Reyes bird’s beak. At higher elevations, northern
                                       spotted owl territories occur in wooded areas along several creeks.
                                       There is a small population of California red-legged frog (CRLF),
                                       federally listed as threatened and a California Species of Special
                                       Concern, on the Tiburon Peninsula.2 The population was discov-
                                       ered in 1997 at a small pond, formerly a lagoon, at Keil Cove. A
                                       second sighting was made in 2000 in coast live oak woodland to
                                       the northwest of the Keil Cove sighting. This is probably the last
                                       remaining population on the peninsula.
                                       The Arroyo Corte Madera del Presidio subwatershed still supports
                                       a steelhead trout run. Old Mill and Cascade Creeks support the
                                       healthiest remaining fisheries habitat in the watershed. Due to
                                       their ephemeral nature, the small creeks draining directly to Rich-
                                       ardson Bay do not support sustainable fisheries. The Arroyo Corte
                                       Madera del Presidio subwatershed is known to support nine fish
                                       species (seven native and two introduced). Native species include
                                       California roach, Sacramento pikeminnow, Coho salmon, steelhead
                                       trout, threespine stickleback, and staghorn and prickly sculpins.
                                       Introduced species include rainwater killifish and western mos-
                                       quitofish.3 Recorded observations of Coho date from the 1940s to
                                       1960s; Coho were last seen in 1981.4 Steelhead, federally listed as
                                       a threatened species, continue to inhabit Arroyo Corte Madera del
View of Mill Valley and Richardson Bay Presidio in reduced numbers.
                                       1
                                         Richardson Bay Audubon, 2008
                                       2
                                         CDFG, 2008
                                       3
                                         Leidy, 2007
                                       4
                                         Leidy et al., 2005
124

                                                                                                                        INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                     £
                                                                                                     Í
                                                                                                                        LAND USE
                                                Larkspur
                                                                       Corte Madera
                                                                                                                        MOBILITY
                                                                                                                      COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                        VITALITY
                                                                                                                         NATURAL
                                                                                                  Alto                ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                      CLIMATE
                                                                                                                      ACTION
  Muir Woods Park
                                                                                                                       HAZARDS &
                                                           Homestead                                     Strawberry
                                                                                                                      PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                        NOISE
                                                                          Almonte
                                                                                                                       GENERAL PLAN
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 5.6: Threatened and Endangered Plant Species
                                                                                                                      ADMINISTRATION
     Diablo helianthella, small groundcone, and minute pocket moss
     Tamalpais oak
     Mt. Tamalpais manzanita
     Marsh microseris
                                                                                                                       Citations/
      Small groundcone                        Water
      Thin-lobed horkelia
                                                                                                                      Appendices
                                                                             [
                                              City Boundary                           0    0.25     0.5 Miles
      Hairless popcorn flower
                                              Mill Valley Roads
      Point Reyes bird’s-beak                 Highway                        Sources: Marin Map, 2012; CNDDB, 2013
                                                                               MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                   125

              Local Creeks and Seasonal Wetlands
              Within the city limits, streams and tributaries form four drainage ba-
              sins on the southeast flank and ridges of Mount Tamalpais. This hy-
              drologic system is illustrated in Figure 5.2. The overall Arroyo Corte
              Madera del Presidio basin extends southeast from over 2,500 feet
              in elevation on Mount Tamalpais to sea level at Richardson Bay,
              covering an area of 6.0 square miles. The basin generally slopes
              from a westerly to easterly direction, forming four sub-basins: (1)
              Arroyo Corte Madera Creek in West Blithedale Canyon, (2) the Cas-
              cade Creek basin, (3) the Warner Creek basin, and (4) the Reed
              Creek basin (Homestead Valley). The Salt Creek basin (Scott Valley
              and Sutton Manor) is situated west of Highway 101 and extends
              southerly from over 400 feet elevation in the Town of Corte Madera
              to sea level at Richardson Bay. The seasonally heavy fresh water
              flows from the entire watershed help to flush the marshes and har-
              bor of Richardson Bay. Coyote Creek is the main stream in Tam Val-
              ley. From its source in the Golden Gate National Recreation Area
              and southwest flanks of Mount Tamalpais, it descends through the
              valley and has been in part redirected and channelized to run par-
              allel to Shoreline Highway. The creek crosses under the highway
              just south of Tam Junction and empties into Richardson Bay. The
              capacity of the lower creek is maintained by periodic dredging in
              order to prevent severe flooding.
              The integrity of this network of streams, ravines, and springs that
              descend abruptly from the upper reaches of the mountain down
              through the center of the City and its neighboring valleys is often
              threatened by human actions. Throughout the watershed, grading,
              excavation, vegetation removal, and replacement of natural ground
              surface by impervious structures and paved surfaces have led to
              flooding and erosion of channel banks. Along the creek channels,
              construction of bridges, roads, culverts, closely abutting residenc-
              es, and other structures have led to disruption of creekside vegeta-
              tion, obstruction of creek flows, erosion, and maintenance prob-
              lems. Where portions of the creeks are exposed to close-by urban
              development, litter accumulates and ends up in the creeks.
              Creeks in Mill Valley provide open water and riparian habitats that
              support a diverse community of plant and wildlife species. Aquatic
              habitat in the upper reaches of Arroyo Corte Madera del Presidio
              (Mill Creek) and Old Mill Creek are known spawning and rearing
Old Mil Creek habitats for central California coast steelhead (Oncorhynchus
126
                                                                                                                              INTRODUCTION
mykiss irideus), a protected species5 (See Figure 5.7). Additionally,
                                                                                                                              LAND USE
critical habitat has been designated for green sturgeon (Acipenser
medirostris) in Richardson Bay and its tributaries (including Arroyo
Corte Madera del Presidio) up to the limit of tidal influence.6 This
species is not known to spawn in the vicinity of Mill Valley, though
tidal and open waters of Richardson Bay may offer important forag-
                                                                                                                              MOBILITY
ing opportunities. Mill Valley’s creeks support many aquatic spe-
cies, including three-spine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus),
river lamprey (Lampetra ayresii), white sturgeon (Acipenser trans-
                                                                                                                            COMMUNITY
montanus), Pacific chorusfrog (Pseudacris regilla), California newt
(Taricha torosa), sculpin (Cottus spp.) and California roach (Hes-
                                                                                                                              VITALITY
peroleucus symmetricus).
Historically, Arroyo Corte Madera del Presidio was home to the fed-
erally and state-listed endangered central California coast coho
                                                                                                                               NATURAL
salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch). This species has not been ob-
served in Mill Valley for several decades, and its absence is likely
                                                                                                                            ENVIRONEMENT
due to fishing pressure, urban development, and the alteration of
Arroyo Corte Madera from its natural state. In the 2004 Recovery
Strategy for California Coho Salmon, the California Department of
Fish and Game recommended restoration of Arroyo Corte Madera’s
historic Coho salmon habitat.7 Restoration of Arroyo Corte Madera                                                           CLIMATE
could play an essential role in the recovery of coho salmon, steel-                                                         ACTION
head, green sturgeon, and other species in Marin County. Arroyo
Corte Madera is also considered a potential location to reintroduce
                                                                                                                             HAZARDS &
the federally listed endangered tidewater goby (Eucyclogobius
newberryi).8
                                                                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY
5
    CalFish, CalFish Data and Maps, 2013, http://www.calfish.org/DataampMaps/
CalFishGeographicData/ tabid/91/Default.aspx, accessed January 2, 2013
6
    National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Final Rulemaking                                                  NOISE
to Designate Critical Habitat for the Threatened Southern Distinct Population
Segment of North American Green Sturgeon, Federal Register, Vol. 74, No. 195,
                                                                                                                             GENERAL PLAN
October 9, 2009.
7
    California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG), 2004 Recovery Strategy for
                                                                                                                            ADMINISTRATION
California Coho Salmon: Report to the California Fish and Game Commission,
http://www.dfg.ca.gov/fish/documents/SAL_SH/SAL_Coho_Recovery/ReportTo
Commission_2004/CohoRCohoRecoveryStr.pdf, February 2004
8
    U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Recovery Plan for the Tidewater Goby (Eucy-
                                                                                                                             Citations/
clogobius newberryi), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Portland, Oregon, vi + 199   Click Off (2008)
pp., 2005                                                                          Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission
                                                                                                                            Appendices
                                                                                                 MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       127

                                    Mill Valley’s creeks support riparian vegetation, a plant community
                                    associated with watercourses. Riparian communities are typified
                                    by tree species such as willow, alder, and cottonwood combined
                                    with an understory of shrubs, vines, grasses, or herbaceous wet-
                                    land vegetation such as California blackberry (Rubus ursinus), tall
                                    flatsedge (Cyperus eragrostis), California wildrose (Rosa californi-
                                    ca), or poison oak (Toxicodendron diversilobum). Along with these
                                    native species, the riparian understory in Mill Valley may include
                                    non-native, invasive species such as giant reed (Arundo donax),
                                    wild oats (Avena species), sedge (Carex pendula), or Himalayan
                                    blackberry (Rubus armeniacus).
                                    The typically complex structure of riparian communities, as well as
                                    their proximity to water, makes them important habitat features
                                    for wildlife. Riparian corridors are commonly used by wildlife as
                                    contiguous features that allow movement and access amongst
                                    otherwise fragmented habitat. Movement corridors also provide
                                    cover from predators, allowing birds, bats, mammals, amphibians,
                                    and reptiles to move or migrate throughout the region. Native wild-
                                    life species that may be observed in riparian habitat in Mill Valley
                                    include red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis), California quail (Cal-
                                    lipepla californica), tree swallow (Tachycineta bicolor), barn owl
                                    (Tyto alba), Pacific chorusfrog, common garter snake (Thamnophis
                                    sirtalis), California myotis (Myotis californicus), dusky-footed wood-
                                    rat (Neotoma fuscipes), and Columbian blacktail deer (Odocoileus
                                    hemionus columbian). The North American river otter (Lontra ca-
                                    nadensis) has also returned to Mill Valley’s watersheds. Native
                                    wildlife species recently extirpated from Mill Valley’s watersheds
                                    include Pacific pond turtle (Actinemys marmorata), California red-
                                    legged frog (Rana draytonii), foothill yellow-legged frog (Rana boylii),
                                    Coho salmon (oncorhynchus kisutch), California freshwater shrimp
                                    (Syncaris pacifica), and sooty crayfish (Pacifastacus nigrescens).
                                    Seasonal wetlands are another important landscape feature found
                                    in Mill Valley. They form in depressions, swales, and floodplains
                                    that retain water for at least a few weeks every year. Wetlands are
                                    valued and protected for their benefits to water quality, air quality,
                                    and habitat for plants and wildlife. Birds, reptiles, and amphib-
                                    ians rely on the aquatic habitat and the emergent vegetation it sup-
                                    ports. Bats hunt for insects over and drink from open water, while
Click Off (2008)                    other mammals may find sustenance and drinking water at these
Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission features.
128

                                                                                                                                                                   INTRODUCTION
                                       Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                    £
                                                                                                                                                    Í
                                                                                                                                                                   LAND USE
                                                                                                               Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                   MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                 COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                   VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                                    NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                 ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                             Alto
                                                                                          E.
                                                                                               BL
                                                                                                 ITH
                                                                                                    ED
                                                                                                      AL
                                                                          M                             E
                                                                          ILL
                                                                                                                                                                 CLIMATE
   Muir Woods Park                                                            ER
                                                                               AV E
                                                                                                                                                                 ACTION
                                                                                                            CAMINO ALTO
                                                            Homestead                                                                                             HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                    Strawberry
                                                                                                                            Almonte                                NOISE
Mill Valley General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                  GENERAL PLAN
Figure 5.7: Critical Wildlife Habitat
                                                                                                                                                                 ADMINISTRATION
Critical Habitat Areas                  Threatened & Endangered Species
      Steelhead Salmon                            California black rail
      Northern spotted owl
                                                  San Pablo song sparrow & California clapper rail
      Marbled murrelet
                                                                                                                                                                  Citations/
      Northern spotted owl sightings
                                                                                         [
                                                                                                       0                  0.25   0.5 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                 Appendices
      Wetlands                                    City Boundary
      Northern Coastal Salt Marsh                 Mill Valley Arterials                  Sources: Marin Map, 2012; CNDDB, 2013; US Fish and Wildlife
                                                                                         Service, 2013; San Francisco Estuary Institute, 2013; National
      Streams                                     Highway                                Marine Fisheries Service, 2006
                                                                                                                                 MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN            129

                                                     Shoreline and Tidal Marsh
                                                     The shoreline of upper Richardson Bay, both within the Mill Val-
                                                     ley city limits and in the unincorporated areas to the south of the
                                                     City, was once an extensive marsh system. Now it consists of a se-
                                                     ries of small vestigial tidal marshes, varying in size and condition,
                                                     and filled developed and undeveloped land. The early marshes of
                                                     Richardson Bay, prior to about 1930, extended into Alto, up Miller
                                                     Avenue to La Goma, into Tamalpais and Tennessee Valleys, into the
                                                     area now occupied by Strawberry Shopping Center, and around de
                                                     Silva Island. Gradually, diking and filling have greatly reduced the
                                                     total marsh acreage, while concomitant siltation from development
                                                     in the watershed has moved marshlands far forward into the bay
                                                     itself, substituting former open water with shallow mudflats and
                                                     new marshes. Remains of the old marsh have been fragmented by
                                                     re-routing of creeks entering the bay and by dredging of the harbor.
                                                     The original, pre-Gold Rush shoreline is almost entirely obliterated.
                                                     The result of all these modifications is an “unnatural” shoreline,
                                                     in Mill Valley as well as in adjacent lands. In spite of modifica-
                                                     tions, the shoreline area retains significant natural features – a
                                                     diversity of plants associated with tidal and non-tidal salt marshes
                                                     and important refuge and feeding areas for migrating and resident
                                                     shorebirds and water fowl. Typically, marsh plants are distributed
                                                     according to an elevation gradient relative to tidal submergence.
                                                     The lowest emergent plant – subject to the most frequent and pro-
                                                     longed submergence daily – is Pacific cordgrass (Spartina foliosa),
                                                     which colonizes mudflats as they approach an elevation permitting
                                                     daily tidal exposure. Cordgrass is known for its high productivity as
                                                     a food source in detrital form to a chain of organisms extending
                                                     into the bay (estuary) and beyond. In Mill Valley, cordgrass is repre-
                                                     sented in the marshes adjacent to the Redwood Highway Frontage
                                                     Road at Hamilton Drive (near Goodman Building Supply) and in the
                                                     small channels in the upper tip of Richardson Bay, near the PG&E
                                                     substation on Roque Moraes. Narrow bands grow on the banks of
                                                     the harbor.
                                                     The Tamalpais Preserve (Bothin Marsh) is located in Richardson
                                                     Bay within the jurisdictions of both the City of Mill Valley and the
                                                     County of Marin. In the County portion, near Tam Junction, exten-
                                                     sive stands of cordgrass have developed over the past two decades
Elizabeth Terwilliger Marsh, located adjacent to the following removal of tidegates and resumption of tidal action. The
Mill Valley Community Center                         banks of Coyote Creek also support bands of cordgrass, although
130

                                                                                                                             INTRODUCTION
these are periodically removed (every six to eight years) during
                                                                                                                             LAND USE
dredging for flood control. Cordgrass has also re-established in the
large marsh opposite Tamalpais High School, as a result of breach-
ing of the levee and resumption of tidal action. This latter area is
partially in the City and partially in the County.
                                                                                                                             MOBILITY
Middle levels of the salt marsh are dominated by pickleweed but
also support a diversity of plants adapted to less frequent tidal
submergence than cordgrass. Pickleweed also contributes food in
                                                                                                                           COMMUNITY
detrital form to the animal life of the estuary. This is the most ex-
tensive plant association in the marshes and is well represented in
                                                                                                                             VITALITY
several marshes on City-owned lands west of the harbor, on both
sides of Arroyo Corte Madera del Presidio. In a small marsh ad-
joining Mill Valley Middle School, pickleweed occupies most of the
area. Pickleweed also occupies much of the marsh opposite the
                                                                                                                              NATURAL
Tamalpais High School playing field (in both the City and County)
and occurs at medium elevations at the mouth of Coyote Creek in
                                                                                                                           ENVIRONEMENT
the Tamalpais Preserve (Bothin Marsh) area, as well as along the
Manzanita and Shoreline Center areas south of Richardson Bay
Bridge.
Upper margins of the marsh, infrequently inundated by high tide                                                            CLIMATE
but subject to high levels of soil salinity, are occupied by salt grass                                                    ACTION
and several associates. Marshes in both the City and County in-
clude limited amounts of this association around the upper periph-
                                                                                                                            HAZARDS &
ery of pickleweed marshes. These marshes are also the habitat
for Point Reyes bird’s beak, which has been documented to occur
                                                                                                                           PUBLIC SAFETY
within the City as shown in Figure 5.6.
Only a few small areas of non-tidal, seasonal marsh remain in the
shorelands of either the City or County around upper Richardson
Bay. On both sides of the realigned Coyote Creek, vestigial marshes                                                          NOISE
remain, wetted only by extreme high tides. In their present condi-
tion, these areas offer high-quality habitat in the fall and winter,
                                                                                                                            GENERAL PLAN
following the onset of the rainy season. They could also be restored
to more complete tidal action.
The large, formerly diked seasonal marsh opposite the Tamalpais                                                            ADMINISTRATION
High School playing field demonstrated how readily tidal action can
restore a viable marsh. After the levee was breached, patches of
                                                                          Mill Valley shoreline and tidal marsh adjacent
                                                                                                                            Citations/
pickleweed began to spread, and cordgrass re-established in drain-        to Miller Avenue between Camino Alto and
age channels. Salt grass, brass buttons, and salt-bush, all aggres-
                                                                                                                           Appendices
                                                                          Almonte
                                                                                         MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN              131

                                    sive colonizers of disturbed marshes, have become established.
                                    The diversity of bird species using the area has also increased
                                    since tidal restoration.
                                    Conservation and restoration of tidal marsh, diked marsh, shore-
                                    line, and open water habitat benefit a variety of productive biologi-
                                    cal processes and resources provided by these communities. Tidal
                                    marshes and wetlands serve to purify water resources by assimilat-
                                    ing waste and trapping pollution from urban runoff and improve air
                                    quality by sequestering greenhouse gasses and producing oxygen.
                                    Marsh vegetation can also increase the retention of storm water,
                                    thereby recharging groundwater and slowing or diminishing peak
                                    flood levels. Marshes also prevent shoreline erosion and protect
                                    the City by absorbing wave energy and storm surges. Maintain-
                                    ing and enhancing these valuable services is an important adapta-
                                    tion strategy as sea levels and storm events are altered by climate
                                    change. Conservation and enhancement of Bothin Marsh and the
                                    waters that contribute to it ensure that the City will continue to
                                    enjoy these free, natural services, even in the face of a dynamic
                                    climate.
                                    Marsh communities in Mill Valley and around the bay also provide
                                    habitat for specialized plant and wildlife species. Some species are
                                    so specialized that they depend completely on San Francisco Bay
                                    tidal marsh and have subsequently followed the path of the marsh
                                    in its decline. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) calls for
                                    the recovery of several species that depend on tidal marsh, includ-
                                    ing salt marsh harvest mouse (Reithrodontomys raviventris), salt
                                    marsh wandering shrew (Sorex vagrans halicoetes), California clap-
                                    per rail (Rallus longirostris obsoletus), California black rail (Lateral-
                                    lus jamaicensis coturniculus), San Francisco common yellowthroat
                                    (Geothlypis trichas sinuosa), Samuel’s (San Pablo) song sparrow
                                    (Melospiza melodia samuelis), and long-billed curlew (Numenius
                                    americanus), as well as marsh plant species including California
                                    sea-blite (Suaeda californica), and Pacific cordgrass (Spartina fo-
                                    liosa), among others. In addition, the National Marine Fisheries
                                    Service (NMFS) has identified marsh habitat and its surrounding
                                    coastal waters as “essential fish habitat” and strives to protect this
                                    sensitive area for the fish species that depend on it for food and
Mill Valley Marsh area and wildlife shelter.
132

                                                                                                                                INTRODUCTION
Habitat features surrounding Mill Valley’s shoreline also act togeth-
                                                                                                                                LAND USE
er as an important wildlife movement corridor. Steelhead move
through Richardson Bay and into its tributaries to spawn. Juvenile
fish find refuge amongst vegetation and food close to shore before
moving to their adult habitats. For endangered salt marsh harvest
mice, large areas of contiguous marsh habitat are necessary for
                                                                                                                                MOBILITY
the recovery of the species. Maintaining connectivity between the
marsh plain and high marsh, vegetated levees, and grasslands is
essential for mice to escape high tides. Additionally, San Francisco
                                                                                                                              COMMUNITY
Bay is part of the Pacific Flyway, the north/south route for migratory
birds in the Americas. Open water, mud flats, and marsh habitat
                                                                                                                                VITALITY
offer essential stop-over locations for food, rest, and cover during
seasonal migrations.
Northern coastal salt marsh around the bay is both valuable and
                                                                                                                                 NATURAL
greatly reduced from its historic extent. This community has be-
come a high-priority community for both state and federal resource
                                                                                                                              ENVIRONEMENT
agencies. In its Draft Recovery Plan for Tidal Marsh Ecosystems of
Northern and Central California, the USFWS has included Mill Val-
ley’s shoreline in the Central/South San Francisco Bay Recovery
Unit.9 Major threats to these communities include climate change,
habitat loss and degradation, and invasion by exotic species such                                                             CLIMATE
as non-native cordgrass species.                                                                                              ACTION
Bayfront Park offers shoreline open space opportunities. In those
                                                                                                                               HAZARDS &
portions of the area that are not landscaped, vegetation consists
predominantly of the opportunistic grasses, annuals, and woody
                                                                                                                              PUBLIC SAFETY
plant species such as toyon and coyote brush. In the absence of
further landscaping, natural succession to a coastal scrub commu-
nity may occur. These portions of the “park” are at present used
for passive recreation.
                                                                                                                                NOISE
Grasslands, Chaparral, and Coastal Scrub
The city’s rich natural history goes beyond its shoreline, over rolling
                                                                                                                               GENERAL PLAN
hills and up steep wooded slopes, culminating in a scenic ridgeline
to the west and the foot of Mount Tamalpais to the northeast. The
                                                                                                                              ADMINISTRATION
regional topography and climate create niches for a variety of veg-                  Click Off (2007)
etation communities, which include redwood groves, broad-leaf ev-                    Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission
ergreens, oak woodland, chaparral, coastal scrub, and grasslands                     Photographer: Ginna Fleming
                                                                                                                               Citations/
9
    U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Draft Recovery Plan for Tidal Marsh Ecosystems
of Northern and Central California, Sacramento, California, xviii + 636 pp., 2010
                                                                                                                              Appendices
                                                                                                   MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       133

                             (see Figure 5.3). At lower elevations, open areas, coastal scrub,
                             chaparral, and grasslands dominate the landscape.
                             Although native grasses such as California’s state grass, the purple
                             needle grass (Nasella pulchra), and forbs persist in Mill Valley, the
                             City’s grasslands have not escaped the invasion of non-natives such
                             as ripgut brome (Bromus diandrus) and wild oats that have come to
                             dominate many of these communities in California. Wildlife associ-
                             ated with this habitat may include birds, reptiles, amphibians, and
                             mammals, and it may even be seasonally visited by the protected
                             salt marsh harvest mouse where it occurs near the marsh edge.
                             Burrowing mammals, such as American badger (Taxidea taxus),
                             Botta’s pocket gopher (Thomomys bottae), and California ground
                             squirrel (Otospermophilus beecheyi), play a key role in the grass-
                             land ecosystem. These species constantly dig and churn soils that
                             move seed, and their burrows provide subterranean homes for all
                             manner of wildlife including coyotes, mice, snakes, and insects.
                             California ground squirrels are a particularly important source of
                             food for grassland predators; American badgers depend on them,
                             as do golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) and others.
                             Forests and Woodlands
                             Forests and woodlands are found on the hills and slopes through-
                             out the City. These communities improve air quality, influence the
                             local climate, stabilize the soil, and provide food and places to live
                             for wildlife. Oak woodland communities consist of coast live oak,
                             California bay laurel, and a variety of shrubs and grasses in the un-
                             derstory. Acorns are an integral part of the local food web, feeding
                             deer, woodpeckers, squirrels, and others. Some of the large, old,
                             and more robust trees in this vegetation community are consid-
                             ered by the City of Mill Valley to be heritage trees, as are those that
                             meet the criteria in the redwood and evergreen forests.
                             Native trees that make up the towering Mill Valley forest canopy in-
                             clude Pacific madrone (Arbutus menziesii), Arroyo willow (Salix lasio-
                             lepis), Scoulter, Pacific coulter species (Salix spp.), Red Elderberry
                             (Sambucus callicarpa), coast redwood (Sequoia sempervirens),
                             Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii), Bay laurel (Umbellularia cali-
                             fornica), Giant Chinquapin (Castanopsis chrysophylla), California
                             nutmeg (Torreya californica), silk tassel (Garrya elliptica), red alder
                             (Alnus rubra), bigleaf maple (Acer macrophyllum), California buck-
Redwood grove in MIll Valley eye (Aesculus californica), Sargent cypress (Cupressus sargentii)
134

                                                                                                                   INTRODUCTION
and Northern California black walnut (Juglans hindsii), which is
                                                                                                                   LAND USE
rare. There are also a variety of oaks within Mill Valley including
coast live oak (Quercus agrifolia), canyon oak (Quercus chrysolep-
sis), chaparral oak (Quercus wislizeni), leather oak (Quercus Du-
rata), California black oak (Quercus kelloggii), oracle oak (Quercus
xmorehus), and tanbark oak (Lithocarpus densiflorus).
                                                                                                                   MOBILITY
The forest is home to the northern spotted owl (Strix occidentalis),
a protected species that is threatened by the removal of old-growth
                                                                                                                 COMMUNITY
forest and by competition from the more aggressive barred owl
(Strix varia). Immediately west of the city limits, the U.S. Fish and
                                                                                                                   VITALITY
Wildlife Service has designated critical habitat for marbled mur-
relet (Brachyramphus marmoratus), and it is possible that this
federally listed threatened species may have historically used old-
growth or second-growth forest within the City (see Figure 5.7).
                                                                                                                    NATURAL
                                                                                                                 ENVIRONEMENT
Sea Level Rise Due to Climate Change
The Richardson Bay watershed is one of the most highly suscep-
tible areas of Marin County to the impacts of climate change. Ris-
ing tide levels in San Francisco Bay will result in more shoreline
erosion as well as increased river flooding as the storm drain sys-                                              CLIMATE
tem is unable to drain against the rising tides. Loss of tidal marsh                                             ACTION
and upland transition zone from sea level rise will adversely affect
plant and animal species. In addition, short duration rainfall inten-
                                                                                                                  HAZARDS &
sities are anticipated to increase and will exacerbate storm water
flooding as well as landslides and soil erosion in the upper water-
                                                                                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
shed. Policies and programs to address sea level rise and climate
change are provided in this element and the Climate Action and
Hazards and Public Safety Elements of the General Plan.
                                                                                                                   NOISE
Open Space Preservation
Natural resources along Mill Valley’s edges are made up of both
public and private land. Some of the land is under the jurisdiction
                                                                                                                  GENERAL PLAN
of the Marin County Open Space District. These natural areas are
protected in a series of open space preserves: Blithedale Summit,
                                                                                                                 ADMINISTRATION
Camino Alto, and Alto Bowl to the north and Bothin Marsh to the
southeast. The wetlands of the Bothin Marsh Preserve, along with
those in Corte Madera, represent the majority of the tidal marsh
habitat of west-central San Francisco Bay. Protected lands are
                                                                                                                  Citations/
shown in Figure 5.8.                                                    Blithedale Summit Preserve
                                                                                                                 Appendices
                                                                                      MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       135

                                            The City of Mill Valley has successfully protected a number of large
                                            parcels of land that were identified in the 1989 General Plan Open
                                            Space Element. Although much of the open space “backdrop” for
                                            Mill Valley is under permanent public protection, a number of en-
                                            vironmentally sensitive parcels still remain. These lands have not
                                            been developed due to their steep slopes or proximity to existing
                                            open space, or because they support creeks or trails. Several of
                                            these sites were identified as priorities for protection by a Site Prior-
                                            ity Committee in January 2002.
                                            The City has several tools at its disposal to accumulate and protect
                                            open space. These tools include direct acquisition through pur-
                                            chase, purchase of tax defaulted property, acceptance of property
                                            donations, and negotiated development plans, which may be in
                                            the form of conservation easements or acquisition of development
                                            rights.
                                            Natural Resource Management, Conservation, Resto-
                                            ration, and Enhancement Opportunities
                                            Mill Valley hosts a range of biological communities and natural re-
                                            sources that perform valuable ecosystem services including flood
                                            control, fire prevention, and erosion protection and afford numer-
                                            ous opportunities for recreation. Many of these natural resources
                                            have been altered from their natural state due to urbanization
                                            and its cascading effects. Based on conditions as they exist today,
                                            however, there may be many opportunities to maintain, restore, or
                                            enhance these resources and ensure their viability for the future.
                                            These opportunities may include the following:
                                            •	 Preserving and enhancing wildlife movement corridors. Cor-
                                                 ridors are an essential component of maintaining sustainable
                                                 wildlife populations. Opportunities to achieve this within Mill
                                                 Valley include removing barriers to fish passage, maintaining
                                                 or enhancing connectivity between marshlands within the city
                                                 limits and those outside, and planning development to main-
                                                 tain habitat cover or preventing barriers to the movement of
                                                 wildlife. This may be accomplished by encouraging landscap-
                                                 ing using native vegetation, installing undercrossings during
                                                 routine road maintenance and construction, and incorporat-
                                                 ing wildlife-friendly features such as nest boxes or crevices for
Centennial documentary photo contest (2000)      roosting bats into construction plans.
Source: Mill Valley Public Library.
Photographer: Cole Slater
136

                                             Fra
                                                                                                                                                             INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                                             LAND USE
                                        Larkspur
                                                                                                                                          Æ
                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                             MOBILITY
                                                                                                             Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                           COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                             VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                              NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                           ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                           CLIMATE
                                                                    Downtown                                                           Alto
                                                                                           E.
                                                                                                BL                 ALTO
                                                                                                                                                           ACTION
                                                                                                  ITH
                                                                                                     ED
                                                                                                       AL         INO
                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                 CAM
                                                                                                                                                            HAZARDS &
                 Muir Woods Park                                               M
                                                                               ILL
                                                                                   ER
                                                                                    AV E
                                                                Homestead                                                                                  PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                              Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                             NOISE
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 5.8: Protected Lands
                                                                                                                                                            GENERAL PLAN
         City Boundary             Bay Area Protected Lands                                                               Almonte
         Highway
                                                                                                                                                           ADMINISTRATION
                                   Waterbody or Wetlands
         Roads                      50' Contours
[
     0            0.25      0.5 Miles     Source: Marin Map, 2012
                                                                                                                                                            Citations/
                                                                                                                                                           Appendices
                                                                                                                            MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN           137

                        •	 Planning for climate change. Estimates of sea level rise
                           change frequently, and federal and state resource manage-
                           ment agencies have collaborated to produce adaptive man-
                           agement strategies to assist local governments in preparing for
                           uncertain future conditions. Adaptive management includes a
                           monitoring element that would allow the City to track changes
                           in sea level rise, temperature, and water availability and plan
                           accordingly. This may include maintaining open spaces along
                           the shoreline and at low elevations, particularly where tidally
                           influenced vegetation communities will migrate inland over
                           time in response to sea level rise.
                        •	 Controlling invasive species. Opportunities currently exist to
                           protect vistas, wildlife corridors, unique habitats, and the rare
                           species of Mill Valley by managing and removing species that
                           potentially threaten the ecosystem, such as giant reed, inva-
                           sive Spartina species, non-native broom species, sedge (Car-
84%
                           ex pendula), and pampas grass (Cortaderia selloana). Public
                           outreach is instrumental to provide residents with information
                           about invasive species and encourage the public to use safe
                           techniques for weed abatement and native, drought-resistant
                           plants for landscaping.
of Marin County land is
protected as            •	 Restoring creeks and wetlands. Mill Valley’s creeks and wet-
                           lands provide valuable ecosystem services. Restoration of de-
parks, open space,         graded sites could further improve these natural services and
                           aid in the recovery of native and/or rare species. Restoration
tidelands &                may include removal of barriers to fish passage, removal of in-
                           vasive plants and wildlife, or maintenance or improvement of
farmlands                  habitat characteristics, such as structural complexity (i.e., add-
                           ing woody debris to channels, increasing riparian vegetation
                           along watercourses).
                        •	 Managing and acquiring open space lands. Large areas of
                           contiguous open space provide wildlife corridors, habitat for
                           rare species, and natural services such as soil stabilization
                           and greenhouse gas sequestration. Opportunities may include
                           monitoring and managing these areas to protect old-growth
                           and heritage trees, as well as native species and communities;
                           maintaining watershed functions by limiting the area of imper-
                           meable surfaces and restoring creeks and wetlands as appro-
                           priate to prevent flooding; monitoring brush encroachment into
                           grasslands to reduce the prevalence of fires, and implementing
138

                                                                                                     INTRODUCTION
    adaptive management strategies; and continuing to educate
                                                                                                     LAND USE
    residents and visitors about the value of ecosystem services,
    recreational opportunities, and aesthetic beauty offered by Mill
    Valley’s natural resources.
•	 Managing natural resources to reduce the impacts of haz-
                                                                                                     MOBILITY
   ards such as fire, flood, erosion, and landslides. Managing
   natural resources effectively not only provides recreational and
   ecosystem services, but it also affords protection to the com-
   munity. By removing invasive species such as French broom
                                                                                                   COMMUNITY
   (Genista monspessulana) and eucalyptus trees, both of which
   are especially prone to fire, the incidence of fire may be greatly
   reduced. Additionally, by maintaining riparian and tidal marsh                                    VITALITY
   vegetation, as well as limiting the area of impermeable ground
   surface, the City may protect itself to a greater degree against
                                                                                                      NATURAL
   flooding. The many vegetation communities throughout the
   area also offer additional protection against excessive erosion
                                                                                                   ENVIRONEMENT
   and limit landslides by stabilizing the soil. By maintaining and
   restoring these natural services, the City promotes a safer,
   healthier, and more sustainable future for the community.
                                                                                                   CLIMATE
                                                                                                   ACTION
                                                                                                    HAZARDS &
                                                                                                   PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                     NOISE
                                                                                                    GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                   ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                    Citations/
    Woman atop Profile Rock on Mount Tam, circa 1901
                                                                                                   Appendices
    Source: Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Room
                                                                        MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       139

    Natural Environment Goals, Policies & Programs
    NATURAL-1 | Understanding and Sustaining the Ecosystem
    Identify, map, and inventory natural resources and potential natural hazards, with
    regular updates.
    NE.1 Data and Mapping
    Collaborate with regional, state, and federal agencies to continually update and assess infor-
    mation on ecologically sensitive and significant natural communities.
        NE.1-1 Create a comprehensive natural resources inventory and map of the data as de-
        scribed below to guide goals and strategies for local resource conservation and manage-
        ment; identify resource conservation priorities, evaluate current and identify new resource
        management practices, guide resource-related regulatory standards, and provide a basis
        for resource preservation, protection, and rehabilitation planning. At a minimum, the inven-
        tory should include the following, but the final scope will depend on community outreach
        and recommendations:
        •	 Existing land cover (i.e., forest [including public trees], wetlands, other vegetation, im-
             pervious surfaces, etc.)
        •	 Significant and sensitive native plant communities
        •	 Endangered, threatened and special concern species
        •	 Wildlife habitat
        •	 Wetlands and streams
        •	 Surface and groundwater quantity and quality
        •	 Soil types
        •	 Landforms (i.e., watershed, severe slopes, wetlands, streams, etc.)
        •	 Greenways and habitat connections between sensitive areas
        •	 Status of land conservation (open space, parks, easements, etc.)
        •	 Existing trails and public access
        •	 Invasive species
        •	 Fire, flood, earthquake, and other hazard areas
        •	 Human population distribution
        •	 Solar access (see Figure 5.9)
        NE.1-2 Review and compare the “baseline” inventory with updated data and information
        at least every ten years to assess potential changes in conditions and to ensure the infor-
        mation stays current and remains a valuable resource for the community and decision-
        makers.
140

                                                                                                                                                                  INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                                                  LAND USE
                                                                                                                                                                  MOBILITY
                                                Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                   £
                                                                                                                                                   Í
                                                                                                                                                                COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                 Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                  VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                                   NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                                                ACTION
                                                                                                                                            Alto
                                                                                                                                                                 HAZARDS &
                                                                                             E.
                                                                                                  BL
                                                                                                    ITH
                                                                                                       ED
                                                                                                         AL
                                                                                                           E
  Muir Woods Park
                                                                                                                                                                PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                 M
                                                                                 ILL
                                                                                     ER
                                                                                      AV E
                                                                                                               CAMINO ALTO
                                                                     Homestead
                                                                                                                                                                  NOISE
                                                                                                                                                   Strawberry
Mill Valley General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN
Figure 5.9: Solar Exposure
Value
                                                                                                                                                                ADMINISTRATION
        High : 1 meter
        Low : 0.35 meter
                                                                                                                             Almonte
        City Boundary
                                [
                                       0       0.25      0.5 Miles
        Mill Valley Arterials
                                                                                                                                                                 Citations/
        Highway                 Source: Golden Gate Lidar Project, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                Appendices
                                                                                                                                MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN            141

    NE.1-3 Use “best available” science and technology, such as “Marin Maps” or other Geo-
    graphic Information System (GIS) or technical resources, to make critical natural resource
    and hazard data and mapping accessible to the community and to reinforce the links be-
    tween residents and the surrounding natural environment.
    NE.1-4 Identify and continually update mapping data showing areas of the City that are
    vulnerable to the effects of climate change-related hazards, including landslides, sea level
    rise, flooding, loss of barrier habitats (e.g., wetlands), changing storm cycles and increased
    rainfall, and extended periods of excessive heat.
    NE.1-5 Continue to train City employees to remain up-to-date on the latest science and
    technology and best practices associated with the natural environment and ecology.
    Public access along Mill Valley’s shoreline near the Highway 101 Frontage Road
142

                                                                                                                 INTRODUCTION
NATURAL-2 | Sustaining and Restoring the Ecosystem
                                                                                                                 LAND USE
Preserve, restore, or rehabilitate the integrity, function, productivity, and long-term
viability and resiliency of the ecosystem and its ecologically sensitive and significant
natural communities and wildlife habitats.
                                                                                                                 MOBILITY
NE.2 Resource Preservation and Restoration
Use a watershed approach (as opposed to a parcel-by-parcel approach) to identifying, preserv-
ing, or rehabilitating natural resources in a consistent manner that supports applicable flood
control, storm drainage, water quality, and public access values, and as a basis for identifying
and applying best practices for the continued contribution of the community’s native plant and                 COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                 VITALITY
wildlife species value and aesthetic character to Mill Valley.
   NE.2-1 Revise City standards and regulations as necessary to consider the effects of de-
   velopment and redevelopment on areas identified as natural resources areas in the “base-
                                                                                                                  NATURAL
   line” inventory and develop mitigation strategies for any proposed development or redevel-
   opment of property in these areas.
   NE.2-2 Use best practices for restoring and rehabilitating the ecosystem to balance needs                   ENVIRONEMENT
   of the community and ecosystem.
   NE.2-3 Provide access to designated open space areas along Richardson Bay and creek                         CLIMATE
   corridors consistent with preserving habitat and protecting threatened or endangered spe-                   ACTION
   cies.
                                                                                                                HAZARDS &
   NE.2-4 Retain plant and wildlife habitat areas, including those that contain known sensi-
   tive resources (e.g., sensitive habitats; special-status, threatened, endangered, or candi-
                                                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY
   date species; and species of concern) and that are contiguous with other existing natural
   areas and/or wildlife movement corridors.
   NE.2-5 Preserve the ecological integrity of watersheds and creek corridors that support ri-
                                                                                                                 NOISE
   parian resources by preserving or restoring native plants and removing invasive non-native
   plants; developing “pools,” “riffles,” “cover,” and “slow flow” areas; and removing or provid-
   ing alternatives to barriers to fish movements.
   NE.2-6 Develop a Creek Master Plan and management guidelines for maintaining and                             GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                               ADMINISTRATION
   enhancing all identified creeks within the city limits, identify flood control measures, de-
   termine preferred stream bank protection techniques, establish a more precise and func-
   tional “creek setback” and related development standards, and identify public access and
   park development opportunities.
   NE.2-7 Preserve and protect wetland resources in compliance with applicable regional,                        Citations/
                                                                                                               Appendices
   state, and federal regulations and to provide a buffer to sea level rise.
                                                                                    MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       143

    NE.2-8 Revise the City’s heritage tree regulations and related education programs to pro-
    tect populations, stands (groves), and heritage specimens of native tree species consistent
    with the City’s fire and flood prevention strategies and programs and considering the fol-
    lowing:
    •	 Tree protection and planting in riparian zones
    •	 Street tree planting and maintenance
    •	 Reduction of tree/public infrastructure conflicts
    •	 Vegetation management
    •	 Root pruning
    NE.2-9 Review and update the 2002 Site Priority Report and collaborate with the Marin
    Open Space District, property owners, and other open space acquisition agencies to iden-
    tify and acquire additional open space resources for recreation, habitat protection, water-
    shed management and flood control, and emergency evacuation purposes.
    Plaque and bench dedication as part of land donation on Monte Vista
144

                                                                                                                   INTRODUCTION
NATURAL-3 | Water
                                                                                                                   LAND USE
Protect and improve water quality, system supply, and system integrity.
NE.3 Water Quality, System Supply, and Integrity
Improve water quality and expand and diversify water supply.
   NE.3-1 Work with Marin Municipal Water District (MMWD) to optimize storage, transmis-                           MOBILITY
   sion, and distribution capacities and efficiencies and to minimize water outages due to
   drought, emergencies, or other disasters.
                                                                                                                 COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                   VITALITY
   NE.3-2 Explore the retrofit of Cascade Dam for use during drought or emergency, consis-
   tent with habitat and species preservation policies and programs.
   NE.3-3 In conjunction with the Sewerage Agency of Southern Marin (SASM) Board, as-
                                                                                                                    NATURAL
   sess the SASM treatment plant to attain greater efficiency, including advanced wastewater
   treatment capacity for water recycling and reuse on public and private properties.
   NE.3-4 Continue to take actions to reduce inflow and infiltration (“I&I”) in Mill Valley’s sani-              ENVIRONEMENT
   tary sewer collection system to reduce spills to the bay during rain events.
   NE.3-5 Continue to implement the sewer lateral evaluation and replacement program and                         CLIMATE
   consider the implementation of a point-of-sale sewer audit.                                                   ACTION
   NE.3-6 Continue to work with the County of Marin and other agencies to implement the
                                                                                                                  HAZARDS &
   Marin County Stormwater Pollution Prevention Program (MCSTOPP) and the National Pol-
   lutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit that require watershed-based region-
                                                                                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
   al water quality standards and urban run-off management and reduction best practices
   and standards for all new development and redevelopment.
   NE.3-7 Encourage and educate residents and businesses to implement integrated pest
   management principles, reduce or discontinue the use of pesticides and herbicides, and                          NOISE
   reduce or discontinue the use of toxic cleaning substances.
                                                                                                                  GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                 ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                                  Citations/
                                                                                                                 Appendices
                                                                                      MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       145

    NE.4 Conservation of Water Resources
    Improve water quality by capturing source pollution, sedimentation, and run-off on public and
    private properties and allow for conservation of water resources through rainwater storage and
    greywater systems.
        NE.4-1 Reduce water use in City buildings by:
        •	 Assessing, maintaining, and repairing existing plumbing fixtures, pipes, and irrigation
            systems in all City buildings and facilities, including building and parking lot landscap-
            ing, public restrooms, parks, golf courses, and other recreational facilities, to minimize
            water use;
        •	 Upgrading City plumbing and irrigation systems with water-conserving technology;
        •	 Exploring options for installation of greywater systems as appropriate in City buildings
            and facilities;
        •	 Auditing the City’s water and wastewater pumps and motors to evaluate equipment
            efficiency;
        •	 Developing and implementing a motor/pump efficiency cycling schedule to use the
            most efficient water or wastewater motors/pumps first and least efficient ones last;
        •	 Replacing the least efficient motors and pumps with more efficient units;
        •	 Implementing methane capture for energy production at the wastewater treatment
            plant;
        •	 Using recycled water for City facilities and operations where appropriate; and
        •	 Retrofitting existing City buildings and facilities to meet water efficiency standards of
            the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) rating system for “Existing
            Buildings.”
        NE.4-2 Reduce water consumption in the community by:
        •	 Partnering with the Marin Municipal Water District (MMWD) to highlight the existence
            of rebates for the installation of indoor and outdoor water efficiency fixtures and ap-
            pliances, and promoting existing and proven water conservation measures through
            educational programs and other initiatives;
        •	 Partnering with MMWD, conservation organizations, installers, and manufacturers to
            promote the installation of greywater systems and rainwater catchment;
        •	 Exploring incentives for promoting the installation of greywater systems and/or water-
            efficient landscaping at commercial and residential properties;
        •	 Requiring water efficiency audits at point of sale for commercial and residential proper-
            ties;
        •	 Adopting a retrofit program to encourage or require installation of water conservation
            measures in existing businesses and homes;
146

                                                                                                            INTRODUCTION
•	 Consistent with upgrades to the Sewerage Agency of Southern Marin (SASM) wastewa-
                                                                                                            LAND USE
   ter treatment facility to provide advanced wastewater treatment and supply, requiring
   dual plumbing for use of recycled water for new commercial and/or residential devel-
   opments;
•	 Using bay-friendly landscaping and gardening guidelines developed by StopWaste.Org
                                                                                                            MOBILITY
   or other similar best practices in the design, construction, and maintenance of residen-
   tial and commercial landscapes; and
•	 Reviewing the City’s zoning regulations and design guidelines to address lot coverage
   standards and increase the use of pervious paving for driveways, patios, walkways,
   and other hardscape features.                                                                          COMMUNITY
NE.4-3 Establish local greywater system guidelines.                                                         VITALITY
NE.4-4 Evaluate existing City-owned landscapes and parking lots to consider options to
                                                                                                             NATURAL
convert reflective and impervious surfaces to pervious landscape, and install or replace
vegetation with drought-tolerant, low-maintenance native species or edible landscaping
                                                                                                          ENVIRONEMENT
that can also provide shade and reduce the effects of intense sunlight and heat.
NE.4-5 Work with the Marin Municipal Water District (MMWD) to establish and promote
incentives for water conservation.
                                                                                                          CLIMATE
                                                                                                          ACTION
                                                                                                           HAZARDS &
                                                                                                          PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                            NOISE
                                                                                                           GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                          ADMINISTRATION
Swimmers on Cascade Dam, 1969                                                                              Citations/
                                                                                                          Appendices
Source: Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Room
                                                                               MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       147

    NATURAL-4 | Leadership & Education
    Increase the community’s knowledge and understanding of ecologically significant
    and sensitive natural communities, natural processes, and any corresponding haz-
    ards in areas where the natural environment and human settlement meet.
    NE.5 Community Outreach and Education
    Support educational programs for residents and visitors about the uniqueness and value of
    Mill Valley’s natural resources and ways to appreciate, enjoy, and protect those resources.
         NE.5-1 Coordinate with the Mill Valley Library, Recreation Department, and local public
         and private schools to integrate sustainability and local natural resource appreciation and
         engagement into educational and recreation programs.
         NE.5-2 Encourage the use of environmental monitoring applications and other technology
         to engage the community in resource protection and preservation.
         NE.5-3 Use Mill Valley’s commitment to volunteerism and environmental stewardship
         to help protect and rehabilitate the area’s natural resources, seek funding for outreach
         and improvements, and facilitate open communication on issues that may affect those
         resources.
         NE.5-4 Use the City of Mill Valley website or other technologies to highlight sustainability
         and local natural resource activities and accomplishments made within the community.
         NE.5-5 Build community support for sustainability through engaging and fun activities
         and challenges such as the “Low Carbon Diet,” “Resilient Neighborhoods,” and other pro-
         grams.
         NE.5-6 Create walking tour maps and programs on natural resource areas and demonstra-
         tion homes, gardens and businesses led by “sustainability docents”. Develop self-guided
         walking tours that include various aspects of the community, such as local and historic
         landmarks and other arts, cultural and environmental features. Consider arts and culture
         walking tours.
         NE.5-7 Identify and designate publicly accessible scenic vistas of natural areas, including
         Richardson Bay, Mount Tamalpais, and existing creek corridors.
         NE.5-8 Create an easy-to-use and readily identifiable system of directional and informa-
         tional signs along paths, trails, and creekside locations. Post signs that indicate prohibited
         activities (such as swimming, fishing, dogs off leash) due to the presence of threatened or
         endangered species. Limit public access during spawning and early development stages
         of young fish.
148

                                                                                                            INTRODUCTION
NE.5-9 Encourage litter reduction programs and promote individual responsibility for help-
                                                                                                            LAND USE
ing to maintain park, recreation and natural areas.
NE.5-10 Provide information to residents on local sustainability efforts, surrounding natu-
ral environment, potential hazards, and emergency preparedness.
                                                                                                            MOBILITY
                                                                                                          COMMUNITY
                                                                                                            VITALITY
                                                                                                             NATURAL
                                                                                                          ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                          CLIMATE
                                                                                                          ACTION
Click Off (2002)                                                                                           HAZARDS &
                                                                                                          PUBLIC SAFETY
Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission
Photographer: Alisa Swartz
                                                                                                            NOISE
                                                                                                           GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                          ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                           Citations/
                                                                                                          Appendices
                                                                               MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       149
    NATURAL-5 | Considering the Ecosystem in City Decision-Making
    Ensure that all planning and decision-making processes integrate sustainability and
    resource conservation.
    NE.6 Leadership and Coordination
    Collaborate with local, state and federal agencies and private organizations to initiate and
    implement sustainable policies and programs. Develop and promote sustainable practices
    and using an ecosystem and watershed approach to solving resource related issues that go
    beyond political boundaries.
        NE.6-1 Use the City’s website and notification systems to disseminate best practices as-
        sociated with resource management programs and practices and hazard mitigation to the
        community.
        NE.6-2 Consider creating a “Sustainability Coordinator” City staff position or a Sustainabil-
        ity Commission to initiate, coordinate, and implement sustainable policies and programs
        as well as researching and writing successful grant applications to support sustainability
        efforts.
        NE.6-3 Continue coordination efforts with Marin County and other jurisdictions to jointly
        create and implement common sustainability practices.
        NE.6-4 Adopt purchasing practices and standards that support climate action policies and
        reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.
        NE.6-5 Encourage application of new technologies that are environmentally beneficial.
       Mt. Tam Locator (date uknown)
       Source: Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Room
150

                                                                                                                                          INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                          LAND USE
                                                                                                                                          MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                        COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                          VITALITY
                                                                                                                                           NATURAL
                                                                                                                                        ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                        CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                        ACTION
                                                                                                                                         HAZARDS &
In December of 1984, a benign accident changed the face of the south dry pond at the Sewerage Agency of Southern Marin
(SASM), located near the Sycamore Avenue entrance to Bayfront Park in Mill Valley. The facility treats raw sewage from the sur-
                                                                                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
rounding area and pipes most of the treated water out to the Bay. In 1983, to handle the extra water that flows into the sewage
system during winter storms, SASM built two dry ponds between its main building and the multi-use path in Bayfront Park. During
periods of heavy rain SASM would store the excess wastewater in these ponds and after the rains ceased, draw the water back
into the plant for treatment.
A leak developed that caused treated water to fill the pond to a level of one foot. It took a few months before the company that laid     NOISE
the pipes agreed that fixing the leak was their responsibility, and more time for them to actually perform the necessary repairs.
During this period, waterfowl and shorebirds, beckoned by the fresh water and the quiet surroundings, began to visit the pond
                                                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN
regularly. The immigration did not stop there though, for bird watchers and others finding a new, peaceful spot to commune with
nature in the middle of civilization arrived soon thereafter. The birds brought on their feet and feathers and in their droppings
seeds of cattails, sedges and other native California plants, some of which took root in this new, hospitable environment. A fresh
                                                                                                                                        ADMINISTRATION
water habitat was born.
                                                                                                                                         Citations/
                                                                                                                                        Appendices
                                                                                                       MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN             151
Climate Actio

                                                                                                                    INTRODUCTION
Purpose
Climate change is caused by an increase in the concentration of                                                     LAND USE
atmospheric greenhouse gases. Potential climate change impacts
in Northern California include declining water supplies, spread of
                                                                                                                    MOBILITY
disease, diminished agricultural productivity, sea level rise, and in-
creased incidence of wildfire, flooding, and landslides. Like many
communities, Mill Valley is addressing these potential impacts by
thinking differently about its resources, taking actions to reduce
                                                                                                                  COMMUNITY
the community’s contribution to greenhouse gas production, and
identifying strategies to allow the community to adapt to potential
foreseen changes.                                                                                                   VITALITY
                                                                         Rainbow over Mill Valley
                                                                         Source: Mill Valley Fire Department
While the Climate Action Element is not a mandatory element of
                                                                                                                     NATURAL
the General Plan, the City of Mill Valley has designed the MV2040
General Plan so that it also serves as the City’s Climate Action
                                                                                                                  ENVIRONEMENT
Plan, identifying the ways in which the City will comply with state
mandates for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Greenhouse
gas (GHG) emission reduction policies and programs are identified
throughout this element and the rest of the General Plan with a
leaf symbol (     ). In addition, an assessment of potential reduc-
                                                                                                                  CLIMATE
tion in GHG emissions, based on the emission reduction measures
                                                                                                                  ACTION
in the MV2040 General Plan, is included in Appendix C of this Gen-
eral Plan.
Existing Conditions                                                                                                HAZARDS &
Overview of Climate Change                                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), the authoritative global scientific consortium on climate
change, has provided overwhelming scientific evidence that hu-                                                      NOISE
man-induced greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are now produc-
ing climate impacts with dangerous consequences. According to
                                                                                                                   GENERAL PLAN
research by Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory and James Hansen,
NASA’s Chief Climate Scientist, recent global emissions trend lines
                                                                                                                  ADMINISTRATION
– if unchanged – are likely to produce the following:
•	 Temperature: Average temperatures could increase as much
   as 10 degrees Fahrenheit (ºF) by the end of the century, with
   3.6 ºF considered the “tipping point” beyond which runaway
                                                                                                                   Citations/
   climate impacts – including full melting of the polar ice – are
   inevitable.
                                                                                                                  Appendices
                                                                                       MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       153

                                  •	 Fire Risk: The occurrence of large wildfires could increase by
                                       as much as 35 to 55 percent.
           SEA
                                  •	 Water Availability: By 2050, the average April measurement
                                       of the Sierra snowpack will drop by 13 feet, resulting in a loss
                                       of 36 percent of California’s water supply. These impacts will
           LEVEL                       dramatically increase competition for scarce water resources,
                                       severely reduce the state’s agricultural production, and further
           R     I  S     E
                                       intensify the frequency and duration of droughts.
                                  •	 Public Health: The frequency and intensity of conditions con-
Projected                              ducive to air pollution, harsh heat, and vector borne disease
will expand the areas                  will increase.
subject to
               flooding           •	 Sea Level Rise: Sea levels could rise from as little as 2 to 3 feet
                                       if emissions trend downward to as much as 8.5 to 35 feet by
       to include low-lying areas      the end of the century if emissions continue to rise in a “busi-
       of Mill Valley from Bothin      ness as usual” scenario.
       Marsh to Sycamore Park.
                                  Between 1900 and 2000, sea level rise on San Francisco Bay (un-
                                  derneath the Golden Gate) was seven inches, primarily due to ther-
                                  mal expansion from global warming, and this rate of increase is
                                  accelerating. According to the Bay Conservation and Development
                                  Commission (BCDC) September 2008 report “A Sea Level Rise
                                  Strategy for the San Francisco Bay Region”:
                                       Recent analyses indicate that sea level rise from warming
                                       oceans may be 1.4 meters (about 55 inches) over the next
                                       100 years, or even higher depending upon the rate at which
                                       glaciers and other ice sheets on land melt. BCDC’s illustrative
                                       maps show that a one-meter rise in the level of the Bay could
                                       flood over 200 square miles of land and development around
                                       the Bay. Initial estimates indicate that over $100 billion worth
                                       of public and private development could be at risk.1
                                  In the face of large-scale damage estimates from even the most
                                  conservative sea level rise estimates, in addition to many other
                                  negative environmental and economic impacts of global warming,
                                  leading scientists are urging policy-makers to take early and strong
                                  action both to mitigate emissions and to begin adapting to likely
                                  climate impacts. See Figure 6.1 for expected sea level rise inunda-
                                  tion areas.
                                  1 San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission, “A Sea Level
                                  Rise Strategy for the San Francisco Bay Region,” September 2008, http://www.
                                  bcdc.ca.gov/meetings/commission/2008/2008-09-18_slr_strategy.pdf. ac-
                                  cessed June 28, 2013.
154

                                                      Fra
                                                                                                                                                                                                            INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                                                                        Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                        I                   LAND USE
                                               Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                                                            MOBILITY
      Galena Creek
                                                                                                                                          Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                          COMMUNITY
    Cascade Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                            VITALITY
                                                                   Arroyo /
    Old Mill Creek                                                 Corte Madera/
                                                                   Del Presidio
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ENVIRONEMENT
                                            Old Mill Creek              Mill Valley
                                                                                      Mill Valley
                                                                                      Fire Station                                            Edna
                                                             Old Mill   City Hall
                                                                                      #6
                                                                              ñsn
                                                             Elementary                                                                       Maguire Elem
                                                             School                     Greenwood
                                                                                        School
                                                                                                                                              School
                                                                                                                                                                  n
                                                            {n                                                                                                                                            CLIMATE
                                           Mill Valley
                                           Public Library   n                                                                                                                      Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ACTION
                                                                                                                     Park Elementary
                                                                                                                     School
                                                                                                           n            E.
                                                                                                                             BL
                                                                                                                               ITH                ALTO
                                                                                                                                  ED
                                                                                                                                    AL           INO
                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                              CAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                           HAZARDS &
                  Muir Woods Park                                Coyote Creek                          M
                                                                                                                                                    Mill Valley
                                                                                                        ILL                                         Community         Mill Valley
                                                                                                           ER
                                                                                                                                                    Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                                      Fire Station #7
                                                                                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                              AV E
                                                                            Marin Horizon
                                                                            School      n                                                     n     Mill Valley
                                                                                                                                                    Middle
                                                                                                                                                                  _   Mill Valley
                                                                                                                                                    School            Police Department
                                                                              Homestead
                                                                                                                                                                                           Strawberry
Mill Valley General Plan                                                                                        Tamalpais High            n
Figure 6.1: Sea Level Rise Inundation                                                                                                                                                                       NOISE
                                                                                                                School
          City Boundary                  Perennial Stream                   Existing Water Body
                                                                                                                             n       Mount
                                                                                                                                     Tamalpais                                £
                                                                                                                                                                              n         Seminary Dr.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Park & Ride
                                                                                                                                                                                                           GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                     School
          Highway                        Ephemeral Stream                   16-in sea level rise - 50 years
          Arterial Roads                                                    55-in sea level rise - 100 years
                                                                                                                                                         Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                                          £ Pohono
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ADMINISTRATION
          Roads                                                                                                                                                                                     St.
                                                                                                                                                                                            Park & Ride
Community Facilities
n    School       £       Transit Center      {      Library                                                                                                       Manzanita
                                                                                                                                                                  Park & Ride    £
                                                                                                                                                                                 n
_    Police
                  s       Fire Station        ñ      City Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Citations/
[
      0            0.25         0.5 Miles                          Source: City of Mill Valley, 2012; Marin Map, 2012; BCDC, UCGS, 2009; WRT 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Appendices
                                                                                                                                                            MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                          155

                                                       Trends in        #1
                                                                                 Climate change is
                                                       Sustainability
                                                                                 going to continue to
                                                                                 affect the way we live.
                                                        •	 Climate change will increase the frequency and intensity
                                                           of conditions conducive to air pollution, harsh heat, and
                                                           vector-borne disease.
                                                        •	 Between 1900 and 2000, sea level rise in San
                                                           Francisco Bay was seven inches, primarily due to
                                                           thermal expansion from global warming, but this rate
                                                           of increase is accelerating.1
                                                        •	 Estimates of future sea level rise range from as little as
                                                           2 to 3 feet if current emission rates trend downward to
                                                           as much as 8.5 to 35 feet by the end of the century if
                                                           emissions continue to rise.2
                                                        •	 Based on current trends, by 2050 the average April
                                                           measurement of the Sierra snowpack will drop by 13
                                                           feet, resulting in a loss of 36 percent of California’s
                                                           water supply.3
                                                        •	 Treating and delivering water accounts for approximately
                                                           20 percent of all electricity used in California and is
                                                           the largest single-purpose use of electricity in Marin
                                                           County.4
                                                        •	 Sea level is projected to rise 16 inches by 2050 and 55
                                                           inches by the end of the century due to the effects of
                                                           climate change.5
                                                        •	 Projected sea level rise will expand the areas subject
                                                           to flooding to include low-lying areas of Mill Valley from
                                                           Bothin Marsh to Sycamore Park.
                                                        •	 By 2050, daily high tides will inundate the same area
                                                           currently subject to flooding by a 100-year flood event.6
                                                        •	 Marin County obtains 80 percent of its water supply
                                                           from local reservoirs and imports about 20 percent
                                                           from the Russian River watershed. Impacts on water
Flooding in Downtown Mill Valley after a rain storm,       supply are likely to be a major result of a changing
February 2014
                                                           climate, due to higher temperatures and more erratic,
                                                           less predictable supply patterns.
156

                                                                                                                    INTRODUCTION
Early action on GHG reduction can produce substantial benefits
                                                                                                                    LAND USE
from the transition to a “low-carbon community.” These benefits
include new jobs in building energy retrofits and renewable energy
projects, public health benefits from reduced air pollution, and en-
hanced local energy security and economic sustainability from re-
                                                                                                                    MOBILITY
duced dependence on fossil fuels.
State of California Initiatives
The State of California has led the country in addressing climate
                                                                                                                  COMMUNITY
change by enacting the following legislative initiatives:
Emissions Reduction Goals                                                                                           VITALITY
•	 Assembly Bill (AB) 32 – 2006: AB 32, The Global Warming
   Solutions Act of 2006, remains the nation’s leading legisla-
                                                                                                                     NATURAL
   tion to address GHG emissions. AB 32 institutes a mandatory
   limit on greenhouse gas pollution and requires a reduction in
                                                                                                                  ENVIRONEMENT
   emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2020, which is about a
   24-percent reduction statewide from current levels. The bill
   also directs the California Air Resources Board (CARB) to estab-
   lish a mandatory reporting system to monitor emission levels
   and adopt regulations to achieve the targeted GHG reductions                                                   CLIMATE
   by 2012. In December 2008, CARB adopted a Scoping Plan to                                                      ACTION
   achieve the state’s 2020 climate goal.
•	 Executive Order S-3-05 – 2005: In 2005, as a companion
   measure to AB 32, Governor Schwarzenegger signed Executive                                                      HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                  PUBLIC SAFETY
   Order S-3-05 to commit California to a statewide emissions re-
   duction of 80 percent below 1990 levels by the year 2050.
•	 Senate Bill (SB) 1771 – 2000: This bill requires the California
   Energy Commission (CEC) to prepare an inventory of the state’s
                                                                                                                    NOISE
   greenhouse gas emissions, study data on climate change, and
   provide government agencies and businesses with information
   on the costs and methods for reducing GHGs. It also estab-
                                                                                                                   GENERAL PLAN
   lished the California Climate Action Registry to serve as a certi-
   fying agency for companies and local governments to quantify
                                                                                                                  ADMINISTRATION
   and register their emissions for possible future trading systems.
Support for Renewable Energy
•	 California Solar Initiative Program – 2006: This $2.8-billion
   program provides incentives for residential and commercial so-       Ground mounted solar panels behind Mill    Citations/
                                                                                                                  Appendices
   lar development over 11 years.                                       Valley’s Public Safety Building
                                                                                     MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN         157

                                         •	 Assembly Bill (AB) 811 – 2008: This 2008 bill allows Cali-
                                              fornia municipalities to help citizens finance renewable and
                                              energy efficiency projects by issuing a bond to pay for initial
                                              installation costs. Repayment is stretched out over the life of
                                              the project and is made through a voluntary assessment on
                                              the building’s property tax, which transfers to the new owner
                                              at time of sale.
                                         •	 Senate Bill (SB) X1-2 – 2011: This bill applies to all electricity
                                              retailers in the state including publicly owned utilities, investor-
                                              owned utilities, electricity service providers, and community
                                              choice aggregators. All of these entities must adopt the new
                                              goal of 20 percent of retail sales from renewables by the end
                                              of 2013, 25 percent by the end of 2016, and 33 percent by the
                                              end of 2020.
                                         Low-Carbon Transportation and “Smart” Growth
                                         •	 Assembly Bill (AB) 118 – 2008: This bill establishes the Cali-
                                              fornia Alternative and Renewable Fuel and Vehicle Technology
                                              Program, which provides grants and rebates to support the
                                              development, manufacture, and purchase of electric vehicles
                                              (EVs), natural gas vehicles (NGVs), hydrogen fuel cell vehicles
                                              (FCVs), biofuel vehicles, and other low-emissions vehicle tech-
                                              nologies.
                                         •	 Senate Bill (SB) 375 – 2007: This law requires climate impacts
                                              to be addressed by local General Plans and directs CARB to
                                              work with metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) to set
                                              and achieve regional targets for GHG reductions based on
                                              changes in land use and transportation. In the Bay Area, the
                                              Association of Bay Area Governments is the lead agency for SB
                                              375 planning.
                                         •	 Assembly Bill (AB) 1493 – 2002: This bill requires CARB to
                                              adopt regulations that achieve the maximum feasible reduc-
                                              tion of greenhouse gases from vehicles.
                                         Marin County Initiatives
                                         Cities for Climate Protection Campaign
                                         In 2002, the Marin County Board of Supervisors adopted a resolu-
                                         tion joining the Cities for Climate Protection Campaign (CCP) spon-
                                         sored by ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability. By 2007,
                                         all 11 Marin municipalities had joined the CCP, which calls on local
Electric Vehicle in Downtown Mill Valley jurisdictions to achieve the following five milestones:
158

                                                                                                                               INTRODUCTION
1.	 Emissions Inventory. Conduct an inventory of current green-
                                                                                                                               LAND USE
    house gas (GHG) emissions and forecast the growth in emis-
    sions that will occur without preventative action. Mill Valley has
    conducted three inventories to date (2000, 2005, and 2010).
2.	 Emissions Reduction Targets. Set a GHG reduction target The
                                                                                                                               MOBILITY
    County of Marin set a target to reduce GHG emissions com-
    munitywide to 15 percent below 2000 levels by the year 2020
    and an internal goal of 15 to 20 percent below 2000 levels by
    the year 2020 for County operations. The City of Mill Valley has
                                                                                                                             COMMUNITY
    established similar targets: 15 percent below 2005 levels com-
    munitywide and 20 percent below 2005 levels for municipal
    activities by the year 2020.                                         New lighting at Mill Valley Middle School             VITALITY
3.	 Climate Action Plan. Develop a local Climate Action Plan that
    describes the policies, programs, and measures that will be
                                                                                                                                NATURAL
    implemented to meet local and state targets. This General Plan
    serves as Mill Valley’s Climate Action Plan. Policies and pro-
                                                                                                                             ENVIRONEMENT
    grams identified with a leaf (   ) serve as emission reduction
    measures for the Climate Action Plan. Appendix C contains an
    analysis of anticipated emission reductions based on General
    Plan goals, policies, and programs. Climate Action policies in-
    clude:                                                                                                                   CLIMATE
•	 Green building, energy efficiency, and renewable energy to ad-                                                            ACTION
                                                                         Electric vehicle owned by the City of Mill Valley
   dress the energy use and consumption of natural resources to
   construct, renovate, operate and maintain buildings
                                                                                                                              HAZARDS &
•	 Land use and transportation to identify more efficient ways to
   utilize land and move about
•	 Natural systems, sequestration, and offsets to absorb or se-                                                              PUBLIC SAFETY
   quester greenhouse gases
•	 Waste reduction, recycling, and Zero Waste to divert and/or
   eliminate all materials from landfill                                                                                       NOISE
•	 Water conservation
                                                                                                                              GENERAL PLAN
•	 Climate change/adaptation to prepare for future scenarios
   such as sea level rise
                                                                                                                             ADMINISTRATION
4.	 Implementation. Implement the local action plan. Appendix A
    of this General Plan contains the Implementation Plan. Emis-
    sion reduction programs are identified using the    icon, and
    implementation progress will be monitored as part of the an-
                                                                                                                              Citations/
    nual review process for the General Plan.                            Electric vehicle charging station near
5.	 Monitoring. Monitor progress and report results.  The City of        Hauke Park
                                                                                                                             Appendices
                                                                                         MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                159

                                        Mill Valley continues to document and update its emissions in-
                                        ventory to mark its progress toward meeting the City’s emission
                                        reduction targets. Annual reporting to benchmark potential
                                        emission reductions in association with the implementation of
                                        emission reduction measures can be incorporated into the an-
                                        nual General Plan review process as well.
                                   Marin Climate and Energy Partnership
                                   Recognizing the need for a collaborative approach to GHG reduc-
                                   tions, city and county leaders launched the Marin Climate and
                                   Energy Partnership (MCEP) in 2007. The City of Mill Valley is a
                                   member of MCEP and works with representatives from the County
                                   of Marin and all of the other Marin cities and towns to address
                                   and streamline the implementation of a variety of GHG reduction
                                   measures, including development of enhanced green building or-
                                   dinances, countywide Zero Waste efforts, and countywide efforts
                                   to transition to a localized, climate-friendly food system. MCEP
                                   is also coordinating efforts to document and monitor progress in
                                   meeting emission reduction targets for the year 2020.
                                   Marin County’s Greenhouse Gas Emissions
                                   In 1990, Marin County GHG emissions were calculated at about
                                   2.6 million tons. By 2000, emissions were estimated at about 3.1
                                   million tons – a 15-percent increase since 1990. Between 2000
                                   and 2005, emissions began decreasing, so the net increase in
                                   emissions between 1990 and 2005 is estimated at 6 percent. Fig-
                                   ure 6.2 shows the distribution of countywide emissions by sector
                                   in 2005, and Figure 6.3 illustrates emission trends over the past
                                   15 years.
                                   In 2006, the County of Marin developed a strategic plan to reduce
                                   annual GHG emissions to 15 percent below 1990 levels by 2020.
                                   The keystone of this plan is the initiation of Marin Clean Energy, a
                                   community choice aggregation program that procures renewable
                                   sources of electricity and partners with PG&E to deliver electric-
                                   ity. Participation in MCE is projected to reduce GHGs by 302,320
                                   tons equivalent carbon dioxide (CO2e) to 534,369 tons annually
                                   by 2020. Other high-impact measures in the 2006 plan include
                                   expanded recycling and solid waste reduction.
Bicyclist on flooded Bay Trail
Source: Tim Porter, Marin Magazine
160

                                                                                                         INTRODUCTION
Figure 6.2 | Marin County Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Sector, 2005
                                                                                                         LAND USE
                                                 Transportation
                                                                                                         MOBILITY
                                                      61%
                                                                                                       COMMUNITY
         Industrial 2%
                                                                                                         VITALITY
             Waste 2%
         Agriculture 4%
                               Commercial
                               Energy Use            Residential
                                                                                                          NATURAL
                                  12%                Energy Use
                                                       19%
                                                                                                       ENVIRONEMENT
                          Source: Mill Valley, February 18, 2010 “Draft Framework:
                          Addressing Climate Change” Presentation
                                                                                                       CLIMATE
Figure 6.3 | Marin County Greenhouse Gas Emission Trends, 1990-2005
                                                                                                       ACTION
     3,300
     3,200                                                                                              HAZARDS &
                                                                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
     3,100
     3,000                                                                                               NOISE
                                                                                                        GENERAL PLAN
     2,900
                                                                                                       ADMINISTRATION
     2,800
     2,700
                  1990           1995              2000                2005                             Citations/
                                                                                                       Appendices
                          Source: Mill Valley, February 18, 2010 “Draft Framework:
                          Addressing Climate Change” Presentation
                                                                            MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       161

                                      Mill Valley’s Greenhouse Gas Emissions
                                      2005 Baseline Emissions Inventory
                                      Mill Valley’s greenhouse gas emissions inventory sets a baseline
                                      emissions level for the year 2005 and projects future emissions
                                      levels for the year 2020. The baseline and projection are used to
                                       Trends in        #2
                                       Sustainability
                                                                   The Air We Breathe
Transportation
      1/2
generates                               •	 Mill Valley generates approximately 87,258 metric tons
                                           equivalent carbon dioxide (CO2e) per year.7
                                        •	 Transportation (e.g., cars, buses, trucks, etc.) generates
                                           half of Mill Valley’s greenhouse gas emissions,
                                           compared to 50 percent for the Bay Area, 41 percent
                  of Mill Valley’s         for California, and 14 percent for the world.8
           greenhouse                   •	 The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Air Quality
         gas emissions
                                           Index (AQI) level for Mill Valley is 30.4, which means air
                                           quality is satisfactory and air pollution poses little or no
                                           risk. This level compares favorably to the U.S. average
                                           AQI of 32 (as a lower AQI is better).9
                                        •	 For six out of seven monitored air pollutants, Mill
                                           Valley’s levels are consistent with national averages or
                                           significantly better.10
                                        •	 In 2010, levels of nitrogen dioxide (which is produced
                                           by motor vehicles and power plants and results in a
                                           brownish haze) were 12.4 parts per billion (ppb), which
                                           is greater than the national average (9.4 ppb) but within
                                           EPA’s adopted standards.11
                                        •	 The Bay Area Air Quality Management District
                                           (BAAQMD) declared 11 “Spare the Air” days for the Bay
                                           Area in 1991, 25 in 1996, and 8 in 2011. According to
Click Off 2008                             the EPA’s AirNow website, however, Marin County had
Source: Mill Valley Arts Commission        zero unhealthy air days between 2000 and 2010.12
162

                                                                                                         INTRODUCTION
Figure 6.4 | Mill Valley 2005 Baseline:
Community Greenhouse Emissions by Sector
                                                                                                         LAND USE
                    Transportation
                                                                                                         MOBILITY
                         50%
                                                                  Off-Road Vehicles
                                                                  & Equipment 1%
                                                                 Water & Wastewater 1%                 COMMUNITY
            Residential                                          Waste 3%                                VITALITY
                                        Commercial
            Energy Use
                                        Energy Use
               31%
                                           13%
                                                                                                          NATURAL
                                                                                                       ENVIRONEMENT
   Source: Mill Valley GHG Emissions Inventory Report, 2010
                                                                                                       CLIMATE
Figure 6.5 | Mill Valley 2005 Baseline:                                                                ACTION
Government Greenhouse Emissions by Sector
                                                                                                        HAZARDS &
                                                                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
                Wastewater
                Treatement                                    Water Delivery 1%
                  Facilties
                                                               Public Lighting 3%
                   42%
                                                                Waste 3%                                 NOISE
                                            Employee
                                                                                                        GENERAL PLAN
     Buildings &                            Commute
      Facilities                              13%
                                                                                                       ADMINISTRATION
        21%
                          Vehicle Fleet
                             16%
                                                                                                        Citations/
                                                                                                       Appendices
  Source: Mill Valley GHG Emissions Inventory Report, 2010
                                                                            MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       163
                                                          determine the amount of emissions reduction necessary to achieve
                                                          the City’s adopted reduction targets for both the community and in-
                                                          ternal government operations.
                                                          In 2005, Mill Valley as a community emitted over 90,000 metric
                                                          tons equivalent carbon dioxide (CO2e) of greenhouse gases. Half
                                                          of these emissions were related to transportation. Residential en-
                                                          ergy use was the second largest source of emissions (31 percent),
                                                          followed by commercial/industrial energy use (13 percent) and
                                                          waste (3 percent).
                                                          In 2005, internal government operations were estimated to have
                                                          contributed 3,000 metric tons CO2e of greenhouse gas emissions
                                                          – just over 3 percent of total citywide emissions. The largest emis-
                                                          sion sources were wastewater treatment and water management,
                                                          building and facility energy use, vehicle fleet, and employee com-
                                                          mute. Waste and streetlight energy use contributed the remainder.
                                                          Comparison of 2005 and 2010 Emissions
                                                          In June 2013, Mill Valley updated its greenhouse gas inventory re-
                                                          port comparing the 2005 baseline year with 2010 data. The inven-
                                                          tory quantifies greenhouse gas emissions from a wide variety of
                                                          sources, from the energy used to power, heat, and cool buildings
                                                          to the fuel used to move vehicles and power off-road equipment
                                                          to the decomposition of solid waste and treatment of wastewater.
                                                          The distribution of 2010 emissions by sector and operation remains
                                                          similar to 2005 data, with the transportation sector still making up
                                                          the greatest percentage of the community’s greenhouse gas emis-
                                                          sions (50 percent), followed by the residential (32 percent) and
                                                          commercial (14 percent) sector. The encouraging news is that Mill
                                                          Valley reduced community greenhouse gas emissions nearly 4 per-
                                                          cent between 2005 and 2010, from 90,806 metric tons in 2005
                                                          to 87,258 metric tons in 2010 – a reduction of 3,548 metric tons
                                                          CO2e. Reductions occurred in all sectors except the wastewater
                                                          sector. See Table 6.1 for details.
                                                          In summary, the comparison of Mill Valley’s GHG reductions be-
                                                          tween 2005 and 2010 shows the following:
Mill Valley is home to the first Leadership in Energy and
                                                          •	 Great strides were made in the waste sector, with 31 percent
Environmental Design (LEED) for Homes residence in
Marin County.                                                  less waste going to the landfill. Some of this diversion in waste
Photo: Mariko Reed                                             is related to the City’s new curbside composting program.
164

                                                                                                                                              INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                              LAND USE
 GHG Emissions
                 Transportation                       Transportation                          Transportation
                      14%                                  41%                                     50%
                                                                                   Other                                Other
 Compared
                                            Other
                                            86%                                    59%                                  50%
                                                                                                                                              MOBILITY
                                                                                 California
                                                                         California                        Bay Area & Mill Valley
                                      World
Table 6.1 | Mill Valley Community Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Sector, 2005 & 2010                                                           COMMUNITY
                         2005 Greenhouse Gas Emissions        2010 Greenhouse Gas Emissions            Change in                              VITALITY
                                                                                                                         % Change in
      Sector                                                                                           Metric Tons
                         Metric Tons                          Metric Tons                                                Metric Tons
                                              % of Total                            % of Total           CO2e
                           CO2e                                 CO2e
                                                                                                                                               NATURAL
Residential                       28,040              31%              27,578                 32%               -462                -1.6%
Commercial                        12,242              13%              11,897                 14%               -345                -2.8%
                                                                                                                                            ENVIRONEMENT
Transportation                    45,522              50%              44,048                 50%              -1,474               -3.2%
Off-Road                           1,129               1%                 987                  1%               -143            -12.6%
Water                                359              <1%                 251                 <1%               -109            -30.2%
Wastewater                           410              <1%                 426                 <1%                 16            +3.8%
Waste                              3,104               3%               2,072                  2%              -1,032           -33.2%      CLIMATE
Total                             90,806             100%              87,258                 100%             -3,548               -3.9%   ACTION
Source: Mill Valley 2010 Emissions Inventory
Note: Emissions are arranged by sector to facilitate detailed analysis of emissions sources and comparison of increases and
decreases between 2005 and 2010. The inventory provides a snapshot of the years 2005 and 2010 and does not intend to imply
                                                                                                                                             HAZARDS &
there is necessarily a trend line between those years. Total emissions may have gone up or down during the years between 2005
and 2010.
                                                                                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY
Table 6.2 | Mill Valley Government Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Sector, 2005 & 2010
                         2005 Greenhouse Gas Emissions        2010 Greenhouse Gas Emissions            Change in
                                                                                                                         % Change in
        Sector           Metric Tons                          Metric Tons                              Metric Tons
                                              % of Total                            % of Total                           Metric Tons
                           CO2e                                 CO2e                                     CO2e
Buildings &                        649.6              21%               663.5                  21%               13.9                +2%      NOISE
Facilities
Wastewater                        1,306.1             42%              1,262.9                 41%              -43.2                 -3%
                                                                                                                                             GENERAL PLAN
Treatment
Facilities*
Vehicle Fleet                      482.4              16%                476.7                 15%               -5.7                 -1%
                                                                                                                                            ADMINISTRATION
Public Lighting                     90.2               3%                 81.0                  3%               -9.1               -10%
Water Delivery*                      41.7              1%                 31.2                  1%              -10.5               -25%
Waste                               93.2               3%                 61.2                  2%              -32.0               -34%
Employee                           434.7              14%               524.2                  17%               89.5               +21%
                                                                                                                                             Citations/
Commute
Total                             3,097.9            100%              3,100.8                100%                2.9               0.1%
                                                                                                                                            Appendices
Source: Mill Valley 2010 Emissions Inventory
*Note: Wastewater treatement and water delivery are not operated by the City of Mill Valley
                                                                                                          MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN              165
                                                •	 In the transportation sector, emissions dropped by 3.2 percent
                                                    due, in part, to improvements in fuel efficiency.
                                                •	 Reductions in the off-road sector were due to a 30-percent de-
                                                    crease in emissions from construction equipment.
                                                •	 Reductions in electricity usage, a decline in the carbon inten-
                                                    sity of electricity provided by PG&E, and the introduction of
                                                    greener electricity provided by the Marin Clean Energy program
                                                    (MCE) were largely responsible for the decrease in emissions in
                                                    the residential and commercial sectors. An integral part of the
                                                    formation of the MCE was the establishment of the Community
                                                    Choice Aggregation (CCA) Marin Clean Energy (MCE) program,
                                                    whereby electrical energy is provided to customers from a wide
                                                    range of renewable energy sources that generate fewer GHG
                                                    emissions. Currently, the program offers two options for energy
                                                    purchases: (1) a “Light Green” option that generates a mini-
                                                    mum of 25 percent from renewable energy sources and pro-
                                                    vides a 53-percent decrease in GHG emissions, and (2) a “Dark
                                                    Green” option that generates 100 percent renewable energy
                                                    content and is 100 percent GHG-free.
                                                •	 A decrease in water usage led to declines in emissions in the
                                                    water sector.
                                                Within government operations, emissions were flat, increasing
                                                by just 2.9 metric tons, or 0.1 percent. Decreases occurred in all
                                                sectors except the buildings and facilities sector (+13.9 metric
                                                tons CO2e) and the employee commute sector (+89.5 metric tons
                                                CO2e), which experienced a 21-percent increase in emissions.
                                                The increase in emissions from buildings and facilities was due
                                                to an increase in natural gas consumption. The increase in em-
                                                ployee commute emissions was apparently due to an increase in
                                                the number of miles employees drove to work, but may also be
                                                due to differences in sampling (as commute emissions are derived
                                                from employee surveys). Excluding the employee commute sector,
                                                emissions from government operations dropped by 3.3 percent.
                                                Emissions generated by the City’s wastewater treatment plant were
                                                responsible for the greatest share of government operations emis-
                                                sions (41 percent), followed by the buildings and facilities sector
Home with solar hot water panels in Mill Valley
                                                (22 percent). See Table 6.2 for details.
166

                                                                                                                       INTRODUCTION
2020 Emissions Reduction Targets
                                                                                                                       LAND USE
The City of Mill Valley has adopted a greenhouse gas emissions
reduction target of 15 percent below 2005 levels for community
emissions and 20 percent below 2005 levels for municipal opera-
tions by the year 2020.
Emission reduction programs are identified in this General Plan                                                        MOBILITY
with a leaf symbol (    ). These policies and programs serve as the
City’s Climate Action Plan and are intended to reduce GHG emis-
                                                                                                                     COMMUNITY
sions to meet the targets.
The comparison of 2005 and 2010 emissions data illustrates that                                                        VITALITY
Mill Valley is making progress toward accomplishing its greenhouse
gas reduction goal for community emissions. However, with the
                                                                                                                        NATURAL
projected increase of population, jobs, and traffic volumes, Mill Val-
ley is expected to emit 8 percent more greenhouse gases in 2020
                                                                                                                     ENVIRONEMENT
than in 2005 under a “business as usual” scenario (see Table 6.3).
Implementing the policies and programs identified in this General
Plan, and monitoring and capturing data to account for emission
reductions associated with the General Plan programs, will there-
fore be important for meeting Mill Valley’s GHG emission reduction
                                                                                                                     CLIMATE
targets.
                                                                                                                     ACTION
Table 6.3 | Projected Growth in Mill Valley Community
Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Sector (Business as Usual)
        Sector
                            2005 Emissions         2010 Emissions   2020 Projected Emissions      Growth              HAZARDS &
                          (Metric Tons CO2e)     (Metric Tons CO2e)    (Metric Tons CO2e)      (2010-2020)
Transportation                          45,522               44,048                  48,233           9.5%           PUBLIC SAFETY
Residential                             28,040               27,578                  28,255           2.5%
Commercial / Industrial                 12,242               11,897                  12,428           4.5%
Waste                                    3,104                2,072                   2,079           3.3%
Off-Road Vehicles                        1,129                  987                     990           3.3%             NOISE
& Equipment
Wastewater                                 410                  426                     427           3.3%
                                                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN
Water                                      359                  251                     251           3.3%
Total                                   90,806               87,258                  92,663           6.2%
                                                                                                                     ADMINISTRATION
Source: Climate Action Plan Analysis, See Appendix C.
                                                                                                                      Citations/
                                                                                                                     Appendices
                                                                                          MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       167

    Climate Action Goals, Policies & Programs
    As stated earlier, the Climate Action Element is not a mandatory General Plan element, but
    the City of Mill Valley is using the MV2040 General Plan as a mechanism for creating goals
    and policies that address climate change. Goals and policies addressing greenhouse gas
    (GHG) emission reduction are identified throughout this element and the rest of the General
    Plan with a leaf symbol (       ).
    CLIMATE-1 | Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction
    Reduce the community’s carbon footprint.
    CL.1 Clean Energy and Energy Efficiency
    Support and provide incentives for using and investing in clean energy and energy efficiency
    solutions.
        CL1-1 Work with the State of California, County of Marin, local agencies, and energy provid-
        ers to increase the proportion of renewable power used by residents and business and pro-
        vide financial and technical assistance for clean energy installation and energy-efficiency
        upgrades throughout Mill Valley.
        CL.1-2 Continue to work with Marin Clean Energy (MCE), PG&E, or other clean energy pro-
        viders to encourage greater resident participation and use of greener energy supplies.
        CL.1-3 Monitor and continue efforts to reduce energy consumption and waste throughout
        all City facilities.
        CL.1-4 Continue to encourage efforts at the Sewerage Agency of Southern Marin (SASM)
        to pursue sustainability efforts such as exploring the use of solar applications, capturing
        and reusing methane, and generating electricity through waste to energy technology.
        CL.1-5 Update the City’s green building ordinance to support best practices and other
        available green building standards to conserve energy and resources, including:
        •	 Design guidelines, development standards, and permitting procedures to encourage
             emerging green building technologies;
        •	 Outdoor lighting standards that prevent light levels in all new development, parking
             lots, and street lighting from exceeding state standards;
        •	 Guidelines for residential solar and wind energy systems such as optimal roof orienta-
             tion, clear access without obstructions, roof framing and design, installation of electri-
             cal conduit to accept electric system wiring, installation of plumbing to support a solar
             hot water system, and provision of space for a solar hot water storage tank in locations
168

                                                                                                               INTRODUCTION
       where a solar electric or hot water system will be cost-effective; and
                                                                                                               LAND USE
   •	 Guidelines to encourage new development to include wiring and staging to allow for so-
      lar- and/or electric-ready technologies and to achieve net zero building efficiency.
   CL.1-6 Consider requiring that energy audits for residential and commercial building be per-
                                                                                                               MOBILITY
   formed prior to completion of sale, and that audit results and information about opportuni-
   ties for energy improvement be presented to potential buyers.
   CL.1-7 Replace street and public parking lot lights with more energy-efficient lamps as tech-
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY
   nology creates more efficient and better quality lighting.
   CL.1-8 Participate in opportunities such as those provided by Assembly Bill 811 and other                   VITALITY
   public financing programs that support the installation of renewable energy systems and
   other energy-efficient upgrades for public agencies and private property owners.   	
   CL1-9 Improve air quality by discouraging wood burning and providing incentives to replace                   NATURAL
                                                                                                             ENVIRONEMENT
   existing inefficient wood-burning devices.
CL.2 Carbon Offsets
Offset carbon emissions through carbon credits or allowances, and through natural sequestra-
tion methods.                                                                                                CLIMATE
                                                                                                             ACTION
   CL.2-1 Provide educational opportunities and creative incentives for City-sponsored events,
   community organizations, residents, and businesses to reduce their carbon footprint using
                                                                                                              HAZARDS &
   validated offset or carbon reduction programs, such as “Resilient Neighborhoods.”
                                                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY
   CL.2-2 Create a process to apply on- or off-site carbon offsets to new development, increased
   intensity of use, and/or other activities that increase greenhouse gas emissions.
CL.3 Monitoring
Establish a baseline and monitor the City and community contribution to greenhouse gas emis-                   NOISE
sions.
                                                                                                              GENERAL PLAN
   CL.3-1 Monitor and update, as necessary, the City Council-adopted greenhouse gas emis-
   sion reduction targets of 20 percent below 2005 levels by 2020 for internal government
                                                                                                             ADMINISTRATION
   operations and 15 percent below 2005 levels communitywide by 2020.
   CL.3-2 Collaborate with the community to identify emission reduction measures that will
   meet adopted emission reduction targets.
                                                                                                              Citations/
                                                                                                             Appendices
                                                                                  MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       169

    CLIMATE-2 | Climate Change Adaptation
    Develop strategies for adapting to climate change.
    CL.4 Adapting to Climate Change
    Ground climate change adaptation strategies in the best-available scientific understanding of
    hazards, risks, impacts, and vulnerabilities, and make adaptation planning and implementa-
    tion a City budgeted item and operational priority.
        CL.4-1 Immediately begin to develop plans and policies that will guide the City’s ability to
        recognize, understand, and respond to the effects of climate change on the community
        (rather than waiting for more complete understanding of climate change and/or data). Ad-
        just plans and actions according to new data and information and establish a permanent
        adaptation funding mechanism through the City’s budget.
        CL.4-2 Plan and fund long-term adaptation strategies to help the people, places, natural
        systems, and infrastructure that are vulnerable to the effects of climate change, including
        but not limited to sea level rise and more extreme heat and storm conditions.
        CL.4-3 Encourage adaptation across multiple sectors, geographical scales, and levels of
        government. Build on the existing efforts and knowledge of a wide range of stakeholders
        who understand local or regional risks and needs.
        CL.4-4 Update community hazard mitigation plans to recognize that the effects of climate
        change will also affect the type and intensity of potential community hazards and to antici-
        pate impacts and responses. Include planning for extreme heat and storm events, identify-
        ing populations and neighborhoods most vulnerable to these events.
        Mill Valley home with green roof
170

                                                                                                               INTRODUCTION
CLIMATE-3 | Zero Waste
                                                                                                               LAND USE
Implement Zero Waste strategies for solid waste management.
CL.5 Recycling and Waste Management
Reduce the volume of the waste stream by encouraging recycling and composting and moving
                                                                                                               MOBILITY
toward Zero Waste objectives that minimize or eliminate waste sent to landfills.
   CL.5-1 Develop a Zero Waste Strategic Plan for Mill Valley that addresses:
   •	 Establishing a Zero Waste goal and timeframe;
                                                                                                             COMMUNITY
   •	 Supporting and promoting ongoing green waste recycling and composting opportuni-
      ties for Mill Valley residents and businesses;                                                           VITALITY
   •	 Requiring all events needing a special events permit from the City to provide adequate
      recycling facilities and compostable materials;
                                                                                                                NATURAL
   •	 Scheduling periodic workshops on composting and providing starter kits to interested
      residents;
   •	 Revising and updating the City’s solid waste ordinance and construction and demoli-                    ENVIRONEMENT
      tion ordinance to stay current with best practices and waste reduction policies; and
   •	 Encouraging school-, business-, and neighborhood-based litter contests with prizes of
      local goods and services provided by local merchants.                                                  CLIMATE
                                                                                                             ACTION
   CL.5-2 Adopt new City waste reduction policies and strengthen existing policies in associa-
   tion with the Zero Waste Strategic Plan, as follows:
                                                                                                              HAZARDS &
   •	 Revise and update Mill Valley’s existing solid waste ordinance to keep pace with chang-
      es in the solid waste industry.
   •	 Modify the construction and demolition ordinance to comply with the Marin Hazardous                    PUBLIC SAFETY
      and Solid Waste Joint Powers Authority (JPA) model ordinance to ensure consistency
      among member agencies and help haulers comply.
                                                                                                               NOISE
   •	 Continue to revise the ordinance that addresses construction/salvage/resale of con-
      struction and demolition materials.
                                                                                                              GENERAL PLAN
   CL.5-3 Work with the Marin Hazardous and Solid Waste Joint Powers Authority (JPA) and
   Mill Valley’s hauler to increase take back, reuse, and diversion, as follows:
                                                                                                             ADMINISTRATION
   •	 Join the JPA in endorsing an Extended Producer Responsibility resolution that will sup-
      port product design and packaging that integrates reuse and recycling.
   •	 Negotiate franchise agreement language with Mill Valley Refuse to encourage “green-
      er” operations, including food waste pick-up, and to maximize diversion.
   •	 Work with JPA member agencies to promote regional bans on problem materials (Sty-                       Citations/
                                                                                                             Appendices
      rofoam, plastic bags) that are difficult to reuse or recycle.
                                                                                  MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       171

    •	 Work with Mill Valley Refuse to develop commercial and maintain residential food
        waste collection routes and to create centrally located facilities to process all green
        and food waste. Process this waste in anaerobic digesters for soil amendments and
        the production of biogas.
    •	 Encourage the JPA to establish a landfill “tipping fee” to fund substantially enhanced
        Zero Waste and related sustainability efforts.
    •	 Establish an Environmentally Preferable Procurement policy that emphasizes waste
        reduction.
    •	 Adopt and enforce a multi-family dwelling and business recycling ordinance.
    CL.5-4 Educate residents and businesses on waste reduction strategies, as follows:
    •	 Encourage reduced consumption by increasing customer awareness of on-line and lo-
        cal resources that encourage material exchange, repair, and reuse.
    •	 Partner with Master Gardeners and others to promote backyard composting.
    •	 Expand education for City employees and the public about the benefits of waste reduc-
        tion through informational materials and organized events.
    Eco-stations set up at local event to reduce Composting demonstration at Mill Valley’s Health and Well-
    waste                                        ness Fair, January 2014
172

                                                                                                              INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                              LAND USE
Trends in
                        # 3 New technologies and practices will
Sustainability
                                                                                                              MOBILITY
                            promote a more sustainable future.
                                                                                                            COMMUNITY
                                                                                                              VITALITY
   •	 Solar energy is projected to grow exponentially as its cost continues to decline. Projections
      indicate that by 2030 solar electricity is likely to cost half what coal electricity does today.
   •	 Cellulosic biofuels offer the promise of creating a viable energy source from waste products,
                                                                                                               NATURAL
      such as wood waste, grasses, corn stalks, and other non-food products.
   •	 Green information and communications technologies such as the following hold promise for
                                                                                                            ENVIRONEMENT
      increasing the energy and resource efficiency of most aspects of urban development:
         ◦◦ Traffic congestion monitoring and pricing systems
         ◦◦ Water monitoring (leakage detection, purification)
         ◦◦ Building applications (temperature, light, humidity)
         ◦◦ Intelligent public transportation and logistics                                                 CLIMATE
         ◦◦ Public shared offices with teleconferencing                                                     ACTION
         ◦◦ Home and office smart appliances
         ◦◦ Smart grids
                                                                                                             HAZARDS &
         ◦◦ Carbon inventories and carbon accounting
   •	 Implementation of carbon taxes will help create disincentives for using fossil fuels and account
                                                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY
      for the impact their use has on the earth’s climate.
   •	 Responding to the effects of climate change will require implementation of adaptation
      strategies, including major investments in infrastructure to prevent coastal flooding and to
      store dwindling seasonal water supplies.
                                                                                                              NOISE
   •	 The combination of high oil prices, fuel shortages, and supply disruptions is expected to
      continue the trend toward more compact, transit-supported development patterns.
                                                                                                             GENERAL PLAN
   •	 There is expected to be increased focus on local and regional food production in and around
      cities as higher fuel prices and unexpected energy shortages drive up food prices.
                                                                                                            ADMINISTRATION
   •	 Water conservation, efficiency, and reuse technologies such as the following hold substantial
      promise for providing greater water supply security:
         ◦◦ Greywater systems
         ◦◦ Low-flow fixtures
                                                                                                             Citations/
         ◦◦ Xeriscape landscaping
                                                                                                            Appendices
                                                                                 MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       173

Hazards & Public Safet

                                                                                                                                           INTRODUCTION
Purpose
Safety is one of seven General Plan elements mandated by the                                                                               LAND USE
California Government Code. The intent of this General Plan ele-
ment is to identify potential hazards and provide policies and regu-
                                                                                                                                           MOBILITY
latory strategies to reduce the community’s risk of death, injuries,
property damage, or economic and social dislocation from these
hazards. Protection from the risks of natural and human-made
hazards, crime, and disease is essential to establishing a sense of
                                                                                                                                         COMMUNITY
well-being for residents and an important consideration in attract-
ing visitors and businesses to Mill Valley.
                                                                                                                                           VITALITY
                                                                                       Evacuation drill sponsored by the Mill Valley
                                                                                       Emergency Preparedness Committee
Mill Valley is generally vulnerable to a range of threats including
both natural and human-made hazards, so planning for the future
                                                                                                                                            NATURAL
is critical. These threats are not just theoretical. In recent years,
the City has experienced earthquakes, floods, fires, hazardous ma-
                                                                                                                                         ENVIRONEMENT
terials spills, and storms, and it can expect to experience more in
the future. In addition, the general threat picture for cities has
been further complicated by the increased use, storage, and trans-
port of hazardous materials; the outbreak of public health threats;
and even the threat of terrorism.
                                                                                                                                         CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                         ACTION
There are three broad categories of hazards that have the poten-
tial to affect Mill Valley in some way: natural, technological, and
human-made threats. These are listed In Table 7.2 and described
in the “Existing Conditions” section below to explain their relevance                                                                     HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                                         PUBLIC SAFETY
to Mill Valley. Goals and policies for hazards and public safety were
developed to address the City’s response and resilience to poten-
tial threatening events.
Table 7.1 | State Requirements for Safety Elements
                                                                                                                                           NOISE
       Safety Element Content Requirements
                                                                              MV2040 General Plan Provisions
       (Government Code Section 65302(b))
                                                                                                                                          GENERAL PLAN
 Risks associated with seismic events (ground-shak-     See Figure 7.1 and related policies and programs. See also City of Mill Valley
 ing, ground failure, tsunami, etc.)                    Emergency Operations Plan.
 Risks associated with slope instability (landslides)   See Figure 7.1 and related policies and programs. See also City of Mill Valley
                                                                                                                                         ADMINISTRATION
                                                        Emergency Operations Plan.
 Risks associated with subsidence and liquefaction      See Figure 7.1 and related policies and programs. See also City of Mill Valley
                                                        Emergency Operations Plan.
 Risks associated with flooding                         See Figures 7.2 7.3 and related policies and programs. See also City of Mill
                                                                                                                                          Citations/
                                                        Valley Emergency Operations Plan.
 Risks associated with wildland and urban fire          See Figure 7.4 and related policies and programs. See also City of Mill Valley
                                                                                                                                         Appendices
                                                        Emergency Operations Plan.
Cover Photo: CERT Awareness as part of Memorial Day Parade
                                                                                                       MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN              175

                                      It is important to note that a disaster can include more than one
                                      type of threat. For example, a major earthquake could cause major
                                      structural damage or loss, fires, hazardous materials releases or
                                      spills on roadways, and ruptured underground pipelines.
                                      II. Existing Conditions
                                      As required by law, the City of Mill Valley identifies and addresses
                                      potential threats to life, property, and the environment and devel-
                                      ops plans and procedures to protect those assets. These plans
                                      include the City of Mill Valley Emergency Operations Plan (EOP), All
                                      Hazard Mitigation Plan (AHMP), and Fire Plan. The Emergency Op-
                                      erations Plan concept of operations identifies actions categorized
                                      in the following categories referred to as the “emergency manage-
                                      ment lifecycle”:
                                      •	 Prevention/Mitigation
                                      •	 Preparedness
                                      •	 Response
                                      •	 Recovery
                                      This systematic approach is used by federal, state, and local emer-
                                      gency managers, with each phase acting as a comprehensive pro-
                                      cess, building upon the accomplishments of the preceding phase
                                      with the overall goal of minimizing the impact caused by an emer-
                                      gency. There is no beginning and no end; the process is continu-
                                      ous and ongoing. Table 7.3 at the end of this chapter summarizes
                                      the implementing programs for hazards by emergency manage-
                                      ment lifecycle.
     JUST THE FACTS
    •	 In 2011 there were 214         Table 7.2 | Summary of Hazards
       earthquakes recorded within
                                                Natural                Technological          Human-Made
       100 miles of Mill Valley—only
       two exceeded a magnitude        • Earthquake             • Hazardous Materials     • Terrorism
       of 4.0.                         • Flood                    Incident                • Civil Disturbance
                                       • Wildland Fire          • Transportation Accident • Security-Related
                                       • Winter Storm           • Failure of Cascade Dam    Threats
    •	 The 2005 flood is estimated to  • Tsunami                • Energy Disruption
       have resulted in $110 million   • Landslide              • Radiological Incident
       in damages, and impacted        • Drought
       1,200 homes and 200             • Climate Change/Sea
                                          Level Rise
       businesses.
                                       • Public Health Crisis
                                       • Extreme Temperature
176

                                                                                                                           INTRODUCTION
Summary of Natural Hazards
                                                                                                                           LAND USE
Earthquakes
Varying in type and intensity, earthquakes are perhaps the least
predictable of any of the potential hazards. They may cause no
real damage or the area could be heavily affected. Often, the main
                                                                                                                           MOBILITY
earthquake is followed by a series of aftershocks. Aftershocks can
be larger than the original quake and pose a significant threat to
those responding to the first event.
Following an earthquake, the threat of fire also poses a significant                                                     COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                           VITALITY
risk to the community. Earthquake damage can include ruptured
natural gas and water lines, increasing the potential for fire while at
the same time inhibiting the ability to fight those fires.
                                                                                                                            NATURAL
Several known active and potentially active earthquake faults are
located within or near Marin County. The San Andreas and Hay-
                                                                                                                         ENVIRONEMENT
ward Faults pass within about five miles southwest and 12 miles
northeast of Mill Valley, respectively. While no known faults tran-
sect the Mill Valley area, the City experiences dozens of small
earthquakes every year (approximately 55 in 2012). Nearly all de-
structive earthquakes in the San Francisco Bay Area originate on                                                         CLIMATE
faults in the San Andreas system, with the largest being the 1906                                                        ACTION
San Francisco quake (magnitude 7.9) and the 1989 Loma Prieta
quake (magnitude 7.1).
Figure 7.1 shows areas of Mill Valley subject to seismic ground-                                                          HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                         PUBLIC SAFETY
shaking and related risks.
Ground Shaking
Shaking damage will vary from slight to intensive, depending upon
the magnitude of the earthquake and proximity to the epicenter.                                                            NOISE
In the upland areas of the City, most modern single-family buildings
                                                                                                                          GENERAL PLAN
with foundations to bedrock will perform well. Modern multi-story
buildings with foundations to bedrock should not be subject to col-
                                                                                                                         ADMINISTRATION
lapse, although some serious damage may occur. Seismic shaking
greatly increases landslide potential. Many hillsides in Mill Valley
are unstable in their natural state, and even minor changes in the
shape of the land surface could create major landslide problems.          Fire of June 18, 1984 that destroyed Dowd’s
                                                                          Moving & Storage, Curtis Gallery, and La
In the lowlands where there is greater development density, the
                                                                          Veranda Restaurant in the 100 block of          Citations/
                                                                                                                         Appendices
                                                                          Throckmorton Avenue.
damage potential will be greater. Unreinforced masonry buildings          Source: Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia
in the downtown area will suffer moderate to severe damage. Fall-         Little History Room
                                                                                        MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN             177

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                              Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Corte Madera
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !
  !
      !
      !
          !
          !
              !
              !
                  !
                  !
                      !
                      !
                          !
                          !
                              !
                              !
                                  !
                                  !
                                      !
                                      !
                                          !
                                          !
                                              !
                                              !
                                                  !
                                                  !
                                                      !
                                                      !
                                                          !
                                                          !
                                                              !
                                                              !
                                                                  !
                                                                  !
                                                                      !
                                                                      !
                                                                          !
                                                                          !
                                                                              !
                                                                              !
                                                                                  !
                                                                                  !
                                                                                      !
                                                                                      !
                                                                                          !
                                                                                          !
                                                                                              !
                                                                                              !
                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !   Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ITH
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ED
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AL !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !
  !
      !
      !
          !
          !
              !
              !
                  !
                  !
                      !
                      !
                          !
                          !
                              !
                              !
                                  !
                                  !
                                      !
                                      !
                                          !
                                          !
                                              !
                                              !
                                                  !
                                                  !
                                                      !
                                                      !
                                                          !
                                                          !   Muir Woods Park
                                                              !
                                                              !
                                                                  !
                                                                  !
                                                                      !
                                                                      !
                                                                          !
                                                                          !
                                                                              !
                                                                              !
                                                                                  !
                                                                                  !
                                                                                      !
                                                                                      !
                                                                                          !
                                                                                          !
                                                                                              !
                                                                                              !
                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E!   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CAMINO ALTO
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Homestead
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Strawberry
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
          Mill Valley General Plan
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
          Figure 7.1: Seismic Ground-Shaking,
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
          Landslide and Liquefaction Risk
  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !       !       !       !       !       !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !    !   !    !   !   !   !     !      !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
              Soil Type/ Shaking Ampliﬁcation                                                                                                                                     Landslide Risk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !   !
                                      A/B (Lowest)                                                                                                                                                                                High Landslide Risk/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mapped Landslides
                                      C (Moderate)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Low Landslide Risk/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                          !       !       !       !       !       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Few Landslides
                                                                                                                                                                          !       !       !       !       !       !       !
                                      D (Signiﬁcant)
                                                                                                                                                                          !       !       !       !       !       !
                                                                                                                                                                          !       !       !       !       !       !       !
                                      E (Strongest)                                                                                                                               Liquefaction Risk
                                      City Boundary                                                                                                                                                                               Very High
                                      Highway                                                                                                                                                                                     Moderate
                                      Roads                                                                                                                                                                                       Low
              [
                                      0                               0.25                                0.5 Miles                                                               Source: Marin Map, 2012
178

                                              Fra
                                                                                                                                                                         INTRODUCTION
                                         Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                          Æ
                                                                                                                                                          I              LAND USE
                                                                                                                                                                         MOBILITY
                                                                                                                         Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                       COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                         VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                                          NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                       ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                       CLIMATE
                                                                         Downtown                                                                  Alto
                                                                                                       E.
                                                                                                            BL
                                                                                                                                                                       ACTION
                                                                                                              ITH              ALTO
                                                                                                                 ED
                                                                                                                   AL         INO
                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                                             CAM
                                                                                                                                                                        HAZARDS &
                  Muir Woods Park                                                          M
                                                                                            ILL
                                                                                                                                                          Strawberry
                                                                                               ER
                                                                                                AV E
                                                                   Homestead                                                                                           PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                                         NOISE
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 7.2: Tsunami Risk                                                                                                                                                GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                       ADMINISTRATION
          City Boundary             Tsunami Inundation Zone              Existing Water Body
          Highway                   Mean High Tide Line                                                                     Almonte
          Roads
                                                                                                                                                                        Citations/
[
      0            0.25      0.5 Miles              Source: Marin Map, 2012; Tsunami Inundation Map for San Rafael/San Quentin Quadrangle, California Emergency
                                                                                                                                                                       Appendices
                                                    Management Agency, California Geologic Survey, University of Southern California, 2009
                                                                                                                                        MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN           179

                                                      Trends in           # 1 Living with
                                                      Public Safety
                                                                              mother nature
                                                       •	 Due to its setting, Mill Valley is vulnerable to a number
                                                          of natural disasters, including earthquakes, wildfire,
                                                          severe winter storms, landslides, flash floods, and tidal
                                                          flooding.
                                                       •	 Many parts of Mill Valley are subject to potential
                                                          flooding due to overflowing creeks caused by high rains
                                                          and flash flooding; severe winter storms and high tides;
                                                          or a combination of the two.
                                                       •	 The primary cause of natural disasters in Mill Valley is
                                                          storm-related, with flooding being the primary type of
                                                          natural disaster.1
                                                       •	 The number of natural disasters in Marin County (17) is
                                                          greater than the U.S. average.2
                                                       •	 In 2011, there were 214 earthquakes recorded within
                                                          100 miles of Mill Valley. Only two exceeded a magnitude
                                                          of 4.0.3
                                                       •	 The 2005 flood is estimated to have resulted in $110
                                                          million in damages and affected 1,200 homes and 200
                                                          businesses.4
                                                       •	 Over 70 percent of Mill Valley parcels are located
                                                          in the wildland-urban Interface (WUI) zone, which is
                                                          characterized as areas with steep slopes and/or dense
                                                          vegetation that can tend to cause fires to burn rapidly.5
                                                       •	 The 1929 fire burned for approximately three days,
                                                          affecting 2,500 acres and 110 homes. The same 2,500
Top & Bottom: Flooding on Miller Avenue, 1945
                                                          acre-area today contains nearly 800 homes.6
Source: Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little
History Room
180

                                                                                                                         INTRODUCTION
ing debris will endanger those in the vicinity of these older build-
                                                                                                                         LAND USE
ings. “Pancaking” of these older structures during business hours
may entrap many people. The City’s densely settled alluvial low-
lands have a potential for heavy damage. Southeast from La Goma
Street to the bay is unconsolidated fill, and the Sutton Manor area
is of the same base.
                                                                                                                         MOBILITY
Liquefaction
In the eastern portions of Mill Valley, along the bay particularly,
                                                                                                                       COMMUNITY
subsidence and differential settlement can occur, leading to dam-
age of structures sited on these lands. Large areas of former bay
                                                                                                                         VITALITY
mud marshlands in Mill Valley have been artificially filled over the
years. These areas have a high potential for building, utility, and
road damage due to differential settlement. The Redwoods senior
housing, Mill Valley Middle School, Mill Valley Community Center,
                                                                                                                          NATURAL
and Mill Valley Public Safety Building are all located within very high
liquefaction risk areas.
                                                                                                                       ENVIRONEMENT
Landslides
Mill Valley lies in the California Coast Ranges and has two con-
trasting topographic settings: (1) steep hills and ridges, and (2) flat
                                                                                                                       CLIMATE
marshlands, bay plains, and mudflats. The hills and ridges of cen-
                                                                                                                       ACTION
tral and southeastern Marin County are characterized by very steep
slopes and defined differences in the strength and stability of the
geological materials underlying the surface soils.
                                                                                                                        HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
Landslides constitute one of the principal hazards to structures,
roads, and utilities on these hillsides. A typical soil debris ava-
lanche in Marin County involves several hundred cubic yards of
soil and colluvium (rock fragments, sand, etc.) that accumulate on
steep slopes or at the foot of cliffs and is the result of total satura-
tion of a part of the regolith (mantlerock or the loose, unconsolidat-                                                   NOISE
ed material, residual or transported, that rests on the solid rock of
the earth’s crust) on a hillside. During the last 20 years, soil debris
                                                                                                                        GENERAL PLAN
avalanches have occurred abundantly when about four inches or
more of rain have fallen in ten hours or less. In other places they
                                                                                                                       ADMINISTRATION
have occurred during normal rainfall as a result of excessive water
introduced into the hillside through domestic use.
Tsunami
Although Mill Valley does not have a direct exposure to ocean wa-          Landslide resulting from winter storm and    Citations/
                                                                                                                       Appendices
ters, it does face a threat of tsunami (earthquake-induced tidal           flooding, 2006
                                                                                         MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN          181

                                                   wave) due to its proximity to the waters of San Francisco Bay. A
                                                   tsunami caused by an offshore earthquake can lead to atypical
                                                   draining and filling of the bay, a “bathtub” or “sloshing” effect that
                                                   may create water swells that exceed the heights of levees and oth-
                                                   er tidal barriers. The result may be flooding in low-lying areas, simi-
                                                   lar to a slow-rise flood during a winter storm but much more rapid
                                                   and less predictable. Figure 7.2 shows areas of Mill Valley that are
                                                   subject to tsunami risk.
                                                   Flooding
                                                   Many developed and undeveloped Mill Valley lands are subject to
                                                   flooding due to a combination of factors, including periodic heavy
                                                   winter rainfalls, tidal fluctuations, and potential for tsunami due to
                                                   seismic activity.
                                                   Mill Valley drains into Richardson Bay mainly by way of the Arroyo
                                                   Corte Madera del Presidio. The stream drains an area of about six
                                                   square miles from the upper reaches of Mount Tamalpais. Stream
                                                   gradients are, therefore, exceptionally steep in the upper eleva-
                                                   tions, and flatten markedly as the creek continues over alluvial
                                                   plains and enters the tidal marshlands along the periphery of Rich-
                                                   ardson Bay. Consequently, the creek often overflows its banks in
                                                   the lower reaches during periods of heavy rainfall.
                                                   Significant encroachment by urban development and vegetative
                                                   growth has occurred along Arroyo Corte Madera del Presidio. Both
                                                   factors have imposed extreme limitations on channel flow capaci-
                                                   ties along substantial portions of the stream, resulting in flood
                                                   problems. During heavy rainfall conditions, floodwaters cascade
                                                   down the steep upper reaches of the main tributary streams and
                                                   flow through central Mill Valley, where they overflow the flatter, gen-
                                                   erally constricted and inadequate channels. Damaging floods have
                                                   periodically occurred over this area as a result.
                                                   Mill Valley areas subject to frequent flooding in the past are pre-
                                                   dominantly former marshlands (Bay Mud areas) that have previ-
                                                   ously been filled for urban expansion purposes. Consequently, the
                                                   flood problem in Mill Valley has increased with time. Areas subject
                                                   to less frequent but damaging storm water inundation include the
                                                   center of the City and a portion of the City’s commercial and resi-
Top: Flooding at Miller Avenue and Montford,
January 2005                                       dential areas. Mill Valley has experienced the impacts of flooding
Bottom: Flooding on Plymouth Avenue, February 2014 from winter storms, most notably in 1982, 1997, 1998, 2005, and
182

                                              Fra
                                                                                                                                                                     INTRODUCTION
                                         Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                  Æ
                                                                                                                                                  I                  LAND USE
      Galena Creek
                                                                                                                                                                     MOBILITY
                                                                                                                      Corte Madera
   Cascade Creek
                                                                                                                                                                   COMMUNITY
                                                         Arroyo /                                                                                                    VITALITY
    Old Mill Creek                                       Corte Madera/
                                                         Del Presidio
                                                                                                                                                                      NATURAL
                                      Old Mill Creek                                                                                                               ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                   CLIMATE
                                                                         Downtown                                                              Alto
                                                                                                    E.
                                                                                                                                                                   ACTION
                                                                                                         BL                 ALTO
                                                                                                           ITH
                                                                                                              ED
                                                                                                                AL         INO
                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                          CAM
                                                                                                                                                                    HAZARDS &
                  Muir Woods Park                      Coyote Creek                     M
                                                                                        ILL
                                                                                            ER
                                                                                             AV E
                                                                  Homestead                                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                      Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                     NOISE
Mill Valley General Plan                                                                                                           Almonte
                                                                                                                                                                    GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                   ADMINISTRATION
Figure 7.3: FEMA Floodplain
          City Boundary             Perennial Stream             Wetland or Waterbody
          Highway                   Ephemeral Stream            Base Flood Zone
                                                                                                                                                                    Citations/
          Roads                                                 River/Stream Flood Hazard Area
[
      0            0.25      0.5 Miles                  Source: Marin Map, 2012
                                                                                                                                                                   Appendices
                                                                                                                                     MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN          183

              2006. These experiences have demonstrated the variety of poten-
              tial hazards to the community. Winter storms can cause any com-
              bination of destruction, ranging from floods to landslides, disrup-
              tion of public utilities and transportation routes, or direct injuries
              or structural damage. Expected impacts depend on the nature and
              severity of the storm.
              Figure 7.3 shows the areas of Mill Valley subject to flood hazards
              identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
              Wildland Fire
              Wildland fire hazards exist in varying degrees throughout Mill Valley
              and probably pose the greatest threat to public safety and property
              of all potential hazards. The fire season generally lasts from five to
              six months. The wildland fire hazard is caused by a combination
              of factors including weather, topography, highly flammable vegeta-
              tion/fuel loading, and human activity.
              Many homes have been built on steep slopes with vegetation in
              close proximity. These slopes are often steep, located in rugged
              terrain, and have very few access routes. The onset of sudden oak
              death has significantly increased the number of dead or weakened
              trees, which serves as potential fuel for fires.
              In several areas, an “urban interface” fire hazard is created as
              older neighborhoods directly border parks or open space. These
              areas often have mature vegetation and large tree canopies which
              could contribute to the quick spread of fires.
              In Mill Valley, significant portions of the community are in a desig-
              nated wildland-urban interface (WUI) zone (see Figure 7.4). These
              areas include Warner Canyon, Mill Valley Ridge, Blithedale Canyon,
              Blithedale Ridge, Cascade Canyon, Fern Canyon, Summit Ridge,
              Scott Valley, and the southeast face of Mount Tamalpais. These
              areas are characterized by steep slopes and are covered by dense
              stands of vegetation that burn explosively and cause fire to spread
              rapidly. A major fire has not occurred in these areas since 1929,
              and, as a result, the density of dry vegetation has increased.
              Public Health Crisis
              One of the gravest threats to the life safety of Marin County resi-
Wildland Fire dents and visitors is posed by biological agents that occur naturally.
184

                                                                                                                                                       INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                       LAND USE
                                     Larkspur
                                                                                                                                    Æ
                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                       MOBILITY
                                                                                                       Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                     COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                       VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                        NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                     ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                 Alto                CLIMATE
                                                                                     E.
                                                                                                                                                     ACTION
                                                                                          BL
                                                                                            ITH
                                                                                               ED
                                                                                                 AL
                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                      HAZARDS &
              Muir Woods Park                                            M
                                                                         ILL
                                                                             ER
                                                                              AV E
                                                                                                                                                     PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                       CAMINO ALTO
                                                             Homestead
                                                                                                                                        Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                       NOISE
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 7.4:
Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) Zone
                                                                                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN
      City Boundary
                                                                                                                     Almonte
                                                                                                                                                     ADMINISTRATION
      Highway
      Roads
      Wildland-Urban Interface
 [
      0         0.25     0.5 Miles      Source: Marin Map, 2012
                                                                                                                                                      Citations/
                                                                                                                                                     Appendices
                                                                                                                      MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN           185

                                       Bacteria and viruses continue to evolve and spread. Drug-resistant
                                       strains of these pathogens also pose serious challenges to modern
                                       medicine. A public health crisis will immediately affect the width
                                       and breadth of emergency medical services.
                                       In order to reduce costs, the medical community has worked to in-
                                       crease its efficiency by reducing or closing facilities, reducing staff,
                                       and relying on just-in-time inventory systems for medical supplies.
                                       These changes have resulted in an indirect reduction in the capac-
                                       ity to handle large-scale health events and an increased reliability
                                       on crisis response systems.
                                       Public health events are likely to affect whole regions and nations.
                                       Resources from outside Marin County may not be available. Ameri-
                                       can society has not had to respond to a major health crisis in mod-
                                       ern times. Existing concepts and response systems may be over-
                                       whelmed.
                                       Fire and Paramedic Service
                                       The Mill Valley Fire Department is a progressive, all-risk emergency
                                       service provider that responds to approximately 2,000 calls for
                                       service a year. These calls for service include house fires, vehicle
                                       fires, wildland fires, medical emergencies, vehicle accidents, natu-
                                       ral gas line leaks, hazardous materials emergencies, and various
                                       technical rescues. Fire personnel also respond to a variety of pub-
                                       lic service calls that include water and electrical problems, non-
                                       injured fall victims, and odor investigations.
                                       The City of Mill Valley faces the potential of various threats against
                                       life and property. Acknowledging this, the Mill Valley Fire Depart-
                                       ment works to prepare for these threats. The Fire Department has
                                       supported and continues to contribute to the Mill Valley Emergency
                                       Preparedness Commission and to the Mill Valley Community Emer-
                                       gency Response Training (CERT) program.
                                       A Municipal Service Tax approved by Mill Valley voters in 1996 al-
                                       lowed for the creation of the Mill Valley Fire Department’s Vegeta-
                                       tion Management Program. This program funds projects aimed at
                                       reducing the risk of life and property as well as improving evacua-
                                       tion routes for residents. Figure 7.5 illustrates evacuation routes
                                       in the City.
Demonstration at Tamalpais High School
186

                                                   Fra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        INTRODUCTION
                                        Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LAND USE
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VITALITY
                                                                                                                                               Gl
                                                                                                                                                 en
                                                                                                                                                    D                     a
                                                                                                                                                                      Vist
                                                                                                                                                                             Lin d
                                                                                                                                                      r
                                                                                  W                                                                                             a Dr
                                                                                           d                                                                                                                                             Underhill Dr
                                                                                       the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NATURAL
                                                                                    Bli
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Alto
                                                                                         ale
                                                                                  C or           e                                                                                                              m in
                                                                                                               ve
                                                                                               Av                 A                                               e
                                                                                                                                                                Av                                                  o
                                                                                   te
                                                                                                               ge
                                                                                                           r id                                                                                                 Ca
                                                                                    M
                                                                                          er
                                                                                                                                                 Buen
                                                                                         ad
                                                                                                     Eld
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                      a Vis
                                                                      Summ                   ve
                                          Th                                it A           aA
                                            ro                                   ve                                                                        ta
                                                         ve n A   Tamalpai
                                                     ll A
                                          d      m                        s
                                       ca     ck
                                                   ve orto
                                                                            ve                                                                                                                                           o Dr
                                   Ca s
                                                                              A
                                                 Lo
                                          r                                                                                                                                                                            sc
                                        eD                  ve                             Be                                                             Manor                                                         Va
                                                                                               rn
                                                                                                  d                                                       Dr
                                                                                                ar                    Sunnyside Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dr
                                                                                                                                   Carmelita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lom
                                                                  M
                                                                      ari
                                                                         on
                                                                                  Moli
                                                                                      no                                              Ave                                                                                              Ashfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rd    Ave                                                CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ACTION
                                                                                          Ave                                 Milwood                                         EB                                                           ve
                                                                                                                                                                                 lith                                                    eA
                                                                          Av e                                                   St
                                                                                                                                                                                     ed                                         eda
                                                                                                                                                                                           ale                                     l
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Av                           i th
                                                                                                                                                                                                   e                               l               g Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EB
                                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                                                                      ille
                                                                                                                      Molin
                                                                                                                           o Ave        rA
                                                                                                                                          ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ro                 Ki plin
                                                                                                                                                                                                ve                               e
               Muir Woods Park                                                                                                                                            aS
                                                                                                                                                                            t                 nA                              qu       Mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                                                                         m                  so                                              raes
                                                                                                                                                                      Go
                                                                                                                                                                                     Nel               to                                       Dr
                                                                                                                                                                La           Sy
                                                                                                                                                                               cam
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Camino Al
                                                                                                                                                                                     ore
                                                                                                                                                                                           Av
                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Frontage Rd                PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                 Homestead
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m ilton D                 Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       w o od Hw y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NOISE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Re d
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 7.5: Evacuation Routes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Almonte
          City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ADMINISTRATION
          Downtown
          Highway
          Roads
          Evacuation Routes
          Steps, Lanes, & Paths
[                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Citations/
      0         0.25        0.5 Miles            Source: Marin Map, 2012; David Parisi and Associates, 2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Appendices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                                                     187

                             In an effort to alert residents of an emergency, five warning sirens
                             have been strategically placed throughout Mill Valley. The Fire De-
                             partment also uses Marin’s Telephone Emergency Notification Sys-
                             tem to contact identified geographical groups in Mill Valley.
                             In partnership with the Marin Municipal Water District (MMWD),
                             the Mill Valley Fire Department continues to significantly upgrade
                             its water system. To date, over 180 fire hydrants have been re-
                             placed and 75,000 feet of water line upgraded.
                             Recognizing the risks associated with the wildland-urban inter-
                             face, the Mill Valley Fire Department assisted in the development
                             of a Mutual Threat Zone plan that is designed to streamline com-
                             munications and resource ordering, pre-designate staging areas,
                             structure protection groups, and command post locations. The Fire
                             Department also works closely with the Mill Valley Police Depart-
                             ment and other agencies to conduct large-scale evacuation drills in
                             pre-selected geographical areas in an effort to train the community
                             and emergency personnel.
                              Trends in         # 2 The  community is
                              Public Safety
                                                    relatively safe.
                               •	 The prevalence of crime in Mill Valley is quite low.
                                  Between 1999 and 2010, the crime index declined
                                  41 percent (indicating less crime), from 164.3 to 97.5,
                                  compared to 319.1 for the U.S. as a whole.13
                               •	 Theft and burglary are by far the most common types
                                  of crime in Mill Valley, with an average of 174 thefts and
                                  69 burglaries reported annually between 1999 and
                                  2010.14
Mill Valley Police Service
188

                                                                                                     INTRODUCTION
Police Service
                                                                                                     LAND USE
The Mill Valley Police Department provides municipal police service
to the residents and visitors of Mill Valley. The Police Department
addresses crime through a collaborative effort involving education
and enforcement among all facets of the community – residents,
                                                                                                     MOBILITY
community groups, schools, and businesses. The Police Depart-
ment works closely with other City departments to meet Mill Val-
ley’s needs.
                                                                                                   COMMUNITY
Currently, Mill Valley experiences a low level of crime when com-
pared to crime trends from the early to mid-1990s. Property
crimes far outpace crimes against people. Advancements in tech-                                      VITALITY
nology have assisted the Police Department in solving crimes, but
they have also contributed to new ways for citizens to be victimized.
                                                                                                      NATURAL
Through training and working with other law enforcement agencies,
the Police Department stays on the cutting edge of criminal deter-
                                                                                                   ENVIRONEMENT
rence and solving crimes.
                                                                                                   CLIMATE
                                                                                                   ACTION
                                                                                                    HAZARDS &
                                                                                                   PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                     NOISE
                                                                                                    GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                   ADMINISTRATION
Above: Civil defense training for women during World War II                                         Citations/
                                                                                                   Appendices
Source: Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Room
                                                                        MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       189

    Hazards Goals, Policies & Programs
    HAZARD-1 | Community Hazard Resilience
    Minimize loss of life, property, and important elements of the natural ecosystem
    and maximize Mill Valley’s ability to prevent, mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and
    recover from disaster.
    HZ.1 Hazard Identification and Mitigation
    Identify all hazards that threaten the City. Determine the likelihood of occurrence and severity
    of all hazards, further categorize them as either “sudden onset” disasters (e.g., earthquakes,
    wildfire) or “slow onset” disasters/phenomena (e.g., drought, extreme heat, sea level rise), and
    strengthen hazard mitigation policies and regulations.
        HZ.1-1 Use geographic information systems, such as Marin Maps, to review and update
        hazard information and quantify the vulnerability of people and structures in hazard areas.
        HZ.1-2 Incorporate hazard maps into public education and outreach, the All Hazard Mitiga-
        tion Plan and Fire Plan, and other planning documents.
        HZ.1-3 Strengthen requirements for public right-of-way improvements, fire sprinklers, veg-
        etation management, fire-resistive construction, and other hazard mitigation programs
        and ensure that regulations are regularly and consistently enforced through adequate
        code enforcement staffing and procedures to minimize threats to life and property. En-
        sure, however, that these mitigation efforts are not done at the expense of good design or
        community character.
        HZ.1-4 Continue to identify and expand preparations for potential hazards as new informa-
        tion and conditions arise, such as for public health pandemics and climate change/sea
        level rise.
        HZ.1-5 Identify and expand preparations for potential hazards through the identification
        and use of the emergency management lifecycle (prevention, mitigation, preparedness,
        response and recovery).
    HZ.2 Administrative and Equipment Capacity
    Maintain adequate concentration and distribution of staff, facilities, materials, and equipment
    to provide a timely disaster response consistent with the needs of a demographically changing
    community and a challenging natural environment, while recognizing the difficulties of main-
    taining these systems on a daily basis.
190

                                                                                                                          INTRODUCTION
    HZ.2-1 Conduct hazard and vulnerability assessments as part of the Mill Valley Emergency
                                                                                                                          LAND USE
    Operations Plan (EOP). Maintain adequate concentration and distribution of staff, facili-
    ties, materials, and equipment to provide a timely response to demands for public safety
    services.
    HZ.2-2 Maintain, update, and implement the All Hazard Mitigation Plan and Fire Plan,
                                                                                                                          MOBILITY
    which integrate hazard mitigation strategies into the day-to-day activities of the City of Mill
    Valley and include provisions addressing police and fire service, vulnerable populations,
    and sensitive facilities during and following a significant disaster.
HZ.3 Critical Infrastructure                                                                                            COMMUNITY
Develop strategies for critical facilities and services (local and regional) that will minimize prob-                     VITALITY
lems during post-disaster evacuations, rescues, and major clean-up operations following a
major disaster.
    HZ.3-1 Develop and implement a detailed Continuity of Operations Plan to ensure the                                    NATURAL
                                                                                                                        ENVIRONEMENT
    City’s ability to provide vital services following a major disaster, including but not limited to
    building permitting and inspection services that will facilitate the rebuilding process, while
    recognizing that there will be minimal staffing, damaged facilities and equipment, disrup-
    tion of communications, a likely absence of mutual aid, and a greatly increased demand
    on all City services.
                                                                                                                        CLIMATE
                                                                                                                        ACTION
    HZ.3-2 Use new technology, volunteers, social media, and other mechanisms to improve
    the capability and effectiveness of hazard early warning systems.
    HZ.3-3 Establish a database of residents and businesses with disaster-related skills,                                HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
    equipment, critical supplies, and/or services.
                                                                                                                          NOISE
                                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                        ADMINISTRATION
    City employees setting up an Emergency Opera-    Mill Valley Community Emergency Response Team
                                                                                                                         Citations/
    tions Center as part of Emergency Preparedness   (CERT) members participating in advanced training
    Commission.                                      sponsored by the Mill Valley Emergency Response
                                                                                                                        Appendices
                                                     Commission.
                                                                                             MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       191

    HZ.4 Civic Duty and Responsibility
    Promote education and events that reinforce the personal responsibility of all residents, busi-
    ness owners, and City staff to plan for, respond to, and recover from disasters.
       HZ.4-1 Ensure continuity of City services and operations through ongoing interdepartmen-
       tal coordination, training, contingency planning, and periodic exercises in order to provide
       swift and effective disaster response and recovery.
       HZ.4-2 Implement, support, and promote regular educational and training programs such
       as “Resilient Neighborhoods,” “GET Ready,” and Community Emergency Response Train-
       ing (CERT) for City staff, residents, businesses, schools, and neighborhood groups that
       address emergency response protocols and procedures, disaster risk education, and self–
       sufficiency.
       HZ.4-3 Coordinate with the Emergency Preparedness Commission (EPC) to manage public
       expectations and educate community members about what the City will be able to do for
       them versus what they will have to do for themselves during and after a disaster.
       Fire hose demonstration
192

                                                                                                                    INTRODUCTION
HZ.5 Emergency Response and Evacuation Routes
                                                                                                                    LAND USE
Maintain and expand the network of anticipated emergency response routes and regularly
exercise evacuation protocols and procedures.
   HZ.5-1 Continue to update the Emergency Operations Plan to identify the anticipated
                                                                                                                    MOBILITY
   emergency response routes and evacuation procedures in the event of a major disaster or
   hazard requiring evacuation events.
   HZ.5-2 Support measures to designate, create, maintain, resurrect, and enhance those
                                                                                                                  COMMUNITY
   Steps, Lanes and Paths that also serve as evacuation routes.
   HZ.5-3 Continue to maintain and clearly identify those facilities and networks that serve as                     VITALITY
   emergency response and evacuation routes.
                                                                                                                     NATURAL
   HZ.5-4 Establish public improvement requirements and fees for new development or sub-
   stantial redevelopment, public improvement assessment districts, the City’s budget pro-
                                                                                                                  ENVIRONEMENT
   cess, or other available funding tools to implement essential emergency access improve-
   ments, including but not limited to the following:
   Public
   •	 End of Tamalpais Avenue. Improve the turn-around so a Type 1 engine can safely turn
      around with a minimum of backing.                                                                           CLIMATE
                                                                                                                  ACTION
   •	 Hazel Avenue at Rose Avenue. Improve the turn so a Type 1 engine can complete turn
      without backing.
                                                                                                                   HAZARDS &
   •	 Marion Avenue and Monte Vista Avenue. Improve the turn so a Type 1 engine can com-
      plete the turn without backing.
                                                                                                                  PUBLIC SAFETY
   •	 Marion Avenue at Hazel Avenue. Improve the turn so a Type 1 Engine can complete the
      turn without backing.
   •	 Molino Avenue at Florence Avenue. Improve the turn so a Type 1 Engine can complete
      the turn without backing.
                                                                                                                    NOISE
   •	 Marion Avenue at Florence Avenue. Improve the turn so a Type 1 Engine can complete
      the turn without backing.
                                                                                                                   GENERAL PLAN
   •	 Hillside Avenue – Area of 300 Block. Improve engine turn-around location. This may
      be completed by making a hammerhead turn into the culvert next to 339 Hillside or by
                                                                                                                  ADMINISTRATION
      requiring a driveway rated for an engine as a condition of approval as part of project
      review for a future project in the area. At this time, there is no turn-around point for fire
      equipment in this high fire danger area.
   •	 Rose Avenue – Area of 200 Block. Improve engine turn-around location. This may be
                                                                                                                   Citations/
      completed by making a hammerhead turn into the culvert next to 226 Rose or by
      requiring a driveway rated for an engine as a condition of approval as part of project
                                                                                                                  Appendices
                                                                                       MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       193

            review for a future project in the area. At this time, there is no turn-around point for fire
            equipment in this high fire danger area.
       •	 Cascade Avenue – Between 371 and 422 Cascade. Widen the road by the embank-
            ment.
       Private
       •	 Lee Street at Quarry Road. Improve the turn so a Type 1 engine can complete the turn
            without backing. This may be done by relocating the utility pole, extending the roadway
            to cover the culvert, allowing the inside of the turn to be enlarged, or removing part of
            the hillside and installing a retaining wall.
       •	 Wainright Place. Improve the turn so a Type 1 engine can complete the turn without
            backing, or at minimum make it a two-point turn. Widen the upper part of Wainwright
            to allow Type 1 engine access and improve the second hair-pin corner. Provide the turn-
            around at the end of the road.
       •	 End of Circle Avenue. Build a Fire Department turn-around and improve access for fire
            equipment on the gated service road between Circle Avenue and the golf club house
            parking lot. Include re-grading and paving of the service road as part of the improve-
            ments
    HZ.6 Prevention and Protection
    Reduce injury and damage from hazards.
       HZ.6-1 Maintain an ongoing fire inspection program to reduce fire hazards associated with
       commercial and multi-family residential buildings, older buildings, critical facilities, public
       assembly facilities, and residential parcels in high-risk areas.
       HZ.6-2 Continue to use Residential Building Reports to identify hazards for potential home
       buyers.
       HZ.6-3 Require and maintain setbacks, easements, and accesses necessary to ensure
       that emergency services can readily and efficiently function with available equipment.
       HZ.6-4 Ensure that all grading and site improvements and structures minimize geotechni-
       cal, seismic, and flood hazards.
       HZ.6-5 Continue to work closely with nearby public safety and emergency management
       agencies to develop and maintain mutual support plans and programs and coordinate
       emergency management procedures such as mutual aid agreements.
194

                                                                                                               INTRODUCTION
Public Safety Goals, Policies & Programs
SAFETY-1 | Police Service                                                                                      LAND USE
Provide the highest-quality police services that proactively prevent and control crime
that the community cannot prevent, reduce fear, and enhance the security of the
                                                                                                               MOBILITY
community.
PS.1 Community Services
Provide extensive community-based service and education programs designed to prevent
crime and emphasize citizen protection and involvement.                                                      COMMUNITY
                                                                                                               VITALITY
   PS.1-1 Provide a high level of visible patrol services within the City.
   PS.1-2 Respond to both emergency and routine calls for service in a timely manner consis-
                                                                                                                NATURAL
   tent with Police Department policy.
                                                                                                             ENVIRONEMENT
   PS.1-3 Establish programs that respond to community concerns regarding crime, emer-
   gency response, student safety, and traffic.
   PS.1-4 Maintain efforts to educate the public about crime deterrence through programs
   like the Neighborhood Watch Program within residential neighborhoods and the Business                     CLIMATE
   Watch Program within commercial areas. Encourage similar community-oriented policing                      ACTION
   and problem-solving techniques in working with the community to reduce crime.
                                                                                                              HAZARDS &
   PS.1-5 Ensure that the Police Department works with other City departments to review
   public and private development plans, ensuring that crime prevention is addressed.
                                                                                                             PUBLIC SAFETY
   PS.1-6 Incorporate crime reduction and public safety response features in the design and
   planning of private and public development.
PS.2 Technology and Performance                                                                                NOISE
Ensure that the Police Department uses modern technology and provides adequate training to
maximize job performance.
   PS.2-1 Maintain high standards of hiring personnel, and provide in-depth training of Police                GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                             ADMINISTRATION
   Department personnel to maintain and improve knowledge and skill levels.
   PS.2-2 Maintain a high standard for the delivery of law enforcement services, including a
   commitment to the use of state-of-the-art equipment and management techniques.
                                                                                                              Citations/
   PS.2-3 Incorporate Police Department staffing and technology needs into each year’s Cap-
   ital Improvement Program and operating budget.                                                            Appendices
                                                                                  MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       195

Nois

                                                                                                       INTRODUCTION
Purpose
Requirements for the Noise Element of the General Plan are set                                         LAND USE
forth in California Government Code Section 65302(f), which pro-
vides the following overall guidance:
    A Noise Element shall identify and appraise noise problems in                                      MOBILITY
    a community. The Noise Element shall recognize the guide-
    lines established by the Office of Noise Control [in the State
                                                                                                     COMMUNITY
    Department of Health Services] and shall analyze and quan-
    tify, to the extent practicable, as determined by the legislative
    body, current and projected noise levels for all of the following                                  VITALITY
    sources:
                                                                                                        NATURAL
    (A)	 Highways and freeways.
    (B)	 Primary arterials and major local streets.
                                                                                                     ENVIRONEMENT
    (C)	 Passenger and freight online railroad operations and
    ground rapid transit systems.
    (D)	 Commercial or general aviation, heliport, helistop, and
    military airport operations, aircraft overflights, jet engine test
    stands, and all other ground facilities and maintenance func-
                                                                                                     CLIMATE
    tions related to airport operation.
                                                                                                     ACTION
    (E)	 Local industrial plants, including but not limited to railroad
    classification yards.
    (F)	 Other ground stationery sources…identified by local agen-
    cies as contributing to the community noise environment.                                          HAZARDS &
The MV2040 General Plan contains policies and programs to pre-                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
vent problems created by excessive noise levels and to maintain or
reduce current noise levels in the community, consistent with the
City’s adopted noise ordinance. The City’s noise ordinance (Mill
Valley Municipal Code Chapter 7.16) contains quantitative noise                                        NOISE
limits for noise sources within the Mill Valley city limits and estab-
lishes acceptable exterior noise levels, acceptable interior noise
                                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN
levels, and exemptions from the ordinance for special activities
such as construction. Special noise limits are also established for
                                                                                                     ADMINISTRATION
certain noise-generating activities.
Typical noise levels experienced in a community are illustrated in
Figure 8.9
                                                                                                      Citations/
                                                                                                     Appendices
                                                                          MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       197

    Existing Conditions
    Noise Measurement Survey
    A noise measurement survey was completed in January 2013 to
    establish existing noise levels in Mill Valley. Long-term measure-
    ments made hour-by-hour over a period of 24 hours or more pro-
    vide information on how noise levels vary throughout the day and
    night and may vary from day to day. A series of attended short-
    term measurements were also made. These measurements are
    also useful because they identify the noise sources that occur dur-
    ing the measurement and note the level of noise associated with
    identifiable events. This assists in quantitatively and qualitatively
    characterizing the noise environments along the major roadways
    and also in the quieter areas of the City.
    Major roadways cause most of the ambient noise in Mill Valley.
    Highway 101 runs along the eastern border of the City. Major lo-
    cal roadways, which include Miller Avenue, East Blithedale Avenue,
    and Camino Alto. Hamilton Drive, Lomita Drive, and Sycamore Av-
    enue, are relatively quiet roads, but they are adjoined by a large
    number of residences and, therefore, contribute to residential
    noise exposure in Mill Valley.
    The noise survey was from the afternoon of Monday, January 7,
    2013, to the afternoon of Wednesday, January 9, 2013, and (at
    one location) from the afternoon of Wednesday, January 9, 2013,
    to the afternoon of Friday, January 11, 2013. Noise measurement
    locations are shown in Figure 8.1. During the noise survey, weather
    conditions were moderate in terms of temperature and wind. The
    noise survey was conducted with Larson Davis Laboratories Type
    820 precision sound level meters. Instrumentation was calibrated
    at the beginning of the noise survey and post-calibrated at the end
    of the survey. No calibration corrections were necessary. During
    the survey, the microphones were fitted with windscreens.
    Noise Measurement Terminology
    The State Office of Planning and Research guidelines related to
    the preparation of the Noise Element of the General Plan mandate
    that noise exposure levels be expressed in terms of the day/night
    average sound level (Ldn) or the community noise equivalent level
    (CNEL). Both of these descriptors represent the 24-hour average
198
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      INTRODUCTION
                                               Fra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LAND USE
                                      Kentfield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Æ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MOBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                                        Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NATURAL
                                                                                                                                       Gl
                                                                                                                                         en
                                                                                                                                            D                     a
                                                                                                                                                              Vist
                                                                                                                                                                  Lin d
                                                                                                                                              r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                          W                                                                                            a Dr
                                                                                   d                                                                                                                                                  Underhill Dr
                                                                               the
                                                                            Bli
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Alto
                                                                                 ale
                                                                          C or           e                                                                                                                  m in
                                                                                                        ve
                                                                                       Av                 A                                               e
                                                                                                                                                        Av                                                      o
                                                                           te
                                                                                                       ge
                                                                                                     id                                                                                                     Ca
                                                                            M
                                                                                  er             r
                                                                                                                                         Buen
                                                                                 ad
                                                                                             Eld
                                                                                                                                              a Vis
                                                              Summ                   ve
                                        Th                          it A           aA
                                          ro  ve n A      Tamalpai
                                                                         ve                                                                        ta
                                          ll A
                                        ve
                                        d      rto                s
                                     ca
                                      Lo mo                         ve                                                                                                                                              o Dr
                                 Ca s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CLIMATE
                                          ck
                                                                      A
                                                   r                                                                                                                                                              sc
                                                 eD  ve                                                                                           Manor                                                            Va
                                                                                   Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ACTION
                                                                                       rn
                                                                                          d                                                       Dr
                                                                                        ar                    Sunnyside Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Alto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dr
                                                                                                                           Carmelita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ita
                                                                                                                      ST-4                                                                                               Lom
                                                          M               Moli                                                Ave                                                                                            Ashfo
                                                              ari
                                                                 on
                                                                              no                                                                                                                                                   rd         Ave                          ST-1
                                                                                  Ave                                   Milwood                                       EB                                      ST-3                         ve
                                                                  Av e                                          ST-5                                                    lith                                               LT-4          eA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                           St                                               ed
                                                                                                                                                                                 ale                                             eda
                                                                                                                                                                                       Av                                           l
                                                                                                                                                                                         e                                     i th           g Dr
                                                                                                                             M                                                                                                    l
                                                                                                              Molin            ille                                                                                          EB
                                                                                                                   o Ave           ve                                                                                   Ro                Ki plin
                                                                                                                                 rA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                                                                                                                      ve                                    e
               Muir Woods Park                                                                                                                                   aS
                                                                                                                                                                   t                nA                                   qu    Mo
                                                                                                                                                                                  so                                                   raes
                                                                                                                                                            G om           Nel                                                             Dr
                                                                                                                                                         La     Sy                             to
                                                                                                                                                                  cam
                                                                                                                                                                                             Camino Al
                                                                                                                                                                           ore
                                                                                                                                                                                 Av
                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                     LT-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Frontage Rd
                                                                                         Homestead
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST-2                    Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NOISE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          m ilton D
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      w o od Hw y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r
                                                                                                                                                                                                            lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LT-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Re d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                           Tam Valley                                                                                                                          LT-1
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 8.1: Noise Measurement Locations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Almonte
          City Boundary    X     Noise Measurement Locations
          Downtown               Roads
          Highway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Citations/
[
      0         0.25      0.5 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Appendices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN                                                        199

                                                        noise level with waiting periods for the daytime (Ldn) or the daytime
                                                        and evening (CNEL). Ldn is currently the preferred metric and is
                                                        used to characterize the 24-hour average noise exposure level.
                                                        It is also important to know how noise levels vary within each hour
                                                        of the day and night. For this purpose, the standard statistical de-
                                                        scriptors are the Lmax, the L10, the L50, and the L90. The Lmax
                                                        noise level is the highest noise level during the interval and the
                                                        L10, L50, and L90 represent sound levels exceeded 10 percent,
                                                        50 percent (the median level), and 90 percent of the time interval
                                                        (representing the background noise levels). The L50 corresponds
                                                        to the noise limit in the City’s noise ordinance. The hourly equiva-
                                                        lent sound level (Leq), the basis for the day/night average noise
                                                        levels, was measured and reported for each hour, as well.
                                                        Long-Term Noise Measurements
                                                        Measurement LT-1 was 100 feet west of the near edge of Highway
                                                        101. The measurement position was at a small park near the Ac-
                                                        qua Hotel parking lot and a waterfront walkway, about 60 feet from
                                                        the center line of the Redwood Highway frontage road. Vehicular
                                                        traffic on Highway 101 was the dominant noise source affecting
                                                        the noise measurement. The daily trend in noise levels at this loca-
                                                        tion is shown in Figure 8.2. The measured day/night average noise
                                                        level at this location was about 71 dBA Ldn. This measurement lo-
                                                        cation was well below the grade of the roadway, resulting in a lower
                                                        Ldn level than would be expected at other portions of the highway
                                                        at the same distance, as shown in the modeled noise levels (Table
                                                        8.1). Activities in the parking lot such as starting car engines, slam-
                                                        ming car doors, and talking may be considered significant inter-
                                                        mittent noise sources, but these did not affect the overall 24-hour
                                                        average noise level. The data clearly demonstrate the difference
                                                        in noise levels between nighttime, when the noise level dropped
                                                        to 35 dBA L90 (in the absence of any local traffic and activities in
                                                        the parking lot), and daytime, when the noise level reached 92 dBA
                                                        Lmax.
                                                        Measurement LT-2 was on Miller Avenue. This measurement loca-
                                                        tion was also selected to characterize noise levels along a major
                                                        road. The measurement position was in a tree near the Mill Valley-
                                                        Sausalito path about 90 feet from the center line of Miller Avenue.
                                                        The measurement was across Miller Avenue from the Tamalpais
Vehicular traffic on Miller Avenue near Tam High School High School athletic fields. The dominant source of noise was ve-
200

                                                                                                                                  INTRODUCTION
hicular traffic on Miller Avenue. Measured data at LT-2 are shown
in Figure 8.3. The measured noise level at this location was 67
                                                                                                                                  LAND USE
dBA Ldn.
Measurement LT-3 was on the east side of Camino Alto along a
creek of Pickleweed Inlet. The measurement position was about
                                                                                                                                  MOBILITY
100 feet from the center line of the roadway. Vehicular traffic along
Camino Alto was the major source of noise. At night, it is likely that
light winds in vegetation and creek water also contributed to the
                                                                                                                                COMMUNITY
background noise levels. The day/night average noise level was
measured to be about 65 dBA Ldn. The measured data are shown
                                                                                                                                  VITALITY
in Figure 8.4. The data show that it is quiet during the night, when
noise levels drop to about 37 dBA L90 in the absence of any local
traffic.
                                                                                                                                   NATURAL
Measurement LT-4 was on East Blithedale Avenue near the shop-
ping center northeast of Lomita Drive. The measurement position
                                                                                                                                ENVIRONEMENT
was about 75 feet from the center line of East Blithedale Avenue.
Vehicular traffic along East Blithedale Avenue was the major source
of noise at this location, which is busier than other local roadways
in Mill Valley. The day/night average noise level at this site was
measured to be about 71 dBA Ldn. Noise levels at this portion of                                                                CLIMATE
the road varied from as low as 35 dBA L90 when there is little lo-                                                              ACTION
cal traffic at night to as high as 87 dBA Lmax during daytime hours
when there are bus and truck pass-bys and high engine vehicle
                                                                                                                                 HAZARDS &
noise. The measurement data are summarized in Figure 8.5.
Table 8.1 | Summary of Short-Term Noise Measurement Data                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
                      Noise Measurement Location                              Lmax   L(1)   L(10)   L(50)   L(90)   Leq   Ldn
                                                                                                                                  NOISE
ST-1: 260 feet from the noise barrier along Highway 101
                                                                              57     56     54       51     49      52     55
(1/8/2013, 11:40-11:50 AM)
ST-2: Approximately 40 feet from Hamilton Drive along Shelter Bay Avenue
                                                                              73     67     63      55      50      59     61
(1/8/2013, 12:10-12:20 PM)
                                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN
ST-3: 240 feet from the center of Camino Alto
                                                                              64     62     57      52      50      54     56
(1/8/2013, 12:30-12:40 PM)
                                                                                                                                ADMINISTRATION
ST-4: 90 feet from the center of East Blithedale Avenue
                                                                              71     66     63      60      55      51     53
(1/8/2013, 1:00-1:10 PM)
ST-5: 180 feet from center of Miller Avenue along Park Avenue
                                                                              64     60     56       51     44      53     54
(1/8/2013, 2:10-2:20 PM)
ST-6: 150 feet from center of West Blithedale Avenue near Blithedale Park
                                                                                                                                 Citations/
                                                                              59     52     49      48      48      48     49
(1/8/2013, 1:30 PM)
                                                                                                                                Appendices
Note: Ldn approximated by correlating to corresponding period at long-term site.
                                                                                                    MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN        201
      MV2040 General Plan                                                                                                                         Noise
                                                                                           Figure 8.2
                                                                                       Noise Levels at LT-1
                                                                                             Figure
                                                                                          Noise Levels 8.2
                                                                                                       at LT-1
                                                                             ~ 100 feetNoise   Levels
                                                                                        from the        at of
                                                                                                 west edge LT-1
                                                                                                              US Hwy 101
                                                                               January 7 - 8, 2013 (Monday - Tuesday)
                                         100
                                                                            Figure 8.2Noise | Noise     Levels
                                                                                                Levels at LT-1 at LT-1
                                                                             ~ 100 feet from the west edge of US Hwy 101
                                          95
                                                                               January 7 - 8, 2013 (Monday - Tuesday)
                                          90
                                         100
                                          85
                                          95
                                          80
                                          90
                                          75
          Noise LevelNoise
                      (dBA)Level (dBA)
                                                                                                                                                  Lmax
                                          85
                                          70                                                                                                      L(1)
                                          80
                                          65                                                                                                      L(10)
                                          75                                                                                                      L(50)
                                          60                                                                                                      Lmax
                                          70                                                                                                      L(90)
                                          55                                                                                                      L(1)
                                                                                                                                                  Lmin
                                          65                                                                                                      L(10)
                                          50
                                                                                                                                                  Leq (hr)
                                                                                                                                                  L(50)
                                          60
                                          45
                                                                                                                                                  L(90)
                                                                                                                                           Ldn = 71 dBA
                                          55
                                          40                                                                                                      Lmin
                                          50
                                          35                                                                                                      Leq (hr)
                                          45
                                          30
                                                                                                                                           Ldn = 71 dBA
                                          40
                                          25
                                          3515:00   17:00   19:00   21:00      23:00   1:00    3:00   5:00   7:00   9:00   11:00   13:00
                                          30
                                                                                         Hour Beginning
                                          25
                                            15:00   17:00   19:00   21:00      23:00   1:00    3:00   5:00   7:00   9:00   11:00   13:00
                                                                                         Hour Beginning
                                                                                           Figure 8.3
                                                                                       Noise Levels at LT-2
                                                                            Figure 8.3Noise
                                                                                        |Figure
                                                                                          Noise     Levels
                                                                                            Levels 8.3
                                                                                                   at LT-2 at LT-2
                                                                                ~ 90Noise
                                                                                     feet fromLevels   atMiller
                                                                                                center of LT-2 Rd.
                                                                              January 7 - 8, 2013 (Monday - Tuesday)
                                         100                                           Noise Levels at LT-2
                                                                                ~ 90 feet from center of Miller Rd.
                                          95
                                                                              January 7 - 8, 2013 (Monday - Tuesday)
                                          90
                                         100
                                          85
                                          95
                                          80
                                          90
                                          75
          Noise LevelNoise
                      (dBA)Level (dBA)
                                                                                                                                                  Lmax
                                          85
                                          70                                                                                                      L(1)
                                          80
                                          65                                                                                                      L(10)
                                          75                                                                                                      L(50)
                                          60                                                                                                      Lmax
                                          70                                                                                                      L(90)
                                          55                                                                                                      L(1)
                                                                                                                                                  Lmin
                                          65                                                                                                      L(10)
                                          50
                                                                                                                                                  Leq (hr)
                                          60                                                                                                      L(50)
                                          45
                                                                                                                                                  L(90)
                                          55                                                                                               Ldn = 66 dBA
                                          40                                                                                                      Lmin
                                          50
                                          35                                                                                                      Leq (hr)
                                          45
                                          30
                                                                                                                                           Ldn = 66 dBA
                                          40
                                          25
                                          3515:00   17:00   19:00   21:00      23:00   1:00    3:00   5:00   7:00   9:00   11:00   13:00
                                          30
                                                                                         Hour Beginning
                                          25
                                            15:00   17:00   19:00   21:00      23:00   1:00    3:00   5:00   7:00   9:00   11:00   13:00
                                                                                         Hour Beginning
202
MV2040 General Plan                                                                                                                                           Noise
                                                                                    Figure 8.4
                                                                                                                                                                             INTRODUCTION
                                                                                Noise Levels at LT-3
                                                                                   Figure    8.4 at LT-3
                                                                                      Noise Levels
                                                                             Noise Levelscenter
                                                                             ~ 100 feet from   at LT-3
                                                                                                   of Camino Alto
                                                                          January 9 - 10, 2013 (Wednesday - Thursday)
                                  100
                                                                          Figure 8.4 | Noise
                                                                                   Noise Levels atLevels
                                                                                                   LT-3 at LT-3
                                                                                                                                                                             LAND USE
                                   95
                                                                             ~ 100 feet from center of Camino Alto
                                                                          January 9 - 10, 2013 (Wednesday - Thursday)
                                   90
                             10085
                                  9580
                                                                                                                                                                             MOBILITY
                                  9075
    Noise Level (dBA)
                                                                                                                                                               Lmax
                                  8570
                                                                                                                                                               L(1)
                                  8065                                                                                                                         L(10)
                                  7560                                                                                                                          L(50)
              Noise Level (dBA)
                                                                                                                                                              Lmax
                                                                                                                                                                           COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                L(90)
                                  7055                                                                                                                        L(1)
                                                                                                                                                                Lmin
                                  6550
                                                                                                                                                                             VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                              L(10)
                                                                                                                                                                Leq (hr)
                                                                                                                                                              L(50)
                                  6045
                                                                                                                                                              L(90)
                                  5540                                                                                                                  Ldn = 65 dBA
                                                                                                                                                              Lmin
                                  5035
                                                                                                                                                              Leq (hr)
                                                                                                                                                                              NATURAL
                                  4530
                                  4025                                                                                                                 Ldn = 65 dBA
                                       14:00    16:00    18:00    20:00       22:00    0:00        2:00    4:00    6:00     8:00    10:00    12:00
                                                                                                                                                                           ENVIRONEMENT
                                  35
                                                                                             Hour Beginning
                                  30
                                  25
                                    14:00      16:00    18:00    20:00      22:00     0:00       2:00     4:00    6:00    8:00     10:00    12:00
                                                                                        Hour Beginning
                                                                                    Figure 8.5
                                                                                Noise Levels at LT-4                                                                       CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                                                           ACTION
                                                                          Figure 8.5 | Noise
                                                                                  Figure  8.5 at
                                                                                    Noise Levels
                                                                                                 Levels
                                                                                                  LT-4
                                                                                                        at LT-4
                                                                             ~Noise
                                                                               75 feet Levels  at LT-4
                                                                                       from center of Blithedale Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                            HAZARDS &
                                                                             January 7 - 8, 2013 (Monday - Tuesday)
                                  100                                                 Noise Levels at LT-4
                                                                                                                                                                           PUBLIC SAFETY
                                   95
                                                                            ~ 75 feet from center of Blithedale Ave.
                                                                            January 7 - 8, 2013 (Monday - Tuesday)
                                   90
                             10085
                                  9580
                                                                                                                                                                             NOISE
                                  9075
    Noise Level (dBA)
                                                                                                                                                               Lmax
                                  8570
                                                                                                                                                               L(1)
                                  8065                                                                                                                         L(10)
                                                                                                                                                                            GENERAL PLAN
                                  7560                                                                                                                          L(50)
              Noise Level (dBA)
                                                                                                                                                              Lmax
                                  7055                                                                                                                          L(90)
                                                                                                                                                              L(1)
                                                                                                                                                                Lmin
                                  6550
                                                                                                                                                                           ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                                                                              L(10)
                                                                                                                                                                Leq (hr)
                                  6045                                                                                                                        L(50)
                                                                                                                                                              L(90)
                                                                                                                                                        Ldn = 71 dBA
                                  5540
                                                                                                                                                              Lmin
                                  5035
                                                                                                                                                              Leq (hr)
                                  4530
                                                                                                                                                                            Citations/
                                                                                                                                                       Ldn = 71 dBA
                                  4025
                                       16:00    18:00    20:00    22:00       0:00     2:00        4:00    6:00    8:00    10:00    12:00    14:00
                                                                                                                                                                           Appendices
                                  35
                                                                                             Hour Beginning
                                  30
                                  25
                                    16:00      18:00    20:00    22:00       0:00     2:00       4:00     6:00    8:00    10:00    12:00    14:00
                                                                                        Hour Beginning
                                                                                                                                            MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN           203
                                              Short-Term Noise Measurements
                                              Short-term noise measurements were conducted during the day
                                              on January 8, 2013. The measured data are summarized in Table
                                              8.1. Measurement ST-1 was on Valley Road, where traffic on High-
                                              way 101 was the significant contributor to measured noise levels.
                                              At ST-2, local traffic on Hamilton Drive and traffic on Highway 101
                                              were the dominant sources of noise. A loud car pass-by on Ham-
                                              ilton Drive generated a maximum instantaneous noise level of 73
                                              dBA Lmax. At ST-3, vehicular traffic on Camino Alto was the only
                                              significant contributor to measured noise levels. At ST-4, vehicular
                                              traffic along East Blithedale Avenue was the dominant source of
                                              noise. At ST-5, traffic along Miller Avenue was the only significant
                                              contributor to measured noise levels. ST-6 was located along a
                                              less dense residential stretch of East Blithedale Avenue, northwest
                                              of downtown Mill Valley, where traffic on East Blithedale Avenue
                                              was the only significant contributor to measured noise levels.
                                              Stationary Noise Sources
                                              In general, stationary noise sources (e.g., large mechanical equip-
                                              ment and loading areas) are often located in primarily commercial
                                              areas and are isolated from noise-sensitive land uses (also known
                                              as “sensitive receptors”). However, the possibility of sensitive de-
                                              velopment encroaching on some of these stationary noise sourc-
                                              es remains, which could result in some land use conflicts. Noise
                                              sources that affect sensitive receptors within the community may
                                              also include commercial land uses or those normally associated
                                              with and/or secondary to residential development. These include
                                              entertainment venues, nightclubs, outdoor dining areas, gas sta-
                                              tions, car washes, fire stations, drive-throughs, air conditioning
                                              units, residential generators, swimming pool pumps, school play-
                                              grounds, athletic and music events, and public parks.
                                              Stationary noise sources in Mill Valley mainly consist of rooftop and
                                              loading dock equipment at commercial uses located north of East
                                              Blithedale Avenue near Camino Alto and Lomita Drive. Commercial
                                              uses are also located along Redwood Highway, the frontage road
                                              to Highway 101.
                                              Temporary Noise Sources
                                              Construction is a temporary source of noise for residences and
Construction-related equipment in Mill Valley businesses located near construction sites. Construction noise
204

                                                                                                                    INTRODUCTION
can be significant for short periods of time at any particular loca-
tion as a result of public improvement projects, private develop-
                                                                                                                    LAND USE
ment projects, remodeling, and other activities.
The highest construction noise levels are normally generated dur-
ing grading and excavation, with lower noise levels occurring during
                                                                                                                    MOBILITY
building construction. Large pieces of earth-moving equipment,
such as graders, scrapers, and bulldozers, generate maximum
noise levels of 85 to 90 dBA at a distance of 50 feet. Typical hourly
                                                                                                                  COMMUNITY
average construction-generated noise levels are about 80 to 85
dBA measured at a distance of 50 feet from the site during busy
                                                                                                                    VITALITY
construction periods. Some construction techniques, such as im-
pact pile driving, can generate very high levels of noise (105 dBA
Lmax at 50 feet) that are difficult to control. Construction activities
can elevate noise levels at adjacent businesses and residences by
                                                                                                                     NATURAL
15 to 20 dBA or more.
                                                                                                                  ENVIRONEMENT
Vibration
Transportation-Related Vibration Sources
There are no fixed railroad lines that pass through Mill Valley. Trans-
portation-related ground vibration would only occur in Mill Valley
                                                                                                                  CLIMATE
from heavy truck pass-bys on Highway 101 and occasionally on
                                                                                                                  ACTION
major local roadways. The resulting vibration levels at the nearest
receivers are normally below the threshold of perception.
Temporary Vibration Sources                                                                                        HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                  PUBLIC SAFETY
Construction activities such as building demolition, site prepara-
tion work, excavation, and foundation work can generate ground-
borne vibration at land uses adjoining construction sites. Impact
pile driving has the potential of generating the highest ground vi-
                                                                                                                    NOISE
bration levels and is of primary concern to structural damage. Oth-
er project construction activities, such as caisson drilling, the use
of jackhammers, rock drills and other high-power or vibratory tools,
                                                                                                                   GENERAL PLAN
and rolling stock equipment (tracked vehicles, compactors, etc.),
can generate substantial vibration levels in the immediate vicinity.
                                                                                                                  ADMINISTRATION
Noise Exposure Maps
SoundPLAN Version V7.0, a three-dimensional ray-tracing comput-
er program, was used to calculate traffic noise levels along major
                                                                                                                   Citations/
roadways throughout Mill Valley. The noise map prepared based
on existing conditions is shown in Figure 8.6 and the noise map
                                                                                                                  Appendices
prepared based on year 2035 conditions is shown in Figure 8.7.            Truck on East Blithedale
                                                                                       MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       205
                                             Larkspur
                                                                                                                                                  Æ
                                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                            Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                Alto
                                                                                                          E.
                                                                                                               BL
                                                                                                                 ITH           ALTO
                                                                                                                    ED
                                                                                                                      AL      INO
                                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                             CAM
                                                                                           M
                                                                                            ILL
                                                                                               ER
                                                                                                AV E
                      Muir Woods Park                                                               LUE
                                                                       Homestead
                                                                                                                                                       Strawberry
      Mill Valley General Plan
      Figure 8.6: Existing Noise Contours                                                                                             Almonte
                City Boundary                Highway              75 dBA                  60 dBA
                Sphere of Inﬂuence           Roads                70 dBA                  55 dBA
                                                                  65 dBA
      [
            0         0.25       0.5 Miles              Source: Marin Map, 2012; Illingworth and Rodkin Inc., 2013
206

                                                                                                                                                                   INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                                                   LAND USE
                                       Larkspur
                                                                                                                                               Æ
                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                                   MOBILITY
                                                                                                                       Corte Madera
                                                                                                                                                                 COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                   VITALITY
                                                                                                                                                                    NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                 ENVIRONEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                 CLIMATE
                                                                                                                                             Alto                ACTION
                                                                                                     E.                    ALTO
                                                                                                          BL
                                                                                                            ITH
                                                                                                               ED         INO
                                                                                                                 AL
                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                         CAM
                                                                                                                                                                  HAZARDS &
                                                                                      M
                                                                                       ILL
                                                                                          ER
                                                                                              E
                Muir Woods Park                                                            AV
                                                                                                                                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                               LUE
                                                                Homestead
                                                                                                                                                    Strawberry
                                                                                                                                                                   NOISE
                                                                                                                                                                  GENERAL PLAN
Mill Valley General Plan
Figure 8.7: 2035 Noise Contours
                                                                                                                                                                 ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                                                  Almonte
          City Boundary                Highway              75 dBA                  60 dBA
          Sphere of Inﬂuence           Roads                70 dBA                  55 dBA
                                                            65 dBA
                                                                                                                                                                  Citations/
[
      0         0.25       0.5 Miles              Source: Marin Map, 2012; Illingworth and Rodkin Inc., 2013
                                                                                                                                                                 Appendices
                                                                                                                                  MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN           207

    Calculations took into account the source of noise, the frequency
    spectra of the noise source, and the topography of the area. The
    geometric data used to create the model were based on geographic
    information system (GIS) data provided by Wallace Roberts & Todd,
    LLC. Existing and year 2035 average daily trip (ADT) data and trav-
    el speeds were also input into the model. For Highway 101, traffic
    volumes and truck mix data input into the model were based on
    information published by the California Department of Transporta-
    tion (Caltrans). The predicted noise levels were then compared to
    measured noise levels for calibration purposes and adjustments
    were made as necessary to create an accurate model.
    Table 8.2 presents existing and year 2035 day-night average noise
    levels calculated at a reference distance of 75 feet from the center
    of the near travel lane for roadways in Mill Valley.
    Noise exposure in the community is defined in terms of the 24-hour
    day/night average noise level (Ldn). The noise levels were mea-
    sured throughout the community. Noise contours were prepared
    for the major roadways using a combination of the measured noise
    levels and traffic data.
    The noise exposure in the community is depicted in the form of
    noise exposure contours along the major roadways. The noise ex-
    posure contours are lines of equal loudness, similar to elevation
    Table 8.2 | Existing and Future Modeled Noise
    Levels Along Mill Valley Roadways
                                                          Ldn at 75 feet, dBA
                      Roadway Segment                               Cumulative
                                                        Existing
                                                                       2035
     Highway 101, north of East Blithedale Avenue          79           79
     Highway 101, south of East Blithedale Avenue          78           79
     East Blithedale Avenue, Highway 101 to Camino Alto   70            70
     East Blithedale Avenue, downtown                     60            61
     East Blithedale Avenue, east of Highway 101          69            69
     East Blithedale Avenue, west of Camino Alto          64            64
     Camino Alto, north of East Blithedale Avenue         63            64
     Camino Alto, south of East Blithedale Avenue         65            66
     Miller Avenue, downtown                               61           61
     Miller Avenue, east of Camino Alto                   68            69
     Miller Avenue, west of Camino Alto                   65            65
208
                                                                                                       INTRODUCTION
contours that are lines of equal elevation. Noise exposure con-
tours were calculated using a traffic noise model developed by the
                                                                                                       LAND USE
Federal Highway Administration and the California Department of
Transportation that is incorporated into the SoundPLAN computer
model. The traffic noise model was calibrated using the actual
measured noise levels in Mill Valley. Noise exposure is presented
                                                                                                       MOBILITY
in terms of the Ldn noise metric.
Noise/Land Use Compatibility Guidelines
                                                                                                     COMMUNITY
Figure 8.8 shows recommended noise/land use compatibility
guidelines. The three categories – normally acceptable, condition-
ally acceptable, and unacceptable – translate to a noise environ-                                      VITALITY
ment for a particular use that would be acceptable without addi-
tional mitigation measures, an intermediate category where the
                                                                                                        NATURAL
application of available mitigation measures would normally result
in an acceptable noise environment, and a noise environment that
                                                                                                     ENVIRONEMENT
could potentially be unacceptable even after the application of
available mitigation measures. When evaluating a proposed de-
velopment under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA),
these three categories would indicate a less-than-significant noise
impact, a less-than-significant noise impact after mitigation, and a
                                                                                                     CLIMATE
significant and unavoidable noise impact, respectively.
                                                                                                     ACTION
Noise Elements are required to facilitate the Noise Insulation Stan-
dards contained in the California Building Code that are applicable
to new multi-family housing. These standards state that where the                                     HAZARDS &
                                                                                                     PUBLIC SAFETY
exterior noise exposure level is 60 dBA Ldn or greater, the building
must attenuate the interior noise level to 45 dBA Ldn or less. The
noise and land use compatibility guidelines (Figure 8.8) are used
to screen for these thresholds. Based on existing conditions in Mill
Valley, an exterior noise goal of 60 dBA Ldn and an interior goal of
45 dBA Ldn are recommended for new residences.                                                         NOISE
Ways of Addressing Noise Problems
                                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN
Traffic noise is the most significant source of community noise in
                                                                                                     ADMINISTRATION
Mill Valley. The noise generated by individual vehicles is pre-empt-
ed by the state, so noise limits cannot be set for individual vehicles.
Noise generated by tire pavement interaction is the predominant
source of traffic noise, however, and local actions can address this
source of noise. During the last seven years, extensive research on
tire pavement noise has been completed, and quieter pavements                                         Citations/
                                                                                                     Appendices
have been identified. These include pavements commonly used
in California, such as open-grade asphalt concrete and rubberized
asphalt.
                                                                          MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       209

    Commercial and retail establishments generate a different kind of
    noise referred to as non-transportation noise. The noise results
    from sources such as heating, ventilating, and refrigeration equip-
    ment; loading dock activities; parking lot traffic and maintenance;
    and special events with music. The City’s noise ordinance regu-
    lates noise from these sources.
    Noise from construction activities – particularly activities associ-
    ated with construction of new residences and remodeling or demo-
    lition and reconstruction on residential properties – disturbs the
    peace and quiet of Mill Valley. The term “construction” covers a
    large range of projects, from new construction or the demolition
    and construction of a large residence to someone repairing a deck
    on a Saturday afternoon. The primary method for addressing con-
    struction noise is through standards that limit work to specified
    times and provide guidance on equipment use and maintenance.
    The following is a representative list of standard controls:
    •	 Limit construction to the hours of 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM on week-
         days, and 9:00 AM to 5:00 PM on Saturdays, with no noise-
         generating construction on Sundays or holidays.
    •	 Control noise from construction workers’ radios to the point
         where they are not audible at existing residences that border
         the project site.
    •	 Equip all internal combustion engine-driven equipment with
         mufflers that are in good condition and appropriate for the
         equipment.
    •	 Use quiet models of air compressors and other stationary noise
         sources where technology exists.
    •	 Locate stationary noise-generating equipment as far as pos-
         sible from sensitive receptors when sensitive receptors adjoin
         or are near a construction project area.
    •	 Prohibit unnecessary idling of internal combustion engines.
    •	 Notify residents adjacent to the project site of the construction
         schedule in writing.
    •	 Designate a noise disturbance coordinator who would be re-
         sponsible for responding to any local complaints about con-
         struction noise. The disturbance coordinator would determine
         the cause of the noise complaints (e.g., starting too early, bad
         muffler, etc.) and institute reasonable measures warranted to
         correct the problem. Conspicuously post a telephone number
         for the disturbance coordinator at the construction site.
210

INTRODUCTION   LAND USE   MOBILITY   COMMUNITY       NATURAL     CLIMATE    HAZARDS &      NOISE
                                                                                                    GENERAL PLAN     Citations/                               211
                                       VITALITY   ENVIRONEMENT   ACTION    PUBLIC SAFETY           ADMINISTRATION   Appendices
                                                                                                                                                              MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                            Delivery truck on Miller Avenue
    Noise Goals, Policies & Programs
    NOISE-1 | Noise
    Maintain a quiet community.
    N.1 Interior and Exterior Noise
    Ensure that interior noise levels do not exceed 45 Ldn in all new residential units (single- and
    multi-family). Analyze residential development sites exposed to noise levels exceeding 60 Ldn
    following protocols in the most recent adopted version of the California Building Code.
         N.1-1 Maintain a pattern of land uses that separates noise-sensitive land uses from major
         traffic noise sources, to the extent feasible.
         N.1-2 Use the noise contours in Figure 8.7 and noise/land use compatibility standards in
         Figure 8.8 to ensure that new development and major redevelopment meet required inte-
         rior and exterior noise standards.
         N.1-3 Do not allow noise-sensitive land uses in noise-impacted areas unless effective miti-
         gation measures are incorporated into the project design to reduce noise levels in outdoor
         activity areas to 60 dBA Ldn or less.
    N.2 Roadway Noise
    Reduce noise from traffic.
         N.2-1 Use “quieter” pavement technologies that also meet other criteria established by the
         City for pavements when resurfacing roadways.
         N.2-2 Control the sound of vehicle amplification systems (e.g., loud stereos) by encourag-
         ing the enforcement of Section 27007 of the California Motor Vehicle Code. This section
         prohibits amplified sound that can be heard 50 or more feet from a vehicle.
         N.2-3 Control excessive exhaust noise by encouraging the enforcement of Section 27150
         of the California Motor Vehicle Code.
    N.3 Acoustical Environment
    Maintain the current quality of the acoustical environment.
         N.3-1 Require an acoustical analysis to mitigate noise-generating projects that would
         cause the following criteria to be exceeded or would cause a significant adverse commu-
         nity response in locations where there is greater sensitivity to excess noise:
212

                                                                                                                              INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                              LAND USE
   •	 Cause the Ldn at noise-sensitive uses to increase by 3 dBA or more and exceed the
      “normally acceptable” level.
   •	 Cause the Ldn at noise-sensitive uses to increase 5 dBA or more and remain “normally
                                                                                                                              MOBILITY
      acceptable.”
   Locations subject to this program would include but are not limited to hospitals, nursing
   homes, theaters, auditoriums, churches, meeting halls, schools, libraries, museums, and
                                                                                                                            COMMUNITY
   parks.
Figure 8.8 | Land Use Compatibility for Roadway and Transportation Noise                                                      VITALITY
                                                          Exterior Noise Exposure (Ldn)
      Land Use Category
                                        55         60            65       70          75         80
Single-Family Residential                                                                                                      NATURAL
Multi-Family Residential, Hotels,                                                                                           ENVIRONEMENT
                                                           (a)
and Motels
Outdoor Sports and Recreation,
Neighborhood Parks and Play-                                                                                                CLIMATE
grounds                                                                                                                     ACTION
Schools, Libraries, Museums,
Hospitals, Personal Care, Meet-
ing Halls, Churches
Office Buildings, Business Com-                                                                                              HAZARDS &
                                                                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY
mercial, and Professional
Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
Amphitheaters (b)
                                                                                                                              NOISE
(a) See Policy N-4
(b) Assumes indoor and outdoor events, therefore exterior noise exposure is low.
         Normally Acceptable
                                                                                                                             GENERAL PLAN
         Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal
         conventional construction, without any special insulation requirements.
                                                                                                                            ADMINISTRATION
         Conditionally Acceptable
         Specified land use may be permitted only after detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements
         and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
         Unacceptable
                                                                                                                             Citations/
         New construction or development should generally not be undertaken because mitigation to comply
         with Noise Element policies is usually not feasible.
                                                                                                                            Appendices
                                                                                                 MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       213

       N.3-2 Ensure that all acoustical analyses required by the City:
       •	 Are prepared by a qualified person or firm experienced in the fields of environmental
           noise assessment and architectural acoustics as selected or pre-approved by the City.
       •	 Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods and
           locations to adequately describe local conditions.
       •	 Estimate existing and projected (20-year) noise levels in terms of Ldn and/or the stan-
           dards of the noise ordinance, and compare those levels to the policies of this Noise
           Element.
       •	 Recommend appropriate mitigation to achieve compliance with the adopted policies
           and standards of this Noise Element. Where the noise source in question consists of
           intermittent single events, the report shall address the effects of maximum noise lev-
           els in sleeping rooms in terms of possible sleep disturbance.
       •	 Describe a post-project assessment program that could be used to evaluate the effec-
           tiveness of the proposed mitigation measures.
       The full cost of any such studies shall be the responsibility of the project applicant.
    N.3 Construction Noise
    Manage noise from construction.
       N.4-1 Implement appropriate standard noise controls for all construction projects.
       N.4-2 Require detailed construction noise management plans.
       N.4-3 Develop a guidance manual to provide information to the public regarding construc-
       tion noise control.
214

                                                                                                                       INTRODUCTION
Figure 8.9 | Typical Noise Levels in the Environment
                                                                                                                       LAND USE
          Common Outdoor Activities                  Noise Level (dBA)            Common Indoor Activities
                                                     110 dBA             Rock Band
                                                                                                                       MOBILITY
                        Jet fly-over at 1,000 feet
                                                     100 dBA
                      Gas lawn mower at 3 feet
                                                      90 dBA
               Diesel truck at 50 feet at 50 mph                         Food blender at 3 feet                      COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                       VITALITY
                                                                         Garbage disposal at 3 feet
                                                       80 dBA
                      Noisy urban area, daytime
                      Gas lawn mower, 100 feet                           Vacuum Cleaner at 10 feet
                                                       70 dBA
                                                                                                                        NATURAL
                               Commercial area
                                                                         Normal speech at 3 feet
                        Heavy traffic at 300 feet
                                                       60 dBA
                                                                         Large business office                       ENVIRONEMENT
                            Quiet urban daytime                          Dishwasher in next room
                                                        50 dBA
                         Quiet urban nighttime                           Theater, large conference room              CLIMATE
                                                        40 dBA
                      Quiet suburban nighttime                                                                       ACTION
                                                                         Library
                                                         30 dBA          Bedroom at night, concert hall
                                                                                                                      HAZARDS &
                           Quiet rural nighttime
                                                         20 dBA
                                                                         Broadcast/recording studio                  PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                         10 dBA
                                                          0 dBA                                                        NOISE
Source: Technical Noise Supplement (TeNS), Caltrans, November 2009
                                                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                     ADMINISTRATION
                                                                                                                      Citations/
                                                                                                                     Appendices
                                                                                          MILL VALLEY GENERAL PLAN       215
CITY OF MILL VALLEY
Housing Element Update
2015-2023
Volume I - Chapters
Volume II - Appendices
Adopted May 4, 2015
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Mill Valley Residents, Members of the Public and City Representatives, including:
City Council
Kenneth R. Wachtel, Mayor
Garry Lion, Vice Mayor
Jessica Jackson, Councilmember
John McCauley, Councilmember
Stephanie Moulton-Peters, Councilmember
Planning Commission
Steven Geiszler, Chair
Anne Bolen, Commissioner
Ricardo Capretta, Commissioner
Larry Davis, Commissioner
Fred Eisenhart, Commissioner
Zoning and Design Guidelines Advisory Committee
Michael Dyett, FAICP, Chair, Resident-at-large
Ken Wachtel, Vice-Chair, City Council Liaison
Ricardo Capretta, Planning Commission Liaison
Bruce Dorfman, Chamber of Commerce Liaison
Burton Miller, FAIA, Architect/Neighborhood Liaison
Jim Parrinello, Resident-at-large
Stephanie Witt, Realtor, Property Development Liaison
City Staff
Jim McCann, City Manager
Vin Smith, Director of Planning and Building
Danielle Staude, Senior Planner
Consultant: Metropolitan Planning Group, Inc.
Geoff I. Bradley, AICP
David Javid, AICP, LEED AP
Justin Shiu
Consultant: Karen Warner Associates, Inc
Karen Warner, AICP
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1. Introduction
           A. Mill Valley Community Context                         I-1
           B. The Role and Purpose of the Housing Element           I-4
           C. Relationship to the General Plan                      I-5
           D. Housing Element Law and Changes to State Requirements I-6
           E. Community Participation Summary                       I-7
Chapter 2. Housing Plan
           Housing and Neighborhood Quality                         II-2
           Housing Supply and Diversity                             II-7
           Housing Affordability                                    II-14
           Address Governmental Constraints                         II-19
           Equal Housing Opportunities and Special Needs            II-23
           Sustainability and Energy Efficiency                     II-27
           Community and Governmental Collaboration                 II-31
           Summary of Quantified Objectives                         II-41
Chapter 3. Housing Needs Summary
           A. Existing Housing Needs                                III-1
           B. Future Housing Needs                                  III-7
Chapter 4. Housing Resources
           A. Sites to Accommodate the 2014-2022 RHNA               IV-1
           B. Availability of infrastructure and Public Services    IV-7
           C. Financial Resources                                   IV-8
           D. Administrative Resources                              IV-10
           E. Opportunities for Energy Conservation                 IV-10
Appendix A. Housing Needs Assessment
            A. Executive Summary                                        A-3
            B. Introduction                                             A-7
            C. Demographic Profile                                      A-8
            D. Household Profile                                        A-14
            E. Special Needs Populations                                A-18
            F. Housing Stock Characteristics                            A-28
            G. Regional Housing Needs Allocation                        A-41
Appendix B. Housing Constraints
            A. Constraints and Opportunities                            B-1
            B. Governmental Constraints                                 B-1
            C. Non-Governmental Constraints                             B-34
Appendix C. Housing Capacity Analysis
            A. Capacity Analysis                                        C-2
Appendix D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element
Appendix E. Summary Report: Second Unit Survey Results
Appendix F. Glossary
            A. Abbreviations                                            F-1
            B. Definitions                                              F-2
QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE TO HOUSING GOALS, POLICIES & PROGRAMS:
Housing & Neighborhood Quality             II-2
Goal & Policies                            II-2  Address Government Constraints             II-19
Programs:                                        Goals & Policies                           II-19
1. Residential Design Guidelines           II-2  Programs:
2. Historic Preservation Guidelines        II-3  22. Update Zoning Code Consistent          II-19
    & Incentives                                     with Land Use Element
3. Housing Maintenance &                   II-4  23. Update Parking Standards               II-20
    Public Information                           24. Fee Deferrals/Waivers for              II-21
4. Regulations to Preserve Existing        II-5      Affordable Housing
    Rental Housing                               25. Density Bonus & Other Incentives for   II-21
5. Preservation of Existing Deed-          II-6      Affordable Housing
    Restricted Affordable Rental Housing         26. CEQA Exemptions for Infill Projects    II-22
Housing Supply & Diversity                 II-7  Equal Housing & Special Needs              II-23
Goal & Policies                            II-7  Goals & Policies                           II-23
Programs:                                        Programs:
6. Mixed Use Zoning in Commercial          II-7  27. Fair Housing                           II-23
    Districts                                    28. Senior Support Services                II-24
7. Micro-Apartment Units                   II-8  29. Home Sharing & Tenant                  II-24
8. Second Units                            II-9  Matching Opportunities
9. Junior Second Units                     II-10 30. Universal Design/Visitability          II-25
10. Affordable Housing Overlay             II-10 31. Homeless Assistance                    II-25
11. Lot Consolidation Incentives           II-11
12. Publicly-Owned Land for                II-12 Sustainability & Energy Efficiency         II-27
    Affordable Housing                           Goals & Policies                           II-27
13. Non-Traditional Housing Types          II-12 Programs:
14. Maintain and Monitor Capacity in Sites II-13 32. Prioritization of Sustainable          II-28
     Inventory                                       Housing Projects
                                                 33. Green Building                         II-28
Housing Affordability                      II-14 34. Energy Conservation                    II-29
Goal & Policies                            II-14 35. Addressing Natural Hazards             II-30
Programs:
15. Inclusionary Housing Regulations       II-15 Community & Government Collaboration       II-31
16. Single-Family Housing Impact Fee       II-16 Goals & Policies                           II-31
17. Local Affordable Housing Fund          II-16 Programs:
18. Affordable Housing                     II-17 36. Community Education and Outreach       II-31
    Development Assistance                       37. Housing Element Monitoring/            II-32
19. Partnerships for Affordable Housing    II-17     Annual Report
20. Homebuyer Assistance                   II-17 38. Mill Valley Housing Advisory Committee II-32
21. Section 8 Rental Assistance            II-18
                                                                                         May 4, 2015
I.        Introduction
A.        Mill Valley Community Context
Mill Valley is located on the western and northern shores of Richardson Bay. Beyond the flat
coastal area and marshlands, it occupies narrow wooded canyons, mostly of second-growth
redwoods, on the southern slopes of Mount Tamalpais. The combination of Mill Valley's idyllic
location nestled beneath Mount Tamalpais, together with ease of access to nearby San
Francisco, and its strong sense of place and small-town character, has made it a popular place to
call home. Over the last 20 years, following a trend that is endemic throughout the Bay Area,
home prices have climbed in Mill Valley, which has diminished affordable housing choices for
older adults in the community who would prefer to “down-size” and live closer to shopping, arts
and cultural events and transportation options; for the grown children of long-time residents
who wish to stay in the town where they grew up; and for those who would prefer the option to
live closer to their Mill Valley job.
Mill Valley has experienced some demographic shifts in its population over the past decade.
There has been a significant increase of over 200 new families in Mill Valley, of which 80 percent
are families with children, and a corresponding increase in the school age population. Young
adults (25-44 years) have decreased from 28 to just 20 percent of Mill Valley’s population during
the same period, and the community of senior citizens (age 65+) is growing, currently
comprising 19 percent of Mill Valley residents, compared to just 15 percent a decade ago
Approximately 20 percent of Mill Valley households earn low incomes (<80% area median
income or AMI), with an additional 12 percent earning moderate incomes (80-120% AMI).
Among the community’s 2,100 renter households, one-third are lower income and 15 percent
moderate income.
This Housing Element identifies solutions that address these trends and demographics
consistent with the overall goals, applicable community values, housing development potential
and housing policies in this Housing Element of the Mill Valley 2040 General Plan.
The 1989 Mill Valley General Plan established a decision-making framework of two overall goals
and seven community values that many have suggested are still applicable to and should be
included in the MV2040 General Plan, including the 2015-2023 Housing Element. The two
overall goals are:
       1. To protect and enhance the natural beauty and small-town character of Mill Valley; and
       2. To encourage continued diversity of housing, income levels and lifestyles in the
           community.
The seven community values from the 1989 General Plan have been slightly modified and
updated through the MV 2040 General Plan process, and additional values related to the arts,
municipal fiscal policies and practices, sustainability and climate action, community participation
and public education have been added based on community input and discussion:
I. Introduction                                                                             Page I-1

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
          Preserving the quality, diversity and historic resources of the community’s residential
           neighborhoods;
          Maintaining a strong, healthy economy that supports locally-owned and local-serving
           businesses;
          Prudent municipal fiscal policies and practices and operational excellence by city
           officials and employees;
          Managing and restoring the scenic quality and physical character of the bayfront,
           ridgelines and hillsides for open space, resource protection and outdoor recreation;
          Preserving and enhancing creeks, marshes, woodlands and other natural resources for
           the use and enjoyment of current and future generations;
          Fostering sustainable policies and practices that enhance climate protection and adapt
           to climate change;
          Minimizing traffic congestion and encouraging safe and convenient mobility
           alternatives;
          Planning, preparing, adapting and responding to natural and human-made disasters;
          Accommodating more housing choice for all income levels and community needs than
           may be possible under conditions in the private housing market
          Promoting the arts, the artistic community and its on-going and lasting contribution to
           the culture, heritage, character, economy and quality of life of the community;
          Cultivating community participation, volunteerism, mutual respect, civil discourse and
           civic responsibility;
          Furthering excellence in public education and an open, effective and mutually
           supportive relationship among the community, public schools and City.
Carrying over the two overall goals and the updated and expanded community values from the
1989 General Plan to the MV2040 General Plan and the 2015-2023 Housing Element not only
provides continuity for a critical decision-making framework that has sustained Mill Valley over
the years, but also speaks to the overall purpose of the MV 2040 General Plan and this Housing
Element to continue to preserve the great qualities that make Mill Valley a special place to live,
learn, work and play; to protect its unique, small-town character; and reinforce the primacy of
local decision-making within the context of state and regional planning mandates.
The 1989 Mill Valley General Plan and MV2040 are quite similar in their respective approach to
addressing the major issues then and now. For example, the 1989 General Plan states that “[I]n
Mill Valley, significant growth is not anticipated and there are no proposals to convert
agricultural lands to urban development; there are no proposals for major new streets or sewer
systems; and there are no plans to build new schools.” Much the same is true for the MV2040
General Plan and this 2015-2023 Housing Element. Particularly in the areas of “infill housing”
and “affordable housing”, two issues of significance in 1989, as well as today (and probably into
the future, as well), the Housing Element has taken an approach to identify potential housing
sites and recommended policies and programs that are based on specific, local criteria that
reflect the need to meet state mandates, yet protect existing neighborhoods, preserve the
character of the community, and work within the City’s existing zoning and residential
development standards.
I. Introduction                                                                               Page I-2

                                                                                         May 4, 2015
Much of Mill Valley’s character can be found in the architectural diversity and historic character
of its existing and predominantly single-family residential neighborhoods. The 1989 General Plan
went to considerable lengths to successfully reduce the previously anticipated residential
development potential of the city in order to encourage smaller scale and more individual
development patterns. The 1989 General Plan did this by “down-zoning” a number of large,
undeveloped tracts of land on the fringes of existing residential areas. Much of this land became
designated open space, and with a few exceptions, the rest was developed into large-lot custom
single-family homes and neighborhoods. The MV2040 General Plan and the 2015-2023 Housing
Element have identified opportunities to meet anticipated housing needs through a similar
approach focused on the existing small-scale, individual lot development patterns set forth in
the 1989 General Plan and reflective of historic development and lot patterns.
As the Housing Element is required to address all housing (not just affordable), there are a few
sites identified in this document that are appropriately zoned and would accommodate a new
single-family home (See Appendix C for further details). It’s important to note, and this Housing
Element reinforces that the identification of sites appropriately zoned for potential housing
development to meet the City’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) is a requirement of
state law, but how that housing is ultimately developed – if it is developed during the term of
this Housing Element – is entirely based on property owners interest in redeveloping their
property according to local housing policies expressed herein, and local zoning and development
standards. The development and redevelopment of existing single-family homes on single lots is
an on-going feature of Mill Valley’s evolving housing market. The consideration of their overall
design and site planning, and the community’s participation in that decision, is what regularly
fills bi-monthly Planning Commission agendas. However, the community has also identified
other housing needs beyond single-family residences on a single lot: the needs reflected in the
overall goal of “a diversity of housing, income levels and lifestyles” and the community value of
“accommodating more housing choice”.
To accomplish this overarching vision, this Housing Element primarily focuses on the much
smaller and more discrete areas of the city that are already zoned for multi-family housing and
commercially zoned areas that allow mixed commercial and residential uses, or multi-family
residential uses on their own. These areas represent about 9 percent of the city’s total number
of lots (the large remainder are all single-family), and most are comparatively small in area. As a
result, it’s quite possible to develop projects of multiple residential units that meet identified
local needs; are consistent with Mill Valley’s character; and meet the City’s proposed standards
for dwelling units per acre, also known as “density”. In addition, the design of those projects,
through the proposed establishment of multi-family specific design guidelines and development
standards for height, bulk and mass will be applied as existing standards are applied to the city’s
single-family developments. Some examples of existing developments of this type -
developments that are already an accepted part of the fabric of the community - are included in
Appendix C. The principal purpose of these examples is to show that “higher density” in a local
Mill Valley context is neither out of character with existing neighborhoods, nor contrary to
community goals and values.
I. Introduction                                                                             Page I-3

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
B.         The Role and Purpose of the Housing Element
The purpose of the Housing Element is to achieve an adequate supply of safe, affordable
housing for all economic segments of the community, including individuals with special housing
needs. The Bay Area and Marin County in particular have become one of the most desired, and
therefore expensive, housing markets in the country. Mill Valley’s housing conditions are
reflective of many area-wide and nation-wide trends, where housing costs, including interest
rates, construction costs and high land costs, have increased the real cost of housing
disproportionately in comparison to incomes. This has resulted in difficulties in the job market,
longer commutes, and the moving out of young families, longtime residents, and other
community members who can no longer afford the high cost of housing.
Every jurisdiction in California must have a General Plan that contains a Housing Element. While
jurisdictions must review and revise all elements of their General Plan regularly to ensure that
they remain up to date, State law has specific requirements for updating the Housing Element
every eight years. The Housing Element is also subject to review by the State Department of
Housing and Community Development.
This Housing Element identifies policies and programs that focus on:
        1.      Housing and Neighborhood Quality;
        2.      Housing Supply and Diversity;
        3.      Housing Affordability;
        4.      Removing Governmental Constraints;
        5.      Equal Housing Opportunities and Special Needs;
        6.      Sustainability and Energy Efficiency; and
        7.      Community and Governmental Collaboration.
The Housing Element consists of the following major components, which are established in State
law:
               A summary of the City’s existing and projected housing needs;
               An assessment of the land, financial and administrative resources available to
                address Mill Valley’s housing needs;
               A Housing Plan to address the City’s identified housing needs, including housing
                goals, policies, and programs; and
               Technical documents consisting of a detailed housing needs assessment, an analysis
                of constraints to housing production and affordability, and an evaluation of the
                City’s progress in implementing the housing programs established in the 2009-2014
                Housing Element.
Data Sources
Various sources of information are used to prepare the Housing Element. They include:
               Population and demographic data from the 1990, 2000, and 2010 Census; 2006-
                2010 American Community Survey, the State Department of Finance, County of
                Marin Point in Time Homeless Count 2013, Golden Gate Regional Center, and
                student enrollment information from the Mill Valley School District;
I. Introduction                                                                               Page I-4

                                                                                          May 4, 2015
              Employment and income data from the California Department of Housing and
               Community Development; 2013 California Occupational Employment Statistics;
              Housing market information, such as home sale prices, rent prices, and vacancies,
               was collected through a survey of internet rental websites including Craigslist.org,
               Trulia.com, and Bay4Rent.com, and DataQuick;
              Utility cost information from Marin Housing Authority
              Housing inventory information and approved and built unit numbers from Assessor
               data, the Mill Valley Planning and Building Departments;
              Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) Projections 2013 and ABAG’s
               Regional Housing Needs Determination provide demographic projections and
               information on future housing needs;
              Comparative data for income levels of various groups is provided by the
               Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy prepared by the U.S. Department of
               Housing and Urban Development; and
              Information on Mill Valley’s development standards was from the City’s Zoning
               Ordinance.
Housing affordability is a major issue in the Bay Area, with a significant number of households in
the region overpaying for housing. As shown by the U.S. Census and other data in Appendix A,
Housing Needs Assessment, the shortage of affordable housing particularly affects lower-
income renters and first-time homebuyers, and limits the choice and opportunity of many with
local jobs, such as public safety workers and teachers. As part of this Housing Element update,
the City will look for additional means to expand the supply of affordable housing, including
facilitating residential development in mixed-use areas and around transit stops.
C.        Relationship to the General Plan
This Housing Element is consistent with Mill Valley’s 2040 General Plan. The General Plan is a
long-range planning document that serves as the ”constitution” for development in a
jurisdiction, by describing goals, policies and programs to guide all development-related
decisions. If a development proposal is not consistent with the General Plan, the proposal or the
General Plan itself must be amended. State law requires a community’s General Plan to be
internally consistent. Therefore, although the Housing Element is subject to special
requirements and a defined timetable of updates, it must function as an integral and consistent
part of the overall General Plan and its other Elements.
Various housing needs can only be addressed on a comprehensive basis in concert with other
community concerns such as infill development or mixed use incentives, for example, which
must consider land use, traffic, parking, design as well as other considerations. In the past,
major amendments to Mill Valley’s Housing Element were made simultaneously with updates to
other General Plan Elements.
I. Introduction                                                                              Page I-5

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
D.         Housing Element Law and Changes to State Requirements
State Housing Element law enacted in 1969 requires local governments to adequately plan to
meet the existing and projected housing needs of all economic segments of the community. This
law acknowledges that, in order for the private market to adequately address housing needs
and demand, local governments must adopt land use plans and regulations which provide
opportunities for, and do not unduly constrain, housing development.
Housing Element law also requires that the California Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) review local housing elements for compliance with State law and to report
its written findings to the local government. If HCD finds that the housing element substantially
complies with State Housing Element law, HCD “certifies” the housing element. If a housing
element has been certified by HCD, State Housing Element law states that there shall be a
“rebuttable presumption of validity of the element” in any court challenge to the validity of the
housing element.
Major recent updates to Housing Element law include the following:
       Senate Bill (SB) 375 passed in 2008 requires the annual submission of reports to HCD
           monitoring the Housing Element, changes the Housing Element cycle from five years to
           eight years, and outlines consequences for the failure to adopt a Housing Element. The
           2015-2023 Housing Element will be under the eight year cycle provide by SB 375.
       Senate Bill (SB) 2 passed in 2007 requires local governments to support homeless
           persons in obtaining shelter and services, specifically, through the identification of a
           Zoning District (or Districts) where emergency shelters are allowed as a permitted use,
           without a conditional use or other discretionary permit. The bill also requires local
           governments to add transitional and supportive housing and emergency shelters to its
           provisions for very low, low, or moderate income households.
       Assembly Bill (AB) 2348 passed in 2004 clarifies the requirements for an inventory of
           land suitable for residential development, to reflect the provision of adequate sites
           within the community for housing. The requirements include an analysis of each site,
           description of how site capacity was established,
       Assembly Bill (AB) 1866 passed in 2002 facilitates the creation of second units, or
           Accessory Dwelling Units, through ministerial approval procedures, and allows the
           identification of realistic capacity for second units, based on development trends of
           second units in the jurisdiction.
       The California Housing Accountability Act (Government Code section 65589.5), passed in
           2010, limits the ability of cities and counties to reject proposed housing development
           projects that are consistent with local plans and zoning regulations. In order to
           disapprove a proposed residential development that complies with all applicable
           objective planning and zoning criteria, the local agency must make written findings,
           supported by substantial evidence, that: (1) the project would have a specific adverse
I. Introduction                                                                                 Page I-6

                                                                                           May 4, 2015
          impact on public health or safety, and (2) no feasible means exists to satisfactorily
          mitigate or avoid the impact.
       Under federal mandate, reasonable accommodations procedures need to be
          established to remove hurdles in the provision of housing that can accommodate the
          needs of persons with disabilities.
E.        Community Participation Summary
The Mill Valley 2040 General Plan and the 2009-2014 Housing Element was adopted in October
2013, and included extensive community outreach to stimulate community wide interest and
conversation. A nine-member General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC), representing a cross-
section of local backgrounds and experience and chaired by a member of the City Council
oversaw the General Plan update. The GPAC conducted four public meetings in 2012-2013 that
focused specifically on the Housing Element planning effort, and conducted a housing tour on
October 6, 2012 to view existing and potential housing options in portions of Mill Valley. Prior
to the review by the General Plan Advisory Committee, the 11-member Land Use and Mobility
Working Group held four public meetings focused on the Housing Element and Housing Element
issues, goals, policies and programs before making its recommendations to the GPAC. In
addition, the City conducted a robust on-line engagement effort, including e-mail blasts, on-line
comment tools and a dedicated Mill Valley 2040 General Plan website. The City also utilized
Mind Mixer, an innovative community engagement tool that generated ideas for the General
Plan and Housing Element.
Because the prior Housing Element was prepared near the end of the 2009-2014 Housing
Element planning period, the Element included both short-term housing program actions, as
well as longer-term actions that carried over into the future 2014-2022 Housing Element
planning period. Thus, the recent and extensive community engagement process conducted for
the prior Housing Element provided the policy foundation for the focused updated for the 2015-
2023 Housing Element period.
More recently in 2014, the City has focused its outreach and community participation on specific
efforts to implement Housing Element Programs. Community involvement has included the
following:
         Zoning and Design Guideline Advisory Committee (ZDAC).                      The City has
          appointed seven community members to serve on the ZDAC to assist staff and the
          community at-large in identifying development standards and design guidelines for
          Multi-Family and Mixed Use projects. ZDAC has conducted five public meeting, with
          the first meeting held in May 20, 2014. ZDAC recommendations on the multi-family
          design guidelines will be presented to Planning Commission in early 2015.
         Planning Commission/City Council Meetings. The City has held over five public hearing
          related to the Special Needs Housing/Density Bonus Ordinances. While the purpose of
          the agenda item was specific to updating the City’s Zoning Code, the staff report and
          presentation included background information on the Housing Element process and
          anticipated schedule for the 2014-2023 Housing Element Update.
I. Introduction                                                                                Page I-7

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
          Joint City Council/Planning Commission Meeting. On September 8, 2014, the City
           Council hosted a joint Study Session meeting to foster the on-going and important
           partnership between the Planning Commission and City Council as part of policy review
           and development. At this meeting, an overview was provided about the upcoming
           Housing Element, with one of the agenda items to review Mill Valley's inclusionary
           housing regulations, future impact fees and Housing Trust Fund as part of the City’s
           Housing Element Goal #3 to provide opportunities for a range of housing types suited to
           residents of varying lifestyle needs and income levels.
          Public Meeting on Draft Housing Element. Upon completion of the draft 2015-2023
           Housing Element, the City conducted a public meeting on October 28, 2014 before the
           Planning Commission to discuss, review and solicit community input on the Draft.
           Meeting notification was e-mailed to nearly 8,000 interested persons and organizations,
           including organizations representing special needs and lower income populations, and
           affordable housing advocacy groups active in Marin. The following are among the
           groups receiving ongoing e-mail notification on the Housing Element that represent
           lower income and special needs populations in Mill Valley: Mill Valley Affordable
           Housing Committee, Public Advocates of Marin, The Redwoods senior community,
           Lilypad Homes (junior second units), League of Women Voters, and Fair Housing of
           Marin.
  Common themes that arose at public meetings on the Housing Element and implementing
  ordinances include the following:
       The importance of preserving the existing lower cost rental stock
       The need to continue to increase the supply of affordable housing
       The need to provide housing at all income levels so that long-time residents can remain
           in Mill Valley and young families can establish themselves
       The importance of balancing growth and density with traffic and other environmental
           impacts
  Mill Valley's Housing Element update continues to promote a variety housing policies and
  programs to address these identified needs and desires of the community.
I. Introduction                                                                            Page I-8

                                                                                        May 4, 2015
II.       Housing Plan
The Housing Plan establishes Mill Valley’s goals, policies and programs relative to the
maintenance, preservation, improvement, and development of housing for all economic
segments of the community. The Plan is prepared in the context of: 1) Mill Valley’s
determination to maintain its small town character; 2) Mill Valley’s housing needs; 3) land
availability and environmental constraints; 4) funding limitations; and 5) experience gained from
implementation of the City’s 2009-2014 Housing Element.
Mill Valley’s Housing Plan is structured around the following overall housing goals:
Housing and Neighborhood Quality
GOAL 1.0: Maintain and enhance the quality and affordability of existing housing and ensure
new development is compatible with Mill Valley’s small town character and many
environmental, community, neighborhood and scenic attributes.
Housing Supply and Diversity
GOAL 2.0: Provide opportunities for a range of housing types suited to residents of varying
lifestyle needs and income levels.
Housing Affordability
GOAL 3.0: Enhance housing affordability so that modest income households can join and
remain an integral part of the Mill Valley community.
Address Governmental Constraints
GOAL 4.0: Address governmental requirements and processes related to the maintenance,
improvement and development of housing while maintaining community character.
Equal Housing Opportunities and Special Needs
GOAL 5.0: Promote equal housing opportunities for all residents, including Mill Valley’s special
needs populations.
Sustainability and Energy Efficiency
GOAL 6.0: Promote a healthy and sustainable Mill Valley through support of existing and new
housing which minimizes reliance on natural resources.
Community and Governmental Collaboration
GOAL 7.0: Coordinate with citizens, community groups, and governmental agencies to help
address Mill Valley’s housing needs.
These seven housing goals and associated housing policies are implemented through a series of
housing programs, encompassing both existing and new or modified programs. A specific
objective, or action, is identified for each program, as well as a time frame for implementation.
Table 2.1 located at the end of this section summarizes Mill Valley’s 2015-2023 Housing Element
programs and objectives.
II. Housing Plan                                                                           Page II-1

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Goals, Policies and Programs
HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOOD QUALITY
GOAL 1.0: Maintain and enhance the quality and affordability of existing housing and ensure new
development is compatible with Mill Valley’s small town character and many environmental,
community neighborhood and scenic attributes.
POLICIES
Policy 1.1 Housing Design Principles
Assure that new housing is well-designed and based on sustainable development principles to
enhance our neighborhoods and community as a whole.
Policy 1.2 Historic Preservation
Identify and preserve historically significant structures consistent with adopted historic
preservation guidelines and regulations, and ensure that infill development is compatible with
the community’s small town character and the context of Mill Valley’s historic resources.
Policy 1.3 Property and Housing Conditions
Support the long-term maintenance and improvement of existing housing through code
enforcement and housing rehabilitation programs.
Policy 1.4 Preserve Rental Housing
Conserve the existing stock of rental housing through creative incentives allowing property
owners to maintain and rehabilitate existing rental units as opposed to tearing down buildings
or converting units to for-sale units or non-residential uses.
Policy 1.5 Protection of Existing Affordable Housing
Ensure the continued affordability of income-restricted housing for low and moderate income
households.
PROGRAMS
1.         Residential Design Guidelines
Background: The City requires a discretionary “Study Session” and subsequent Design Review
Permit for development of all new single and multi-family housing. The stated purpose of the
Design Review Permit is “to encourage development that is compatible with, integrated into,
and subordinate to its natural setting. The City strives to preserve, protect, and promote its
unique environmental, community and scenic attributes through the residential design review
process.” To this end, the City has developed design review guidelines for development in
Single-Family Residential (RS) zoning districts, including principles for slope design, flora and
fauna design, soils and grading design, drainage design, and building design. The guidelines
II. Housing Plan                                                                          Page II-2

                                                                                         May 4, 2015
were updated to address hillside development in 2001, and now apply to all residential
development.
As a means of providing better up-front direction to the development community regarding the
desired character of multi-family residential development in Mill Valley, the City established a
Zoning and Design Guidelines Advisory Committee (ZDAC) to provide guidance to staff in the
creation of design review guidelines for multi-family development. The Guidelines will provide
direction on multi-family and mixed use development, in the same way that the existing
residential design guidelines are serving to direct single-family residential development. In
addition to building and site design elements, the Multi-Family Design Guidelines will also
integrate recommendations for sustainable site planning and green building design to minimize
reliance on natural resources and encourage alternative modes of transportation.
Program Objectives: Continue to implement a design review process to ensure that new single
and multi-family development and substantial modifications to existing structures are
compatible with Mill Valley’s small town character, unique environmental, community and scenic
attributes. By 2015, develop and adopt Multi-Family Design Guidelines, which address
development compatibility and promote sustainable site design and building practices.
2.        Historic Preservation Guidelines and Incentives
Background: Mill Valley has several mechanisms in place to preserve and maintain its historic
resources. The Historic Overlay (H-O) designation is currently applied to 27 designated buildings
of historic importance in Mill Valley. The H-O Ordinance utilizes the Secretary of Interior’s
Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings in design review
of any addition to, or alteration of, designated structures, and provides for a delay in any
proposed demolition of historic structures while alternative means of preservation are
examined by the City. Furthermore, the H-O Overlay designation provides the following
incentives for preservation:
         Waiver of building permit fees for exterior and interior building maintenance items
          requiring a permit.
         Provision of a list of pre-approved historic consultants for applicants for the review of
          modifications to historic structures in accordance with the California Environmental
          Quality Act (CEQA).
To further the community’s historic preservation goals, the City will explore attaining Certified
Local Government (CLG) status as a means of gaining access to federal preservation funds, as
well as expert technical advice from the State Architect’s Office and National Park Service.
Certification will require the City to develop a historic preservation program, and determine
whether the current H-O Ordinance meets State standards. In addition, the City will explore the
revision of the H-O Ordinance to address in greater clarity demolition procedures, and the role
of the Historical Society. The City will also explore conducting a formal historic survey to arrive
at and agree upon a single list of historic resources in the city.
Program Objectives: Explore revising the H-O Ordinance to clarify demolition procedures and
process. Pursue attaining Certified Local Government (CLG) status to acquire State and Federal
II. Housing Plan                                                                            Page II-3

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
expertise and funding benefits. Explore conducting a formal survey to formalize the list of historic
resources in the city.
                         100 Summit Avenue: property in Historic Overlay Zone.
3.         Housing Maintenance and Public Information
Background: The City inspects all residential units prior to resale to identify any zoning or
Building Code violations, and requires compliance for health and safety violations. The
opportunity exists to move beyond a pure compliance approach and begin to offer information
on how qualifying property owners can utilize existing resources for improving housing
conditions. Coordination with Marin Housing, Marin Clean Energy and PG&E would be
increased under this program.
          The Residential Rehabilitation Loan Program administered by Marin Housing provides
           technical assistance to very low income homeowners and makes low interest property
           improvement loans of up to $35,000 for correction of substandard conditions,
           elimination of health and safety hazards, energy conservation measures, and
           accessibility improvements.
       Mill Valley homeowners and renters are eligible for a variety of financial incentives
           through PG&E and Marin Clean Energy for making energy efficiency improvements to
           their homes, including rebates for home energy assessments, energy efficiency updates,
           and solar energy improvements. Income-qualified residents can participate in PG&E’s
           Energy Savings Assistance Program which provides free minor home improvements and
           replacement of old space and water heating systems.
 Program Objectives: Provide informational handouts on available rehabilitation assistance and
energy retrofit programs for distribution as part of the normal code enforcement process, and
pro-actively publicize on the City’s website and through dissemination of brochures at City Hall
and the Community Center, with focused outreach to senior citizen organizations. Strive to
provide rehabilitation assistance to five (5) lower income households.
II. Housing Plan                                                                           Page II-4

                                                                                          May 4, 2015
4.      Regulations to Preserve Existing Rental Housing
Background: As a means of conserving the supply of multi-family rental housing, Mill Valley's
Condominium Conversion Ordinance (Zoning Ordinance Chapter 20.59) prohibit the conversion
of rental developments to condominium ownership unless the following findings can be made:
A.     the proposed conversion will not substantially affect the availability of rental housing in
       the community;
B.     replacement housing for displaced tenants is available within Mill Valley; and
C.     the proposed conversion is consistent with the Mill Valley General Plan, and in particular,
       with the objectives, policies, and programs of the Housing Element of the General Plan
       designed to provide for the housing needs of all economic segments of the community, as
       well as with any and all applicable specific plans.
As part of the application process, new regulations require applicants to conduct a rental survey
showing comparable rental housing within the municipal boundaries of Mill Valley to illustrate
to staff and City decision makers that the proposed condominium conversion project will not
substantially impact the availability of rental housing and that there is sufficient replacement
housing for the displaced tenants. The survey must include identification of all rental housing in
structures of two or more units within Mill Valley and shall include the number of units,
categorized by bedroom count and rents charged, as well as vacancies by unit type. This survey,
along with the findings, creates sufficient regulations to address condominium conversions.
Furthermore, the City’s new ordinance sets forth a series of tenant protections associated with
condominium conversions, including relocation assistance, right of first purchase, and leasehold
rights such as notice of termination and restricting rent increases.
While updating the City’s Condominium Conversion Ordinance, the City Council, Planning
Commission and members of the public expressed interest in exploring further regulations to
protect rental housing as condominium conversion regulations only apply to existing structures.
As such, the City will consider regulations to address tear downs and other regulations and/or
creative incentives to allow property owners to rehabilitate their rental units and building as
opposed to tearing down the building and/or converting the space to ownership units or
commercial use. There is also interest from the community in utilizing existing rental housing for
residents and relocation purposes as opposed to short-term rentals that tend to be used for
vacationing purposes.
Program Objectives: By 2015, clarify or define a “tear down” versus “renovation to existing
building” in the Municipal Code, and apply the definition to the Condominium Conversion Code
(Mill Valley Municipal Code, Section 20.59). Consider regulations and incentives for property
owners to maintain their existing rental housing as opposed to tearing down building and/or
converting rental units to for-sale units or commercial space, and review possible regulations as
part of updating the inclusionary housing regulations (Program #15). Evaluate allowing rental
projects to utilize funds that are set aside in a Local Affordable Housing Trust Fund (Program
#17) for the purposes of rehabilitating buildings while maintaining affordable rent levels.
Consider revising the Municipal Code to regulate and/or limit short-term rentals (less than 30
days) in single family residential areas as a means of increasing the availability of rental
properties for longer term residence (as opposed to vacation rentals).
II. Housing Plan                                                                             Page II-5

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
5.         Preservation of Existing Deed Restricted Affordable Rental Housing
Background: Currently, eight (8) income-restricted affordable rental projects are located within
Mill Valley, providing 301 units affordable to lower income families, seniors and persons living
with disabilities. In addition, the City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance has resulted in the
development of 37 affordable rental and ownership units integrated within ten market rate
developments. None of the affordable housing stock in Mill Valley is at risk of conversion to
market rate.
Program Objectives: Continue to contract with the Marin Housing Authority to monitor deed
restricted ownership and rental housing to ensure compliance with affordability restrictions.
Require long-term affordability controls on all future affordable housing units.
                                  Alto Station Apartments – BRIDGE Housing
II. Housing Plan                                                                        Page II-6

                                                                                         May 4, 2015
HOUSING SUPPLY AND DIVERSITY
GOAL 2.0: Provide opportunities for a range of housing types suited to residents of
varying lifestyle needs and income levels.
POLICIES
Policy 2.1 Variety of Housing Choices
Encourage diversity in the type, size, price and owner/renter tenure of residential development
in Mill Valley. Strive for a balance of unit sizes provided through new development.
Policy 2.2 Adequate Sites
Provide adequately zoned sites to address Mill Valley’s housing needs, emphasizing locations
near transit and services that promote walkability.
Policy 2.3 Residential Mixed Use
Encourage the efficient use of land by allowing commercial and residential uses on the same
property in both horizontal and vertical mixed-use configurations.
Policy 2.4 Adaptive Reuse
Support innovative strategies for the adaptive reuse of existing building resources to provide for
a wide range of housing types and residential uses.
Policy 2.5 Secondary Dwelling Units
Continue to support the provision of second units in all residential districts as a means of
dispersing small, affordable units throughout the community.
PROGRAMS
6.        Mixed Use Zoning in Commercial Districts
Background: The residential sites analysis conducted for the Housing Element identifies
approximately one-third of Mill Valley’s residential infill potential within the city’s commercial
zoning districts, primarily along Miller Avenue, East Blithedale Avenue, and Camino Alto. The
City’s Zoning Code currently provides for residential units and mixed use projects as
conditionally permitted uses within the primary commercial zones (C-G, C-N and P-A) subject to
Planning Commission review and approval. Minimum densities have recently been established
through the Mill Valley General Plan Update (adopted October 2013) in the Land Use Element
and Land Use map. These minimum densities are intended to assist in the development review
process for the applicants and surrounding community. Minimum and maximum density ranges
were also established by the community and included in the Land Use Element to better balance
the number and size of units on a parcel based on its land use designation. (Specific site-related
limitations and constraints such as slope, creek setback and limited vehicular access may form
the basis for reduced minimum densities).
II. Housing Plan                                                                           Page II-7

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
While current development regulations for residential and mixed use projects within
commercial districts provide for creativity and variety in development proposals, there is limited
certainty in project approval due to development standards being determined on a case-by-case
basis. In order to provide more certainty for applicants, the Zoning and Design Guidelines
Advisory Committee (ZDAC) is evaluating the following for commercial districts that allow
residential uses:
          Elimination of the Conditional Use Permit for multi-family and mixed-use projects, and use of
           Multi-Family Design Review Guidelines to provide guidance to applicants;
          Modification of parking standards to include incentives, such as shared parking, to encourage
           mixed-use developments;
          Modification of development standards for residential uses in commercial zones; and
          Creation of flexible standards for non-traditional housing types (e.g., live/work, co-housing,
           assisted living, etc.) and adaptive reuse.
As C-G and C-N zoning districts provide for the greatest flexibility for residential uses, the City
will also consider revising zoning district boundaries to incorporate appropriate adjacent sites
that may be currently within other zoning districts.
Program Objectives: By 2015, remove the CUP requirement for multi-family residential uses and
mixed uses where residential is above the ground floor or off of the commercial street frontage
in the C-G and C-N Zoning Districts – while adding multi-family design guidelines to facilitate the
City’s design review process - and evaluate modifications to residential development regulations
in the P-A, C-R, C-G, and C-N Zoning Districts that promote housing development consistent with
General Plan.
7.         Micro-Apartment Units
Background: Micro-apartment units are being considered in high cost urban areas as an
alternative, more affordable form of housing for single individuals. Units are typically a
maximum of 350 square feet in size, and are marketed to single professionals, students and
senior citizens. Micro-apartment units differ from Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) units in that
each micro-apartment unit includes a full bathroom and kitchen, whereas SROs tend to have
shared bathrooms and kitchen facilities.
Persons living alone comprise one-third of Mill Valley’s households, with seniors making up the
majority (44%) of this group. With local apartment rents beyond the level of affordability to
lower income single-person households, micro-units could provide an affordable housing option
for a segment of the Mill Valley population, in particular young adults in the workforce and
seniors who may be seeking smaller spaces. By incorporating micro-units within residential and
mixed-use developments with standard-sized units, the City can foster economic diversity and
support the integration of residential uses within the pedestrian core of the community.
To further evaluate the appropriateness of micro-apartments in Mill Valley, the City will conduct
a survey and focus group with developers, and assess the local target market for such
developments. In addition to reduced unit sizes, other modified standards will be considered,
including reduced parking and open space requirements (related to common or private patio,
deck or yard areas). The survey will also evaluate micro-apartment units as a potential source of
affordable housing. The City will consider micro-apartment units only within a development with
II. Housing Plan                                                                                 Page II-8

                                                                                         May 4, 2015
other standard types of units. Currently there are no regulations pertaining to micro-apartment
units in Mill Valley.
Program Objectives: Explore the feasibility of encouraging and incentivizing micro-apartment
units projects as part of developments with standard-size units. To the extent micro-units are
deemed appropriate for Mill Valley, develop standards to facilitate this unit type as a form of
affordable residential and mixed-use housing.
8.        Second Units
Background: Second dwelling units are self-contained living units with cooking, eating, sleeping,
and full sanitation facilities, either attached to or detached from the primary residential unit on
a single lot. Second units offer several benefits. First, they typically rent for less than
apartments of comparable size, and can offer affordable rental options for seniors and single
persons. Second, the primary homeowner receives supplementary income by renting out the
second unit, which can help many modest income and elderly homeowners afford to remain in
their homes.
Second units are an integral segment of Mill Valley’s housing stock, comprising an estimated 550
units, including over 100 new second units built or issued permits since 2000. The City has
supported the legalization of existing second units built without proper permits, with 77
unpermitted second units brought up to code during the 2003-2004 amnesty program.
The City continues to review and make appropriate refinements to its second unit regulations
(Municipal Code Section 20.90), and has recently added a deed restriction for those second units
that receive any square foot bonus in Floor Area to ensure approved units remain as functioning
second units. To provide expanded opportunities for second units or additional single-family
dwellings on lots of a certain minimum size, the City will consider modifications to Section
20.16.030 (F) of the Municipal Code that currently allows “clustered or grouped” single-family
housing with a conditional use permit. As indicated previously in Program #4, the City will also
consider revising the Municipal Code to regulate and/or limit short-term rentals, including
rentals of second units, in single-family residential areas as a means of increasing the availability
of rental properties for long term residence.
Due to the importance of the Second Unit program to the overall production of housing within
the community, in September 2014, the City completed a survey of second units to obtain more
information about their actual use and rents. Based on the response of 100 Mill Valley property
owners with a second unit, approximately three-quarters of second units in the community are
provided at rent levels affordable to very low and low income households. For additional results
of the survey, see Appendix E. This information will assist in future policy decisions that affect
second units.
Program Objectives: Continue to review and refine the second unit ordinance to provide
housing options for seniors, caregivers, and other lower and extremely low income households.
Evaluate regulations on short-term rentals within single family residential areas. Based on past
trends, seek to facilitate creation an average of eight second units on an annual basis.
Consider another amnesty program for second units that do not have permits, should the
average number of new second units fall below 5 new units a year.
II. Housing Plan                                                                           Page II-9

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
9. Junior Second Units
Background: As identified in the Housing Element Needs Assessment, of Mill Valley’s
approximately 1,300 senior homeowners, over one-third are living alone in single-family homes.
As these seniors continue to age, their ability to live independently can become more of a
challenge. One zoning tool being explored by many Marin jurisdictions which can help to
support elderly homeowners remain in their homes is the concept of allowing "Junior Second
Units" created from existing underutilized space, such as an unused bedroom, which can be
improved as an independent rental unit. Because these junior units are established within the
existing improved square footage of the home, little or no additional parking may be required.
Mill Valley will coordinate with other Marin jurisdictions in evaluating appropriate zoning
regulations to support in the creation of Junior Second Units of less than 500 square feet in size.
Such units would be created through the repurposing of existing space within a single-family
dwelling to create a semi-private living situation for a renter or caregiver in conjunction with the
owner-occupied unit. Junior Second Units would be required to have exterior access, and meet
the U.S. Census definition of a housing unit1 to qualify for credit towards the City's regional
housing needs (RHNA).
Program Objectives: Explore and evaluate development standards to facilitate the provision of
Junior Second Units, while addressing issues of neighborhood compatibility.
10.        Affordable Housing Overlay
An Affordable Housing Overlay is a zoning tool which offers a package of incentives on
designated sites designed to make the development of affordable housing more feasible. It is an
“overlay” because it layers on top of base zoning regulations, leaving in place the option for
property owners to develop under the base zone, or to utilize the voluntary incentives for the
provision of affordable units. Overlay incentives are distinct from incentives offered through
State density bonus law in that they provide more certainty by providing the full set of
incentives up front and establish local commitments to encourage specific types of housing2.
The Affordable Housing Overlay will be applied to the following development site in Mill Valley:
        The Redwoods Addition: The Redwoods, A Community of Seniors (“The Redwoods”) is a
        multi-level retirement community situated on a large ten-acre lot, and is currently
        undergoing a comprehensive $33 million renovation. Phase 2 of the Redwoods
        revitalization includes development of approximately 40 additional independent living
        units for lower income seniors, planned for the current parking lot which fronts on Miller
        Avenue. The Redwoods is appointing a Phase 2 Task Force to provide input on the
        project's design, density and affordability. To help reduce development costs and enhance
1
   The 2010 U.S. Census defines a "housing unit" as a house, an apartment, a mobile home, a group of
  homes, or a single room that is occupied (of if vacant, is intended for occupancy) as separate living
  quarters. Separate living quarters are those in which the occupants live and eat separately from any
  other persons in the building and which have direct access from the outside of the building or through a
  common hall.
2
   Property owners can utilize incentives identified in the Affordable Housing Overlay, or utilize State
Density Bonus incentives, but not both.
II. Housing Plan                                                                                 Page II-10

                                                                                               May 4, 2015
       affordability on the new units, the City will establish an Affordable Housing Overlay that
       provides the following incentives:
                  Increased building height allowance
                  Reduced parking requirement
                  Development fee waiver
                  By-right allowance for 49 additional independent living units conditioned upon
                   units being provided at levels affordable to lower income seniors.
Program Objectives: During 2015, coordinate with Redwoods' staff and Phase 2 Task Force to
define specific development incentives and incorporate within an Affordable Housing Overlay for
The Redwoods site. Coordinate with site property owners in facilitating public review of
development proposals, and in application for affordable housing funds.
11.       Lot Consolidation Incentives
Background: Mill Valley has many small and irregularly shaped lots, particularly in the
commercial zoning districts. These lots are generally under half an acre in size, and some lots are
not rectilinear, depending on the terrain and roadways. These site characteristics result in some
level of difficulty in achieving housing developments of a sufficient scale to render the inclusion
of affordable housing units feasible, including access to State and Federal affordable housing
resources. The potential consolidation of adjacent suitable sites, without increasing existing
residential densities, would provide the opportunity to create more viable affordable housing
developments.
As shown in the Housing Element Capacity Analysis and map in Appendix C, many of the
individual commercially-zoned parcels identified as suitable for residential and mixed use
development are located adjacent to each other, and a handful share the same ownership.
These parcels have potential for assembly into larger sites, enhancing the feasibility of achieving
affordable units based on economies of scale, advantages in design, and in some cases, the
ability to achieve a one to two-unit increase in the number of units.
As a means of facilitating the consolidation of parcels located within a quarter-mile of transit
and identified as suitable for development in the Capacity Analysis, the City will offer the
following incentives:
         Discuss consolidation opportunities with property owners of adjacent parcels identified in
          Appendix C.
         Guide property owners through the lot consolidation (lot line adjustment) application process,
          and waive the fee for this particular entitlement when the resulting project includes designated
          affordable units.
         Assist property owners in identifying and applying for financial resources for projects which
          incorporate affordable units.
         Utilize the proposed Multi-Family Design Guidelines as a means to identify other tools to
          encourage lot consolidation where appropriate and consistent with the immediate
          neighborhood.
Any proposed project on consolidated sites would still need to undergo all other required review
procedures, including the appropriate level of environmental review. As part of the City’s new
Multi-Family Design Guidelines, the City will establish a set of criteria to ensure that site
II. Housing Plan                                                                                 Page II-11

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
consolidation does not result in developments that are out of scale with the immediate
neighborhood and the City of Mill Valley.
Program Objectives: Adopt lot consolidation incentives in 2015 in conjunction with Multi-Family
Design Guidelines while ensuring compatibility of development with Mill Valley’s small town
character.
12.        Publicly-Owned Land for Affordable Housing
Background: As a predominately built-out city, Mill Valley has few remaining vacant properties
suitable for residential development. This shortage of vacant developable land has resulted in
the exploration of alternative mechanisms to provide sites for housing. Such mechanisms
include long-term leases of surplus publicly-owned land and sale of air rights.
To facilitate affordable housing development, the City would lease appropriate City-owned
properties on a long-term basis to housing developers in exchange for a long-term commitment
to maintain all or a portion of units as affordable housing. Another mechanism could be the sale
of air-rights above City-owned property for development of affordable housing at an off-site
location. To increase the supply of potential sites, the City would allow residential uses in the
Community Facilities (C-F) zone subject to the approval of a conditional use permit.
Program Objectives: By 2018, prepare an inventory of publicly-owned land that is not already
zoned for open space, including parking lots, and examine the feasibility of their use for housing.
Consider modifying the City’s zoning regulations to allow residential uses in the C-F zone subject
to the approval of a conditional use permit.
13.        Non-Traditional Housing Types
Background: Mill Valley will explore non-traditional housing types for inclusion in the Zoning
Ordinance to broaden the variety of housing types available and cater to all economic segments.
     Co-housing refers to collaborative housing, or intentional and supportive communities
      where people can both live comfortably and conveniently while also developing a powerful
      sense of community. Co-housing communities consist of individually owned, private units
      clustered around common facilities and amenities in a walkable, sustainable environment.
      Common features may include a community garden, recreational areas, and a common
      house where day care and meals can be shared. The communities are managed by the
      residents who have chosen to live in a close-knit neighborhood. Hundreds of co-housing
      communities currently exist throughout the country in a variety of settings, including
      communities in Berkeley, Oakland, Pleasant Hill, Cotati, Grass Valley, Davis and Santa
      Barbara. Based on the nature of co-housing and its emphasis on common areas and human
      scale, there is a distinct opportunity to develop models for a uniquely Mill Valley housing
      type that responds to the community character and needs.
     Duets and duplexes are similar from a physical standpoint, both involving two attached
      residential units, with the distinction lying in their different ownership structure. Duplexes
      are sold together as a single building and typically rented out, whereas duet homes are sold
      and owned separately and typically remain owner-occupied. As a means of expanding
      ownership opportunities for modest income households, the City should consider allowing
      duets and duplexes as a form of single-family housing within its single-family zone districts.
II. Housing Plan                                                                            Page II-12

                                                                                             May 4, 2015
     “Roomers” are currently permitted in single-family Residential zones. (Section 20.16.020(B)
      of the Zoning Ordinance) This provision allows up to two roomers per dwelling by right,
      allowing homeowners to sublet parts of their residences and creating less costly rental
      opportunities. For senior homeowners, taking on roomers can not only generate needed
      income, it can provide added security and companionship, and help to address the many
      Mill Valley seniors who are over-housed in single-family homes. Development standards
      should be created that can make these opportunities available while remaining consistent
      with neighborhood standards.
     Live/work housing is intended for housing a resident and his or her business, typically on
      different floors of the same building or same unit. This housing type was considered in the
      2003 Housing Element, and will be defined in the Municipal Code as part of the pending
      review and adoption multi-family residential design guidelines. The City has been
      considering such housing on a case-by-case basis. The Aloha Lofts at 65 Throckmorton
      Avenue represent a live/work project in the downtown area, for which the City provided
      reduced parking and modified development standards.
     Assisted living facilities are designed for elderly individuals requiring assistance with
      certain activities of daily living – such as eating, bathing and transportation – but desiring
      to live as independently as possible. Such facilities bridge the gap between independent
      living and nursing homes. The Redwoods is a continuing care retirement community (CCRC)
      and includes a mix of independent senior apartment units, assisted living units and health
      care center/skilled nursing, allowing residents to age in place. The City’s Zoning Ordinance
      does not currently identify assisted living facilities, or provide specialized standards to
      facilitate their development.
Program Objectives: Modify the Zoning Ordinance to develop standards that accommodate new
housing types suited to the community’s housing needs and that respect neighborhood
attributes.
14.       Maintain and Monitor Capacity in Sites Inventory
Background: Mill Valley shall ensure that adequate sites are available throughout the planning
period to accommodate the City's regional housing needs, or " RHNA".
Program Objectives: On a project-by-project basis, pursuant to Government Code Section
658633, the City will monitor available residential capacity and evaluate projects on sites within
the inventory. Should approval of a project on a site listed on the Capacity Analysis result in a
reduction of capacity below the residential capacity needed to accommodate the City’s housing
needs, the City will identify and zone sufficient sites to accommodate the shortfall.
3
  Government Code Sec. 65863(b) requires the following findings to be made to reduce residential density
for any parcel identified in the housing element inventory:
     1. The reduction is consistent with the adopted General Plan, including the Housing Element; and,
     2. The remaining sites identified in the housing element are adequate to accommodate the
          jurisdiction’s RHNA allocation.
II. Housing Plan                                                                              Page II-13

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
GOAL 3.0: Enhance housing affordability so that modest income households can join
and remain an integral part of the Mill Valley community.
POLICIES
Policy 3.1 Mixed Income Housing
Utilize the City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance as a tool to integrate affordable units within
market rate developments consistent with applicable densities, and to increase the availability
of affordable housing throughout the community. Continue to prioritize the construction of
affordable units on-site, with provision of units off-site or payment of an in-lieu housing fee as
less preferred alternatives.
Policy 3.2 Affordable Housing Incentives
Facilitate the development of affordable housing through regulatory incentives and concessions,
and/or financial assistance. Proactively seek out new models and approaches in the provision of
affordable housing.
Policy 3.3 Financial Resources
Pursue expanded financial resources to support in the production of and conversion to
affordable housing for Mill Valley’s lower income workforce and special needs populations.
Policy 3.4 Public/Private Partnerships
Explore collaborative partnerships with nonprofit organizations, developers, the business
community and governmental agencies in the provision of affordable housing.
Policy 3.5 Homeownership Assistance
Encourage the provision of financial assistance to low and moderate income first-time
homebuyers through County and State programs.
Policy 3.6 Rental Assistance
Support and publicize available rental assistance programs for lower income and special needs
households.
II. Housing Plan                                                                         Page II-14

                                                                                                  May 4, 2015
PROGRAMS
15. Inclusionary Housing Regulations
Background: Inclusionary housing requires developers to make a percentage of housing units in
new residential developments affordable to low and moderate-income households. A major
goal of Inclusionary Housing is to expand the supply of affordable housing throughout the
community to encourage mixed-income neighborhoods and to help people live and work closer
to home. Mill Valley’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance has been an important tool in integrating
affordable units within market rate developments, with 37 affordable inclusionary units built
since the Ordinance's adoption in 1988.
Pursuant to policy direction given as part of the 2009-2014 Housing Element, the City has been
working with the Zoning and Design Guidelines Advisory Committee (ZDAC), Planning
Commission and City Council to re-evaluate key parameters of the City's current ordinance to
enhance its effectiveness, including analysis of the following:
       Increasing the percentage of affordable units required from 15% to 20%-25%;
       Reducing the project size threshold when projects are required to provide affordable
           units rather than being permitted to pay an in-lieu fee;
       Requiring deeper income targeting to address affordability for very low and low income
           households;
       Considering replacement unit requirements for removal of existing rental units;
       Requiring greater parity in development and design standards between project
           affordable and market-rate units;
       Extending affordable housing impact fees to single-family homes (see Program #16);
       Updating the current housing in-lieu fee calculation based on a nexus study;
       Moving to a fee-based program for rental housing with on-site and off-site alternatives
           to insure compliance with recent case law regarding inclusionary rental housing (the
           Palmer Decision); and
       Defining additional public benefits that the City may require from housing developers.
Program Objectives: Re-evaluate the City’s Inclusionary Housing Program, and amend the
Zoning Ordinance in 2015 to strengthen and enhance the Program’s effectiveness in providing
affordable housing and comply with the 2009 California Court of Appeal decision commonly
referred to as Palmer/Sixth Street Properties L.P. vs City of Los Angeles.4
4
  In Palmer vs. City of Los Angeles (2009), the California Court of Appeal ruled that inclusionary ordinances
applied to rental housing violate the Costa Hawkins Act (the State law regulating rent control), and that
jurisdictions may not establish the rent levels of inclusionary units unless the project has received a
benefit from the government. Thus, similar to many Bay Area jurisdictions, Mill Valley is evaluating the
following approach for application of inclusionary requirements to rental housing:
     • Moving away from an “on-site,” “off-site,” or “fee” program to a fee-first program defensible
          under impact fee law;
     • Developer payment of a fee to mitigate the impact of market rate housing OR qualification for an
          alternative to the fee (on-site or off-site units);
     • Allowance for provision of affordable rental units only when the project has received a financial
          contribution or other government benefit, as recorded in an agreement.
II. Housing Plan                                                                                    Page II-15

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
16.         Single-Family Housing Impact Fee
Background: Mill Valley faces a severe shortage of housing affordable to the local workforce,
resulting in the vast majority of persons who work in the community commuting in from outside
the city. Residential development further increases the demand for affordable housing, based
on the growth in employment generated by residential households’ increased demand for goods
and services. While the City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance specifies affordable housing
requirements for development of two or more residential units, the Ordinance does not apply to
construction of individual single-family homes. As a means of distributing the responsibility for
affordable housing across all new residential development, the City is evaluating the
contribution towards affordable housing demand from new single-family construction, including
the establishment of an affordable housing impact fee on new single-family construction, or fee
reductions/waivers for the provision of new second units. Pursuant to AB 1600, the City is
preparing a nexus study regarding the linkage between development of single-family housing
and the demand for affordable units, and, if such a link is established, will recommend the
adoption an impact fee.
Program Objectives: Finalize the residential nexus analysis regarding the establishment of an
affordable housing impact fee for all new residential redevelopment, including new single-family
homes, tear downs and major additions. Integrate single-family impact fees within the City's
updated Inclusionary Housing Program, as appropriate (refer to Program #15).
                            8 Old Mill: Example of Inclusionary Homeownership
17.        Local Affordable Housing Fund
Background: Because Mill Valley has limited access to state and federal housing resources, the
City faces practical and financial constraints in its ability to facilitate the construction of
affordable housing. To create a more viable funding source, the City proposes to establish an
Affordable Housing Fund that will be used to construct or help leverage construction of and
conversion to affordable housing. Potential Housing Fund resources include, but are not limited
to: in-lieu fees from the Inclusionary Housing Program; affordable housing impact fees on single-
family development; and in-lieu fees on condominium conversions. Implementing regulations
will be established to manage the Fund and establish parameters for allocation of funds towards
projects.
II. Housing Plan                                                                       Page II-16

                                                                                             May 4, 2015
Program Objectives: Establish a dedicated Affordable Housing Fund for deposit of in-lieu fee
revenues. Consult with Marin County on their Housing Fund, and establish implementing
regulations to govern Fund oversight and expenditures.
18.       Affordable Housing Development Assistance
Background: The City can play an important role in facilitating the development of quality,
affordable housing in the community through provision of regulatory incentives and direct
financial assistance. By utilizing various tools to facilitate infill development, the City can help to
address the housing needs of its extremely low, very low, low and moderate income
households. The following are among the types of incentives that will be considered upon
request:
         Reduction in development fees;
         Flexible development standards;
         Density bonuses as described in Implementing Program #25;
         City assistance, where applicable, in the preparation of affordable housing funding
          applications; and
         Financial assistance through future Affordable Housing Fund resources, as described in
          Program #17.
Program Objectives: Provide financial and regulatory incentives to private developers for the
development of high quality affordable housing for families and seniors appropriately designed
to respect Mill Valley’s small town character.
19.       Partnerships for Affordable Housing
Background: The Bay Area is home to numerous nonprofit housing developers who have
produced thousands of high-quality affordable housing projects over the past 40 years. Within
Mill Valley, several regional and national housing non-profits have a track record of developing
and managing successful affordable housing projects, including BRIDGE Housing, EAH
(Ecumenical Association for Housing), Eden Housing, Mercy Housing, and North Bay
Rehabilitation Services. The key to the success of non-profits lies in three areas: 1) their ability
to access a diversity of funding sources; 2) their commitment to working cooperatively with the
local community; and 3) their long-term dedication to their projects. The Nonprofit Housing
Association of Northern California serves as a resource organization for affordable housing
developers in the Bay Area.
Program Objectives: Explore partnerships with a variety of affordable housing providers,
utilizing the Nonprofit Housing Association of Northern California as a resource to identify
nonprofits with experience in developing small scale residential infill and mixed use projects.
20.       Homebuyer Assistance
Background: First-time homebuyers in Mill Valley have access to several homebuyer assistance
programs offered through Marin Housing.
The Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program administered by Marin Housing provides
qualified first time homebuyers with a federal income tax credit of up to 15% of the annual
II. Housing Plan                                                                              Page II-17

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
interest paid on the homebuyer’s mortgage. This enables homebuyers to have more disposable
income available to qualify for a mortgage loan and make the monthly mortgage payments.
Eligibility includes maximum household incomes of approximately $100,000 (for 2 person
household), and sales price limits of approximately $400,000.
Marin Housing also administers a Below Market Rate (BMR) first-time homebuyer program on
behalf of jurisdictions in the County with inclusionary housing requirements, including Mill
Valley. The City has entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with Marin Housing to
manage and monitor the city’s 27 affordable ownership inclusionary units, and to conduct
ongoing education through publication of homeowner newsletters.
Program Objectives: Continue to participate with Marin Housing in administration of the Below
Market Rate program and Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program. As MCCs become
available on an annual basis, actively publicize availability through local media and on the City’s
website.
21.        Section 8 Rental Assistance
Background: The Section 8 Rental Assistance Program extends rental subsidies to very low-
income households (50% area median income or AMI), including families, seniors, and the
disabled. The Section 8 Program offers a voucher that pays the difference between the current
fair market rent (FMR) and what a tenant can afford to pay (i.e. 30% of household income). The
voucher allows a tenant to choose housing that costs above the payment standard, provided the
tenant pays the extra cost. With nearly 100 Mill Valley households currently receiving Section 8
rental vouchers, and an additional 135 residents on the waiting list for assistance, Section 8
plays a critical role in allowing extremely low and very low income households to remain in the
community. As a means of supporting the use of Section 8, Chapter 5.33 of the Mill Valley
Municipal Code prohibits discrimination against tenants based on their source of income or the
use of rental subsidies and other rental programs.
Program Objectives: The City will continue to offer tenants information regarding Section 8
rental subsidies and provide referrals to Marin Housing for assistance. The City will also
encourage landlords to register units with the Housing Authority and direct to
www.GoSection8.com, Marin Housing’s new enhanced program for on-line listing of rental
properties, by providing informational brochures to rental property owners.
II. Housing Plan                                                                         Page II-18

                                                                                      May 4, 2015
ADDRESS GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
GOAL 4.0: Address governmental constraints on the maintenance, improvement and
development of housing while maintaining community character.
POLICIES
Policy 4.1 Regulatory Incentives for Affordable Housing
Support the use of density bonuses and other incentives, such as fee deferrals/waivers and
parking reductions, to offset the costs of affordable housing while ensuring that potential
impacts are addressed.
Policy 4.2 Flexible Development Standards
Provide flexibility in development standards to accommodate new models and approaches to
providing housing, such as transit-oriented development, mixed use, co-housing and live/work
housing.
Policy 4.3 Efficient Use of Multi-Family Zoning
Encourage the sustainable use of land and promote affordability by prohibiting new single-
family development within multi-family or commercial land use districts.
Policy 4.4 Development Review
Explore continued improvements to the entitlement process to coordinate the processing of
development permits, design review and environmental clearance. Provide for priority and
expedited treatment in planning processing for affordable housing.
Policy 4.5 Regular Updates to the Zoning Code to Reflect Housing Standards and Regulations
Update Mill Valley’s Zoning Code to provide adequate zoning provisions as established by State
Housing Law (including but not limited to State density bonus regulations and special needs
housing).
PROGRAMS
22.       Update Zoning Code Consistent with Land Use Element
Background: As part of the 2040 General Plan, the City established minimum and maximum
densities for each residential land use category, along with a Land Use Map that clearly depicts
the General Plan designation of each parcel in the city. Residential development standards
within the Zoning Ordinance are being updated for consistency with the new General Plan. In
Commercial districts, the maximum density of RM 1.5 (29 units per acre) will be used as a
ceiling. Development standards such as minimum space set aside for commercial use, height
limits, parking requirements and setbacks are also being established.
In order to ensure the efficient use of multi-family properties, development of new single-family
residential dwellings will be prohibited in multi-family and commercial land use districts. This
II. Housing Plan                                                                        Page II-19

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
modification is part of the Zoning Code update that will occur as part of the proposed multi-
family development standards ZDAC will present to Planning Commission in early 2015. And as
described under Program #6 (Mixed Use Zoning in Commercial Districts), the updated Zoning
Ordinance will establish multi-family residential development standards and uses in commercial
areas, and combined with the use of Multi-Family Residential Design Guidelines (Program #1),
will provide for a more transparent and efficient development review process.
Program Objectives: In 2015, update residential development standards consistent with the
adopted 2040 General Plan. Conduct ongoing monitoring of the Housing Element sites inventory
to ensure the continued provision of adequate site capacity to address Mill Valley’s regional
housing needs by income category throughout the planning period. Should a potential shortfall
be identified, redesignate additional sites as necessary.
23.        Update Parking Standards
Background: Mill Valley’s Zoning Code establishes an off-street parking standard of two spaces
per residential unit, regardless of unit size or number of bedrooms. With the exception of
nursing homes, the Code does not specify reduced parking standards for specialized housing
types, such as senior housing, housing for persons with disabilities, or residential/commercial
mixed use. While the Planning Commission can provide modified parking standards on a case-
by-case basis based on development and design review, this process should be made more
effective by adopting appropriate refinements to the City’s parking standards and codified in the
Zoning Ordinance.
The 2040 General Plan calls for the City to establish new parking standards and a citywide
parking management program for vehicles and bicycles. The following programs are intended to
enhance parking efficiencies and sustainability:
       Evaluate parking management strategies and implement those most suitable to Mill
             Valley’s parking needs, including but not limited to: shared parking, “unbundled”
             parking in commercial and multi-family residential projects, payments in-lieu of
             providing parking, credits for on-site car sharing, and variable pricing of on- and off-
             street parking to insure adequate parking during peak demand periods;
       Consider reduced parking requirements for affordable studio and one bedroom units;
       Consider reduced parking requirements in proximity to transit;
       Include bicycle parking requirements in parking standards; and
       Establish shared parking guidelines for mixed-use projects.
Program Objectives: In 2015, evaluate and establish modified parking standards in the Zoning
Ordinance to facilitate specific types of housing such as:
       Multi-family and mixed use developments within commercial areas
       Senior housing and housing for persons with disabilities
       Housing in proximity to transit (1/4 mile)
       One bedroom, studio and micro-units
II. Housing Plan                                                                            Page II-20

                                                                                        May 4, 2015
24.       Fee Deferrals and/or Waivers for Affordable Housing
Background: The City collects various fees from development projects to cover the costs of
processing permits and providing services and facilities. While these fees are assessed on a per
unit share basis, they are an element in the cost of housing and could potentially constrain the
provision of affordable housing. The deferral, reduction or waiver of City fees can lower the
production costs of affordable housing.
Pursuant to Municipal Code Section 5.32, the City will continue to offer a 50% reduction in City
fees, licenses and taxes for units provided at levels affordable to and occupied by lower and
moderate income households. In order to specifically encourage the provision of housing
affordable to extremely low income (ELI) households (<30% AMI), the City will waive 100% of
application processing fees for projects with a minimum of 10% ELI units, or not less than one
unit.
In addition, the California legislature passed AB 641 in 2007, which helps to address the cash
flow challenges inherent in many affordable housing projects during the construction phase. For
affordable housing developments in which at least 49 percent of the units are affordable to low
or very low-income households, AB 641 prohibits local governments from requiring the payment
of local developer fees prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy.
Program Objectives: Provide information to the affordable housing community that fee
deferrals, reductions and waivers may be requested for affordable housing projects. By 2015,
adopt a resolution to specify the waiver of 100% of application processing fees for projects with a
minimum of 10% Extremely Low Income units.
25.    Density Bonus and Other Incentives for Affordable Housing
Background: Under Government Code section 65915-65918, for housing projects of at least five
units cities must grant density bonuses ranging from 5% to 35% (depending on the affordability
provided by the housing project) when requested by the project sponsor, and provide up to
three incentives or concessions unless specific findings can be made. Local jurisdictions are
required to adopt regulations that specify how compliance with the State’s density bonus law
will be implemented. The City is also required to establish procedures for waiving or modifying
development and zoning standards that would otherwise inhibit the utilization of the density
bonus on specific sites. These procedures must include, but not be limited to, such items as
minimum lot size, side yard setbacks, and placement of public works improvements. In 2014,
the Mill Valley City Council adopted local residential density bonus provisions (Mill Valley
Municipal Code, Chapter 20.81), consistent with State law. The City's Ordinance reflects AB
2222, effective January 1, 2015, which requires developers to replace any pre-existing affordable
units on a site as a condition of eligibility for granting a density bonus.
Program Objectives: Implement the City’s local density bonus ordinance to implement State law.
II. Housing Plan                                                                          Page II-21

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
26.        CEQA Exemptions for Infill Projects
Background: State law allows for approximately 30 classes of categorical exemptions for
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review. These are types of projects that the
Secretary of the Resources Agency has determined do not usually have a significant effect on
the environment. Examples include the replacement of reconstruction of existing structures,
construction of small structures as defined by State Guidelines, and actions to maintain, restore,
or enhance a natural resource. The nature or location of projects can result in exceptions to
exemptions. Mill Valley will continue to utilize allowable CEQA exemptions for qualified urban
infill and other residential projects where site characteristics and an absence of potentially
significant environmental impacts allow. Use of the CEQA exemption must be consistent with
the environmental review of individual projects.
Program Objectives: Continue to utilize categorical exemptions under CEQA on a case by case
basis as appropriate based on the facts and circumstances of individual residential and mixed
use infill development projects.
                             505 Miller Avenue; mixed-use development
II. Housing Plan                                                                        Page II-22
                                                                                           May 4, 2015
EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES AND SPECIAL NEEDS
GOAL 5.0: Promote equal housing opportunities for all residents, including Mill Valley’s special needs
populations.
POLICIES
Policy 5.1 Fair Housing
Seek to ensure that individuals and families pursuing housing in Mill Valley do not experience
discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, marital status, disability, age, sex, familial
status, national origin, sexual preference, source of income or other arbitrary factors, consistent
with the Fair Housing Act.
Policy 5.2 Housing Options for Seniors
Support development and maintenance of affordable senior rental and ownership housing and
supportive services to facilitate maximum independence and the ability of seniors to remain in
their homes and/or in the community.
Policy 5.3 Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Address the special housing needs of persons with disabilities through provision of supportive
housing, homeowner accessibility grants, zoning for group housing, and reasonable
accommodation procedures.
Policy 5.4 Homeless Housing and Services
Work cooperatively with Marin County and other applicable agencies to provide a continuum of
care for the homeless, including emergency shelter, transitional housing, supportive housing
and permanent affordable housing.
PROGRAMS
27.       Fair Housing Program
Background: Fair Housing of Marin (FROM) is the designated provider of fair housing and
tenant-landlord information in Marin County. FROM provides fair housing investigation and
coordinates referral services to assist individuals who may have been the victims of
discrimination. Many of the people who contact FROM have basic questions about landlord and
tenant rights and responsibilities; FROM’s housing counselors provide clients with
comprehensive information to help resolve tenant/landlord issues. FROM conducts extensive
fair housing education and outreach throughout Marin County, and is a certified HUD
Foreclosure Counseling agency.
Mill Valley maintains a website dedicated to housing resources, including information on the
Fair Housing Program.
Program Objectives: Continue to promote fair housing practices, and refer fair housing
complaints to Fair Housing of Marin. Publicize the fair housing program (including the City’s
local ordinance to prohibit discrimination based on source of income or use of Section 8
II. Housing Plan                                                                            Page II-23

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
subsidies) through placement of fair housing services brochures at the public counter, on the
City’s website and in other community locations.
28.        Senior Support Services
Background: Seniors citizens in Mill Valley have access to a range of services that can help
support aging in place and prevent premature institutionalization. Many of the senior programs
operate from the Community Center through the sponsorship of the Parks & Recreation
Department. In addition to social and recreational activities, services such as health insurance
counseling and advocacy, legal counseling, and AARP drivers safety courses are offered at the
Center. The Mill Valley Seniors Club meets weekly at the Center and provides input on the city's
senior programming.
The Mill Valley 2040 Community Vitality Element establishes the following programs to support
independent and healthy living for seniors:
       Work with paramedics, community based organizations and County and City staff to
            identify those most at risk for falls and provide them with assessments of their homes
            and regular check-ins to reduce the risk of injuries related to falls.
       Create "Safe Routes for Seniors" by identifying the routes that older adults take to
            access medical care, food and social events in the community and make those safer.
       Promote opportunities to allow residents who wish to age in place and remain part of
            the community
Mill Valley Village, together with its parent Marin Village, is a volunteer-drive non-profit
membership organization dedicated to providing resources and assistance to enable seniors to
remain in their own homes as they age. Mill Valley Village has a growing team of community
volunteers to help members with occasional transportation assistance, household tasks, home
visits and phone check-ins. In addition to home support services, Mill Valley Village will organize
and link seniors with Village social events, cultural programs, and educational and fitness classes
to support seniors in remaining active and connected to their community.
Program Objectives: Support the provision of senior services in the community to promote
independent and healthy living as outlined in the Mill Valley General Plan goals, policies and
programs.
29.        Home Sharing and Tenant Matching Opportunities
Background: Sharing a home promotes independent living, provides additional income for the
provider, an affordable rent for the seeker, and the potential for deeper relationships for both.
The average age of community members in Mill Valley is growing older, and nearly 500 seniors
currently live alone in single-family homes in the city. Shared housing promotes the efficient
use of the housing stock, and can help address the housing needs of seniors in our community.
Homesharing programs, such as the one offered by Episcopal Senior Communities (ESC) in San
Rafael, match lower income home seekers with homeowners with excess space who are
interested in sharing their homes.
Mill Valley maintains a website dedicated to housing resources, including information on the
home sharing and tenant matching program.
II. Housing Plan                                                                          Page II-24

                                                                                           May 4, 2015
Program Objectives: Support organizations that facilitate house sharing, and actively promote
through senior citizen organizations, such as Mill Valley Village and Mill Valley Seniors Club.
30.       Universal Design/Visitability
Background: As Mill Valley’s population continues to age, providing housing that is accessible to
people of all abilities becomes increasingly important. The majority the community’s housing
stock was built prior to 1991 when current ADA accessibility standards took effect, and thus it is
important for the City to facilitate the retrofit of existing housing to provide greater accessibility,
as well as to promote accessibility in new construction. The goal of universal design is to
accommodate a wide range of abilities including children, aging populations, and persons with
disabilities by providing features in residential construction that enhance accessibility. Examples
of universal design features include:
              Entrances without steps that make it easier for persons to enter the home;
              Wider doorways that enhance interior circulation and accommodate strollers and
               wheelchairs;
              Lever door handles that are easier to use, especially by parents with an infant or
               persons with arthritis; and
              Light switches and electrical outlets that are located at a height more convenient
               and accessible to the elderly.
Housing that is “visitable” is accessible at a basic level, enabling persons with disabilities to visit
the homes of their friends, relatives, and neighbors. Visitability can be achieved in new
construction by utilizing two simple design standards: (1) providing a 32-inch clear opening in all
interior and bathroom doorways; and (2) providing at least one accessible means of ingress and
egress for each unit.
Program Objectives: Develop guidelines encouraging principles of universal design and
visitability, and provide to residential development applicants.
31.       Homeless Assistance
Background: Support Countywide programs and the Marin Partnership to End Homelessness in
the provision of resources to address the needs of the homeless and persons at risk of
homelessness, including emergency shelter, transitional housing, supportive housing and
permanent housing. Provide flyers and information on the City’s website, including the Annual
Marin Community Resource Guide, and links to the emergency 211 toll-free call system for
information and referral.
Senate Bill 2 establishes requirements for emergency shelter ordinances. During the State
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) review of Mill Valley's draft Housing
Element, HCD requested specific changes to the City's Emergency Shelter Standards that were
adopted in October 2014. To address this issue, the City will amend Section 20.40.050.1 of the
Municipal Code as follows: a) amend Section 20.40.050.1.G4 (Management Plan) to eliminate the
following words in the last sentence "and other regulations, as appropriate, or as requested by the
Planning and Building Director"; and b) eliminate Mill Valley Municipal Code Section 20.40.050.1.G5
(Annual Report).
II. Housing Plan                                                                             Page II-25

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Mill Valley maintains a website dedicated to housing resources, including homeless assistance
information.
Program Objectives: Support implementation of the Homeless Countywide Continuum of Care
and publicize the Marin Community Resource Guide and emergency 211 call system. Amend Mill
Valley Municipal Code Sections 20.40.050.1.G4 and 20.40.050.1.G5 as specified in Program #31
in 2015.
II. Housing Plan                                                                     Page II-26
                                                                                        May 4, 2015
SUSTAINABILITY AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY
GOAL 6.0: Promote a healthy and sustainable Mill Valley through support of existing
and new housing which minimizes reliance on natural resources and automobile use.
POLICIES
Policy 6.1 Smart Growth
Preserve open space, watersheds and environmental habitats, while accommodating new
growth in compact forms in a manner that de-emphasizes the automobile, allowing residents to
use their cars less or not at all.
Policy 6.2 Green Building
Implement Mill Valley’s Green Building Program to ensure new development is energy and
water efficient, and consider establishing incentives to achieve energy efficiencies higher than
those required by the Ordinance.
Policy 6.3 Energy Efficiency and Alternative Energy Sources
Promote modifications to increase energy efficiency and the use of alternative energy sources
such as solar energy, cogeneration, and non-fossil fuels.
Policy 6.4 Healthy Community.
Promote healthy living and physical activity through decisions in the location, site planning and
design of housing and mixed use development.
Policy 6.5 Transportation Alternatives and Walkability
Incorporate transit and other transportation alternatives including walking and bicycling into the
design of new development, particularly in areas within a half mile of designated transit stops.
Policy 6.6 Jobs/Housing Balance
Encourage a closer link between housing and jobs in the community, including housing
opportunities affordable to Mill Valley’s modest income workforce.
II. Housing Plan                                                                         Page II-27

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
PROGRAMS
32.        Prioritization of Sustainable Housing Projects
Background: The Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), Department
of Transportation (DOT), and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) formed an interagency
partnership in 2009 for Sustainable Communities, incorporating livability principles into the
provision of housing. The key principles are focused on the provision of housing in relative
proximity to transit and amenities, therefore reducing the need for cars owned by residents.
Community benefits associated with transit-accessible and mixed use housing include: better
health outcomes, increased access to employment, reduced infrastructure costs to the City,
additional economic development, and increased tax revenue.
The City of Mill Valley places a high priority on sustainability, and will prioritize funding for
residential and mixed-use projects within a quarter to half-mile walking radius of transit and
other pedestrian amenities. Please see Appendix B, Section C. 10 - Impact of Sustainability
Factors on Development, for maps illustrating the relationship between transit, amenities, and
parcels in Mill Valley.
Program Objectives: Prioritize redevelopment projects competing for funds and grants that are
within a quarter to half mile radius of transit stops, have a large number of amenities within a
half mile radius, and/or have a higher walkscore.
33.        Green Building
Background: Mill Valley adopted a local Green Building Ordinance in December 2008,
establishing green building requirements for all new residential and commercial development,
including building additions and renovations. Residential and mixed use projects are required to
complete a Build It Green (“BIG”) checklist as part of building plan submittal to the City, and
demonstrate compliance with BIG Green Building Guidelines as verified by a certified
GreenPoint Rater. (Non-residential development is subject to LEED5 green building standards).
Green building design, construction and operation can have a significant impact on Mill Valley’s
environmental sustainability, including:
        Resource and material usage
        Energy consumption and efficiency
        Water consumption and efficiency
        Waste management
        Air quality
        Health and welfare of residents, workers and visitors
In addition to the adopted Green Building Ordinance, the California Statewide Green Building
Code, or CALGREEN, went into effect on January 1, 2011, and updated the California Building
Standards Code (otherwise known as Title 24). CALGREEN has mandatory requirements that
apply to residential and non-residential construction, that achieve material and water
conservation, and reduced waste in construction practices, but not a higher level of energy
5
   LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) refers to the green building rating system
developed by the U.S. Green Building Council.
II. Housing Plan                                                                          Page II-28

                                                                                       May 4, 2015
efficiency compared to Title 24. Green Building Ordinances such as BIG and LEED fill in this gap
by typically exceeding Title 24’s energy efficiency standards by 15%.
Mill Valley maintains a webpage dedicated to Green Building, including an information guide
that can be downloaded.
Program Objectives: Continue to provide outreach and education to developers, architects and
residents to provide information on the new CALGREEN code, ways to incorporate sustainability
in project design and in existing structures. Evaluate incorporation of incentives into the Green
Building Ordinance to achieve higher levels of energy efficiency.
                                    Cool roof system on a Mill Valley home.
                                    (Source: www.cityofmillvalley.org)
34.       Energy Conservation
Background: The City will evaluate the following activities to support clean energy and energy
efficiency solutions in the community’s housing:
      Continue to work with the Marin Housing Authority to provide rehabilitation loan
          applicants with information on use of green materials and energy conserving measures
          in home improvements.
      Update the City’s development standards and design guidelines to encourage solar,
          water harvesting and other emerging green technologies.
      Require energy audits for residential uses prior to the completion of sale, and provide
          audit results and information about opportunities for energy improvement to
          prospective buyers.
      Require where feasible, new residential construction to use “solar ready” guidelines, for
          the easy, cost effective installation of solar energy systems in the future.
      Support neighbors working together to implement solar power on a block or
          neighborhood level.
      Support efforts of the Marin Energy Authority, Marin Clean Energy and PG&E to
          maximize residential subscription rates for green energy plans.
II. Housing Plan                                                                         Page II-29

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
          Set up an information page on the City’s website to assist and guide Mill Valley residents
           to locate contractors, incentives and financial resources to install photovoltaic panels on
           their homes or businesses. Explore the provision of additional incentives for properties
           in Mill Valley that have high solar potential. Contact PG&E and MEA to learn about their
           solar programs and available incentives. Contact Marin Solar to learn about the County-
           wide program and any challenges, and explore bringing the county-wide program into
           Mill Valley.
Please see Appendix B, Section C. 10 - Impact of Sustainability Factors on Development, for the
solar potential of parcels in Mill Valley.
Program Objectives: Implement actions for energy efficiency identified in the 2040 Mill Valley
General Plan. Incorporate energy conservation and sustainability measures as part of the
proposed mixed use/multi-family design guidelines and development standards (see Program #1
for details).
35.        Addressing Natural Hazards
Background: AB 162 was passed to ensure that local planning agencies consider flooding risks
and plan flood management strategies while preparing General Plans. Pursuant to AB 162,
jurisdictions are required to amend the Safety and Conservation Element of the General Plan to
add analysis and policies relating to flood hazards, at the time the City updates its Housing
Element after January 1, 2008, and every five years thereafter.
The City’s current Public Health and Safety Element was written in 1989, and is currently being
updated as part of the Mill Valley 2040 General Plan Update process.
Mill Valley’s Floodplain Management Ordinance regulates new development and substantial
improvements to existing development within the floodplain. The Ordinance meets the
following requirements set forth by AB 162:
          Identify information regarding flood hazards, including flood hazard zones, maps,
           historical data, land uses, and flood protection agencies.
      Establish comprehensive goals, policies and objectives to protect against unreasonable
           flooding risks, based on the above information.
      Establish a set of feasible implementation measures to carry out those goals, policies
           and objectives.
In recent years and as reflected in the MV2040 General Plan, more attention has been raised
about natural hazards and events as it relates to Climate Change. There are many potential
hazards that could be exacerbated as part of climate change and sea level rise based on Mill
Valley’s topography and proximity to San Francisco Bay.
Program Objectives: Continue to work with local jurisdictions and through the All Hazards
Mitigation Plan and the MV2040 General Plan to address and mitigate natural hazards.
II. Housing Plan                                                                              Page II-30

                                                                                         May 4, 2015
COMMMUNITY AND GOVERNMENTAL COLLABORATION
GOAL 7.0: Coordinate with citizens, community groups, and governmental agencies to
help address Mill Valley’s housing needs.
POLICIES
Policy 7.1 Community Participation
Undertake effective and informed public participation from all economic segments in the
community, including both homeowners and renters, and special needs groups in the
formulation and review of City housing policies.
Policy 7.2 Neighborhood Outreach
Encourage developers of any major housing project to conduct neighborhood meetings with
residents early in the process to undertake problem solving and facilitate more informed, faster
and constructive development review.
Policy 7.3 Public Review of Development
Encourage public awareness and involvement in housing development proposals to facilitate the
design of new housing that fits within the neighborhood context.
Policy 7.4 Housing Element Implementation
Take a proactive leadership role in working with community groups, other jurisdictions and
agencies, non-profit housing sponsors, and the building and real estate industry to ensure the
timely follow through of actions identified in the Housing Element, including formation of a
Housing Committee to support implementation.
PROGRAMS
36.       Community Education and Outreach
Background: The Mill Valley 2040 General Plan involved extensive community participation
from a wide spectrum of residents and stakeholders in planning for the future of the town. As
part of this effort, the community has become more informed about Mill Valley’s unique
housing needs and issues, and Housing Element policies and programs designed to address the
community’s needs. A detailed description of these efforts is described in Chapter 1.
The City will build on the momentum gained through the 2040 General Plan to garner public
support for implementation of the Housing Element and the provision of housing for all
economic segments of the community. The education and outreach efforts to the Mill Valley
community will address broader housing issues, rehabilitation and maintenance of the existing
housing stock, retrofits for energy efficiency, and also the creation of housing that fits with and
enhances the small-town character of Mill Valley.
II. Housing Plan                                                                           Page II-31

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Program Objectives:
       Provide ongoing education and outreach on housing issues, rehabilitation, energy
            retrofits, and design through presentations, on-line resources, housing fact sheets and
            other means.
       Assist prospective applicants of all types of residential developments in coordinating
            meetings with neighbors and other stakeholders prior to submittal of a formal
            development application.
       Coordinate with interested groups, including local businesses, housing advocacy groups
            and owner and renter neighborhood groups to build public understanding and support
            for affordable, workforce and special needs housing.
37.        Housing Element Monitoring/Annual Report
Background: The Planning Department is responsible for the regular monitoring of the Housing
Element, and preparing an Annual Progress Report for review by the public, City decision-
makers and submittal to State HCD. Completion of the Annual Report is required for the City to
maintain access to State housing funds.
The Annual Report documents:
          Mill Valley’s annual residential building activity, including identification of any deed
           restricted affordable units and assignment of market rate units to an appropriate
           affordability category
          Progress towards the Regional Housing Needs Allocation since the start of the planning
           period;
          Input from the Planning Commission and other community stakeholders; and
          Implementation status of Housing Element programs.
Program Objectives: The Planning and Building Departments will review the Housing Element
annually and provide opportunities for public participation, in conjunction with the submission of
the City’s Annual Progress Report to the State Department of Housing and Community
Development by April 1st of each year.
38.        Mill Valley Housing Advisory Committee
Background: Through the Mill Valley 2040 General Plan process, the City and its community
stakeholders developed valuable new goals and established a strong foundation for future
action to address the community’s affordable housing needs. As a means of supporting the
effective implementation of the City’s new Housing Element, the City will establish a Housing
Advisory Committee to serve as an advisory group to the Planning Commission and City Council
for guidance on Mill Valley’s housing policies, procedures, projects and funding opportunities.
Responsibilities of the Housing Advisory Committee may include:
          Monitor and report regularly on housing issues in Mill Valley, including:
                o Progress towards Housing Element goals
                o Identification of any obstacles or impediments to achieving these goals
                o Suggested policies and actions to keep Mill Valley on track towards its goals
          Work with the City Council to coordinate housing activities with other City goals and
           plans.
II. Housing Plan                                                                            Page II-32

                                                                                          May 4, 2015
         Meet regularly to gather public input and recommendations, and to make periodic
          reports to the Planning Commission and City Council.
         Submit reports on housing activities to the Planning Commission and City Council for
          inclusion in the City’s Annual Housing Element Progress Report.
         Coordinate with interested and affected groups, as directed by the City Council.
         Research and investigate new and existing methods of financing, funding and managing
          housing and mixed use affordable housing development consistent with Housing
          Element goals and policies, and report findings to the City Council, as requested.
Program Objectives: Establish a Mill Valley Housing Advisory Committee in 2015, and define the
Committee’s specific role and responsibilities in supporting Housing Element implementation.
II. Housing Plan                                                                           Page II-33

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
 Table 2.1: Summary of Implementing Programs
Program               Summary            Objectives             Funding Responsible Time Frame
                                                                Source  Entity
Housing and Neighborhood Quality
1. Residential        Ensure future      Develop and adopt      General Planning    In 2015
Design Guidelines development            Multi-Family Design    Fund    Department;
                      projects remain    Guidelines.                    Planning
                      compatible with                                   Commission
                      character and
                      setting of Mill
                      Valley.
2. Historic           Preserve and       Explore revising the   General Mill Valley Explore
Preservation          maintain historic  H-O Ordinance to       Fund    Historical  revisions to
Guidelines and        buildings in Mill  clarify demolition             Society;    Ordinance by
Incentives            Valley.            procedures and                 Planning    2016.
                                         process. Pursue                Department;
                                         attaining CLG status.          Planning
                                         Explore conducting             Commission
                                         formal survey of
                                         historic resources.
3. Housing            Maintain health    Publicize              General Planning    Complete 5
Maintenance and       and safety levels  rehabilitation         Fund;   Department  rehabilitation
Public                of building stock  assistance and         CDBG;               loans during
Information           and provide        energy retrofit        PG&E                2015-2023
                      assistance to      programs, with                             period.
                      income-qualifying  focused outreach to
                      households.        senior citizens.
                                         Provide rehabilitation
                                         assistance to five
                                         lower income
                                         households.
4. Regulations to     Conserve the       Implement City’s       General Planning    In 2015.
Preserve Existing     supply of existing Condo Conversion       Fund    Department;
Rental Housing        rental housing by  ordinance. Evaluate            Planning
                      restricting        use of objective and           Commission
                      conversions to     reliable data sources
                      condominium        to accurately assess
                      ownership, and     rental vacancy rates.
                      regulating tear    Clarify tear downs vs
                      downs and          renovations,
                      conversions to     evaluate incentives
                      non-residential    for property owners
                      use.               to maintain existing
                                         rental housing, and
                                         consider regulations
                                         on vacation rentals.
II. Housing Plan                                                                     Page II-34

                                                                                  May 4, 2015
Program            Summary           Objectives              Funding Responsible  Time Frame
                                                             Source  Entity
5. Preservation of Maintain          Continue to contract    General Planning     Ongoing.
Existing           affordable        with MHA to ensure      Fund    Department;
Affordable Rental  housing rental    compliance with                 Planning
Housing            stock.            affordability                   Commission
                                     restrictions. Require
                                     long-term
                                     affordability controls
                                     on future affordable
                                     housing units.
Housing Supply and Diversity
6. Mixed Use       Promote housing   Remove CUP for          General Planning     In 2015.
Zoning in          development in    multi-family and        Fund    Department;
Commercial         Commercial        mixed uses for                  Planning
Districts          districts, to     residential above               Commission;
                   realize infill    ground floor or off             City Council
                   potential.        commercial street
                                     frontage. Evaluate
                                     modifications to
                                     residential
                                     development
                                     regulations in
                                     Commercial districts.
7. Micro-          Provide an        Explore the feasibility General Planning     In 2015.
Apartment Units    alternative form  of encouraging and      Fund    Department;
                   of affordable     incentivizing micro-            Planning
                   housing through   apartment units.                Commission;
                   micro-apartment   To the extent                   City Council
                   units.            appropriate, develop
                                     standards for micro-
                                     apartment units.
8. Second Units    Support the       Continue to review      General Planning     Monitor
                   provision of      and refine the          Fund    Department;  progress in
                   second units as a second unit                     Planning     conjunction
                   means to provide  ordinance. Consider             Commission;  with Annual
                   housing for       regulations on short-           City Council Housing
                   seniors,          term rentals. Seek to                        Element
                   caregivers, and   create an average of                         progress
                   lower income      eight second units                           report.
                   households.       annually.                                    Evaluate
                                                                                  vacation rentals
                                                                                  in 2015.
9. Junior Second   Explore Junior    Evaluate, and as        General Planning     Evaluate and
Units              Second Units      appropriate, adopt      Fund    Department;  adopt
                   created through   standards to                    Planning     standards, as
                   repurposing of    facilitate Junior               Commission;  appropriate, by
                   underutilized     Second Units.                   City Council 2018.
                   space within
                   single-family
                   homes.
II. Housing Plan                                                                   Page II-35
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Program               Summary            Objectives              Funding Responsible  Time Frame
                                                                 Source  Entity
10. Affordable        Establish an       Coordinate with         General Planning     Define
Housing Overlay       Affordable         Redwoods' staff and     Fund    Department;  incentives and
                      Housing Overlay    Phase 2 Task Force to           Planning     adopt Overlay
                      to provide         define specific                 Commission   during 2015.
                      targeted           incentives for
                      incentives on      inclusion in
                      designated sites   Affordable Housing
                      to enhance the     Overlay for the
                      feasibility of     Redwoods site.
                      affordable
                      housing
                      development.
11. Lot               Facilitate the     Adopt lot               General Planning     In 2015.
Consolidation         consolidation of   consolidation           Fund    Department;
Incentives            small parcels to   incentives in                   Planning
                      enhance the        coordination with               Commission
                      viability of       Multi-family Design
                      affordable         Guidelines.
                      housing.
12. Publicly-         Allow and          Prepare inventory of    General Planning     In 2018.
Owned Land for        incentivize the    publicly-owned land.    Fund    Department;
Affordable            development of     Modify City’s zoning            Planning
Housing               affordable         regulations to allow            Commission;
                      housing on         residential uses in C-F         City Council
                      publicly-owned     zone.
                      land.
13. Non-              Explore non-       Modify Zoning           General Planning     In 2015.
Traditional           traditional        Ordinance to develop    Fund    Department;
Housing Types         housing types to   standards for new               Planning
                      allow a wider      housing typologies.             Commission;
                      variety of housing                                 City Council
                      types suited to
                      Mill Valley.
14. Maintain and      Ensure sites are   Conduct ongoing         General Planning     Ongoing
Monitor Capacity      available          monitoring to           Fund    Department;  monitoring of
in Sites Inventory    throughout the     ensure adequate                 Planning     sites adequacy
                      planning period    sites, and should               Commission;  in conjunction
                      to accommodate     potential shortfall             City Council with project
                      Mill Valley's      exist, redesignate                           applications.
                      RHNA.              additional sites as
                                         necessary.
Housing Affordability
15. Inclusionary      Enhance            Amend Ordinance to      General Planning     In 2015.
Housing               inclusionary       strengthen the          Fund    Department;
Regulations           housing            program’s                       Planning
                      regulations to     effectiveness in                Commission;
                      provide more       providing affordable            City Council
                      affordable         housing, and comply
                      housing.           with current case
                                         law.
II. Housing Plan                                                                       Page II-36

                                                                                    May 4, 2015
Program           Summary            Objectives             Funding    Responsible  Time Frame
                                                            Source     Entity
16. Single-Family Evaluate           Finalize nexus study   General    Planning     In 2015, in
Housing Impact    contribution to    regarding              Fund;      Department;  coordination
Fee               affordable         establishment of       Potential  Planning     with
                  housing from new   impact fee on single-  impact     Commission;  amendments to
                  single-family      family construction    fees from  City Council Inclusionary
                  construction.      and major additions.   single-                 Housing
                                     Integrate within       family                  Ordinance.
                                     updated Inclusionary   construct-
                                     Housing Program.       ion
17. Local         Facilitate         Establish a dedicated  Potential  Planning     Following
Affordable        construction of    Affordable Housing     Affordable Department;  update of
Housing Fund      affordable         Fund for deposit of    Housing    Planning     Inclusionary
                  housing by         in-lieu fee revenues,  Fund       Commission;  Housing
                  establishing an    including regulations. Revenues   City Council Ordinance in
                  Affordable                                                        2015.
                  Housing Fund.
18. Affordable    Facilitate         Provide financial and  General    Planning     Ongoing;
Housing           development of     regulatory incentives  Fund;      Department;  continue and
Development       affordable         to private developers  Potential  Planning     expand current
Assistance        housing by         for affordable         Affordable Commission;  practice.
                  providing          housing.               Housing    City Council
                  incentives for                            Fund
                  developers.                               Revenues
19. Partnerships  Partner with a     Work with Nonprofit    General    Planning     Beginning in
for Affordable    variety of         Housing Association    Fund;      Department   2015.
Housing           affordable         of Northern            Potential
                  housing providers  California to identify Affordable
                  to bring           and explore            Housing
                  affordable         partnerships with      Fund
                  housing to Mill    affordable housing     Revenues
                  Valley.            providers.
20. Homebuyer     Assist first-time  Continue               Federal    Planning     Ongoing;
Assistance        homebuyers in      participation with     funds      Department   maintain
                  Mill Valley        Marin Housing to                               current
                                     administer BMR and                             practice.
                                     MCC programs.
21. Section 8     Provide            Continue to offer      HUD        Planning     Ongoing; Begin
Rental Assistance assistance to very tenants information    Section 8  Department   outreach to
                  low income         regarding Section 8    funds                   landlords to
                  households         and encourage                                  register units
                  through Section 8  landlords to register                          starting 2015.
                  Rental Assistance. units with the
                                     program.
II. Housing Plan                                                                     Page II-37
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Program               Summary            Objectives              Funding    Responsible  Time Frame
                                                                 Source     Entity
Remove Governmental Constraints
22. Update            Define densities   Update residential      General    Planning     In 2015.
Zoning Code           for residential    development             Fund       Department;  Ongoing
Consistent with       uses with greater  standards consistent               Planning     monitoring of
Land Use              clarity for a more with 2040 General                  Commission;  sites adequacy
Element               transparent and    Plan. Monitor to                   City Council in conjunction
                      efficient          ensure adequate                                 with project
                      development        sites to address                                applications.
                      review process.    RHNA.
23. Update            Increase           Evaluate and            General    Planning     In 2015.
Parking               effectiveness of   establish modified      Fund       Department;
Standards             parking standards  parking standards in               Planning
                      by refining the    the Zoning Ordinance               Commission;
                      standards.         to facilitate specific             City Council
                                         types of housing.
24. Fee Deferrals     Provide            Provide information     General    Planning     Provide fee
and/or Waivers        information        to affordable housing   Fund;      Department;  information
for Affordable        regarding fee      community on fee        Potential  Planning     starting in2015.
Housing               waivers for        deferrals, reductions   Affordable Commission;  Adopt
                      affordable         and waivers. Adopt      Housing    City Council resolution for
                      housing, and       resolution to waive     Fund                    ELI fee waivers
                      specify fee        of 100% of              Revenues                in 2015.
                      waivers in the     application
                      Municipal Code.    processing fees for
                                         projects with 10% ELI
                                         units.
25. Density           Provide density    Implement local         General    Planning     Ongoing.
Bonus and Other       bonuses for        density bonus           Fund       Department;
Incentives for        qualified mixed    ordinance.                         Planning
Affordable            income projects,                                      Commission;
Housing               consistent with                                       City Council
                      State law.
26. CEQA              Utilize allowable  Continue to utilize     General    Planning     Ongoing;
Exemptions for        CEQA exemptions categorical CEQA           Fund       Department;  maintain
Infill Projects       for qualified      exemptions where                   Planning     current
                      urban infill and   appropriate, on a                  Commission;  practice.
                      other qualifying   case-by-case basis.                City Council
                      residential
                      projects.
Equal Housing Opportunities and Special Needs
27. Fair Housing      Continue to        Publicize the fair      General    Planning     Ongoing.
Program               promote and        housing program         Fund;      Department
                      further fair       through brochures       CDBG
                      housing practices  and the City’s
                      and outreach.      website.
28. Senior            Provide senior     Continue to provide     General    Parks and    Ongoing;
Support Services      services to help   senior services in Mill Fund       Recreation   maintain
                      seniors age in     Valley.                            Department   current
                      place.                                                             practice.
II. Housing Plan                                                                          Page II-38

                                                                                       May 4, 2015
Program             Summary              Objectives             Funding    Responsible Time Frame
                                                                Source     Entity
29. Home Sharing    Promote efficient    Support                General    Planning    Beginning in
and Tenant          use of housing       organizations that     Fund;      Department  2015.
Matching            stock and            facilitate housing     CDBG
Opportunities       addressing the       sharing; actively
                    housing needs of     promote through
                    seniors.             senior citizen
                                         organizations.
30. Universal       Facilitate the       Develop guidelines     General    Planning    In 2016.
Design/             retrofit of existing encouraging            Fund       Department;
Visitability        housing to           principles of                     Planning
                    provide and          universal design and              Commission
                    promote greater      visitability.
                    accessibility.
31. Homeless        Support              Support                General    Planning    Amend the
Assistance          Countywide           implementation of      Fund       Department  code in 2015.
                    programs to          the Homeless
                    address the needs    Countywide
                    of homeless          Continuum of Care,
                    persons and          publicize the Marin
                    those at risk of     Community Resource
                    becoming             Guide and
                    homeless.            emergency 211 call
                                         system. Amend Code
                                         Sections
                                         20.40.050.1.G4 and
                                         20.40.050.1.G5 as
                                         specified in Program
                                         #31.
Sustainability and Energy Efficiency
32. Prioritization  Prioritize           Prioritize projects in General    Planning    Ongoing.
of Sustainable      sustainable          sustainable locations  Fund;      Department
Housing Projects    housing              competing for funds    Potential
                    developments in      and grants.            Affordable
                    sustainable                                 Housing
                    locations for their                         Fund
                    numerous                                    Revenues
                    benefits.
33. Green           Promote green        Provide outreach and   General    Planning    Ongoing.
Building            building practices   education to           Fund       Department
                    for more             developers regarding
                    sustainable          CALGREEN and the
                    housing              Green Building
                    development          Ordinance. Evaluate
                    projects.            incentives for Green
                                         Building Ordinance
                                         for higher energy
                                         efficiency.
II. Housing Plan                                                                        Page II-39
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Program               Summary           Objectives             Funding Responsible  Time Frame
                                                               Source  Entity
34. Energy            Evaluate and      Implement actions      General Planning     Ongoing.
Conservation          implement         for energy efficiency  Fund    Department
                      activities to     identified in the 2040
                      support clean     General Plan.
                      energy and
                      energy efficiency
                      solutions in Mill
                      Valley’s housing.
35. Addressing        Maintain          Incorporate            General Planning     Ongoing.
Natural Hazards       consistency with  appropriate            Fund    Department
                      State law in the  references to the
                      General Plan with Floodplain
                      regards to flood  Management
                      hazards.          Ordinance in the
                                        2040 General Plan.
                                        Review Housing
                                        Element whenever
                                        General Plan
                                        amendments are
                                        made to ensure
                                        consistency.
Community and Governmental Collaboration
36. Community         Garner public     Provide education      General Planning     Ongoing;
Education and         support for       and outreach on        Fund    Department   maintain and
Outreach              implementation    housing issues, assist                      expand current
                      of Housing        prospective                                 practice.
                      Element and the   applicants, and
                      provision of      coordinate with
                      housing for all   interested groups.
                      economic
                      segments of the
                      community.
37. Housing           Maintain          Submit an annual       General Planning      Annually, by
Element               consistency with  report to HCD by       Fund    Department;  April 1st.
Monitoring/           State law and     April 1 of each year.          Building
Annual Report         access to State                                  Department;
                      housing funds by                                 City Council
                      annually
                      reporting to HCD.
38. Mill Valley       Support the       Establish Mill Valley  General Planning     In 2015.
Housing Advisory      effective         Housing Advisory       Fund    Department;
Committee             implementation    Committee in 2015,             City Council
                      of the Housing    define roles and
                      Element.          responsibilities.
II. Housing Plan                                                                     Page II-40

                                                                                                May 4, 2015
 Summary of Quantified Objectives
The following table summarizes the City’s quantified objectives for the 2015-2023 Housing
Element planning period. The objectives include the City’s new construction objectives to meet
its 2014-2022 RHNA; rehabilitation objectives to reflect Marin Housing’s Rehabilitation Loan
Program; and conservation objectives to reflect preservation of existing rent-restricted
affordable housing.
Table 2.2: Quantified Objectives for Mill Valley’s 2015-2023 Housing Element Period
Income Level                New Construction           Rehabilitation               Conservation
                            Objectives                 Objectives**                 Objectives***
Extremely Low*                         20                         2
(0% - 30% AMI)
                                                                                             177
Very Low                               21                         3
(31% - 50% AMI)
Low                                    24                         --
                                                                                             127
(51% - 80% AMI)
Moderate                               26                         --
                                                                                              4
(81% - 120% AMI)
Above Moderate                         38                         --
(>120% AMI)
Totals                                129                         5                          308
* Of Mill Valley’s RHNA allocation for 41 very low income units, half is allocated to extremely low income
households, and half to very low income households.
** Rehabilitation objectives are based on a goal to assist five households through Marin Housing’s
Rehabilitation Loan Program.
*** Conservation objectives reflect preservation of 308 existing rent-restricted units in publicly-assisted
projects owned by non-profits or the Marin Housing Authority, and affordable rental units provided
through the City’s inclusionary housing program.
II. Housing Plan                                                                                  Page II-41

                                                                                       May 4, 2015
III.      Housing Needs Summary
State Housing Element law requires that local governments adequately plan to meet existing
housing needs, including special housing needs, and projected housing needs. A complete
analysis of these needs is required and must include a quantification and descriptive analysis of
those needs, and the resources available to address them.
The Housing Needs Summary in this chapter is a summary of the needs analysis in Appendix A.
Chapter IV details the resources that Mill Valley has to address its housing needs.
A.        Existing Housing Needs
1.        Population and Employment Trends
Mill Valley has experienced only modest population growth over the past two decades, from
13,029 in 1990 to 13,903 in 2010 as recorded by the Census. However, the city’s demographic
and household characteristics have changed, illustrating shifts in the make-up of the population.
The community has evidenced a noticable increase in the families with children, which
comprises over 80 percent of the increase of over 200 families from 2000 to 2010.
Corresponding to this increase, the school age population (5-17 years) over the past decade has
grown to 18 percent of the population.
Young adults (25-44 years) have decreased from 28 to 20 percent of Mill Valley’s population
during the 2000-2010 period. Senior citizens (age 65+) continue to represent a growing segment
of the community, currently comprising 19 percent of Mill Valley residents, compared to just 15
percent a decade ago.
Two-thirds of Mill Valley’s resident workforce is employed in Management, Business, Science
and Arts occupations, with the majority employed outside of the County in urban centers such
as San Francisco and Oakland.
The employment base in Mill Valley (4,360 primary jobs within Mill Valley city limits) is
dominated by lower paying retail and service-related jobs, and given the shortage of local
affordable housing opportunities, has resulted in the vast majority of people who work in the
community being unable to live here.
III. Housing Needs Summary                                                               Page III-1

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
2.         Summary of Housing Needs
The summary of existing housing needs is organized into four areas: housing availability, housing
affordability, housing adequacy, and special needs households.
Housing Availability                                              Housing Affordability
Total Housing Units                        6,534                  Overpaying households (>30% of income on
                                                                  housing cost)
Total Occupied Units                       6,084
   - Owner Occupied                        3,974      65%         Renters                             780         37%
   - Renter Occupied                       2,110      35%           - Low Income Renters              607         66%2
                                                                      (<80% AMI)
Total Vacant Units                         450        6.9%        Owners                              1,709       43%
   - For rent                              100        1.5%          - Low Income Owners               490         71%2
    - Rented, not occupied                  15        0.2%            (<80% AMI)
    - For sale only                         47        0.7%
    - Sold, not occupied                    28        0.4%
    - Seasonal, recreational use           115        1.8%
    - All other vacant units               145        2.2%
Renter vacancy rate                                   4.5%1
Homeowner vacancy rate                                1.2%1
Housing Adequacy                                                  Special Needs Households/Persons
Overcrowded households (>1.01 persons/room)                       Senior Households (65+)                1,822         30%
   Renter                                 89        4.2%3           - Senior Homeowners                  1,331        73%4
   Owner                                  25        0.6%3           - Senior Renters                       491        27%4
                                                                    - Seniors Living Alone                 888        49%4
                                                                  Disabled Persons                       1,562        12%5
Estimated Units in Need of Rehabilitation                         Female-Headed Families                   465        7.6%
   Renter                                 425       20%           Large Households (5+ ppl)                305        5.0%
   Owner                                  320       8%            Homeless Persons                            3         1%
                                                                  Farmworkers                                18       0.3%
Sources: 2000 and 2010 Census data; American Community Survey 2006-2010; HUD Comprehensive Housing
Affordability Strategy Data Book.
Notes: Please see Appendix A for notes and explanations on numbers and percentages
1.         Per 2010 Census, rental vacancy rate is calculated by dividing total number of vacant units “for rent” by sum
           of renter-occupied units, vacant units for rent, and vacant units rented but not occupied, x 100. The Census
           computes homeowner vacancy rate using a similar methodology.
2.         This percentage is of all low income renters or low income owners, respectively.
3.         These percentages are based on American Community Survey data, applied to 2010 Census households.
4.         These percentages are of all senior households in 2010.
5.         This percentage is based on the 2000 Census population over 5 years old.
III. Housing Needs Summary                                                                                     Page III-2

                                                                                          May 4, 2015
3.        Housing Availability
The 2010 Census documents a total of 6,534 housing units in Mill Valley, reflecting a net
increase in approximately 400 units over the past two decades, or an average of 20 units/year.
The proportion of owner (65%) and renter (35%) households has remained unchanged during
this period.
During the most recent decade, Mill Valley has seen a net loss in over 100 multi-family units,
whereas a net increase in over 300 single-family detached and attached homes were developed.
The decline in multi-family housing is concentrated among smaller properties with two to four
units.
As measured by the 2010 Census, the residential vacancy rate in Mill Valley was 1.2 percent for
ownership units and 4.5 percent for rental units, and indication that vacancies are slightly below
ideal levels for normal resident turn over.
Second units and affordable housing developments are integral components of Mill Valley’s
affordable housing stock. 89 building permits were issued for new second units from 2000-2010,
and 74 previously unpermitted second units were legalized and brought up to code from 2002-
2003 through the City’s second unit amnesty program. There are eight rental housing
developments owned by non-profits or the Marin Housing Authority, providing 301 units
affordable to lower income families, seniors and persons living with disabilities. The City’s
Inclusionary Housing Ordinance also resulted in the integration of 38 affordable rental and
ownership units within market rate developments. Eight of these units were approved and built
in the last decade, with three more units to be built.
4.        Housing Affordability
Market rents in Mill Valley are well beyond the level of affordability for very low and low income
(<80% AMI) households. The 2014 rent survey documents average apartment rents of $2,500 for
one bedroom and $2,850 for two bedroom units, translating to an affordability gap ranging from
$800 to $950 per month depending on household size. Lower income occupations which may be
constrained in finding appropriate housing in Mill Valley (depending on willingness to share a
unit or live in lower cost rentals) include elementary school teachers, graphic designers, and
transit bus drivers.
With a median single-family sales price of $1.5 million (2014), single-family home prices in Mill
Valley are well beyond the reach of moderate income households (120% AMI). Condominiums,
however, do provide an affordable homeownership option for many moderate income
households. Expanding the supply of condominiums, combined with downpayment assistance
programs and inclusionary housing requirements, may be an effective strategy to extend
affordable homeownership opportunities to households earning moderate incomes.
Housing overpayment among lower income households is high, with 70 percent of both lower
income owners and lower income renters spending greater than 30 percent of their incomes
towards housing. The level of overpayment is defined as the expenditure of more than 30
III. Housing Needs Summary                                                                 Page III-3

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
percent of gross household income on housing. By this standard, 37% of renters and 43% of
owners in Mill Valley overpay for housing.
The community’s special needs populations – seniors, persons with disabilities, and female-
headed households with children – are particularly vulnerable to losing their housing due to an
inability to pay.
As previously stated, second units, affordable housing developments, and inclusionary units
represent an important segment of Mill Valley’s affordable housing stock. The Housing Element
proposes a program to preserve or replace any such units “at-risk” of conversion.
The waiting list at each of these affordable housing developments is long. Additional indications
of the general shortage of affordable housing in the area include over 160 Mill Valley
households on the waiting list for Section 8 rental subsidies.
5.         Housing Adequacy
High property values and a strong sense of neighborhood pride have contributed to ongoing
upkeep and renovation of the housing stock. Nonetheless, given that half of Mill Valley’s
housing is more than 50 years old, combined with a sizable senior population who may face
difficulties maintaining their homes as they age, both code enforcement and housing
rehabilitation programs continue to be important.
Despite the advanced age of the housing stock, problems with property maintenance and
housing deterioration have not been an issue thus far in Mill Valley. In terms of developing a
general estimate of the number of units in need of rehabilitation in Mill Valley, the City used the
following approach. Using 30 years as the benchmark when residential structures begin
requiring major systems replacement or repair, units built prior to 1980 can be considered as
potential candidates for rehabilitation needs. Of Mill Valley’s approximately 1,700 pre-1980
rental units, an estimated 25 percent, or 425 units, may require some degree of rehabilitation.
Among the city’s 3,300 pre-1980 owner units, an estimated ten percent, or 330 units, may be in
need of rehabilitation. No units have been identified as needing replacement.
Less than one percent of owner households in Mill Valley are considered overcrowded (>1.01
persons per room), with 25% of these households meeting the definition of severe overcrowding
(>1.51 occupants per room). The incidence of overcrowding is more prevalent among Mill
Valley’s renter households, with 4.2 percent overcrowded; none of these households are
severely overcrowded. Overall, household overcrowding remains a relatively minor issue in Mill
Valley.
6.         Special Needs Households
Special housing needs cater to specific demographic or occupational groups, which call for
specific program responses, such as the preservation or development of housing units of certain
types or sizes. Housing Element statute specifically requires the analysis of the special housing
needs of the elderly, disabled, female-headed households, large families, farmworkers, and
homeless persons and families.
III. Housing Needs Summary                                                                 Page III-4

                                                                                            May 4, 2015
a.        Seniors
Seniors are the largest special needs group in Mill Valley, comprising 30 percent of all
households. Some of their more pressing housing needs include:
       Rental affordability – about three-quarters of Mill Valley’s approximately 500 senior
          renter households are lower income, with one-quarter extremely low income;
       Housing accommodations for disabilities – 31 percent of Mill Valley’s seniors have one
          or more disabilities, including physical, sensory and mental, and conditions that limit the
          ability to leave their home;
       Housing maintenance – about one-third of Mill Valley’s approximately 1,300 senior
          homeowners live alone, and may be unable to maintain their homes or perform minor
          repairs as they age.
Lower income seniors often cannot afford the cost of licensed facilities in assisted living. On top
of basic rent, personalized care is an additional cost for the senior population. Two residential
care facilities are currently available in Mill Valley: Redwoods (150 apartment units) and Marin
Terrace (49 units).
Diverse strategies which foster independent living such as accessibility improvements, second
units, shared housing, rehabilitation assistance), and strategies to encourage the provision of a
variety of supportive living environments for seniors of all income levels, will be required to
address the needs of seniors in Mill Valley, including Programs #27 (Fair Housing Program), #28
(Senior Support Services), #29 (Home Sharing and Tenant Matching Opportunities), and other
programs to encourage the development of affordable housing in Mill Valley.
b.        Persons with Disabilities
Many individuals with a disability (mental, physical, or developmental) live on a small fixed
income, limiting their ability to pay for housing. Persons with disability need affordable,
conveniently-located housing which, where necessary, has been or can be specially adapted to
address accessibility issues and with on- or off-site support services including
outpatient/inpatient day treatment programs.
Approximately 1,500 Mill Valley residents (12%) are living with a disability, a number that will
likely increase as the population continues to age. The design and affordability of housing,
modifications to improve accessibility, proximity to services and transit, and group living
opportunities represent some of the considerations important in serving this need group.
Both the federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act require
Mill Valley to make reasonable accommodations (i.e. modifications or exceptions) in zoning and
land use regulations to afford disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling. Mill Valley has reviewed its zoning laws and policies for compliance, and makes related
information available to the public through handouts and notices published in the planning and
City Council agendas.
Program #30 (Universal Design/Visitability) specifically facilitates the retrofit of existing housing
to provide and promote greater accessibility.
III. Housing Needs Summary                                                                   Page III-5

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
c.         Large Households
Due to the limited supply of adequately sized units to accommodate larger households, defined
as households with five or more persons, large families often face significant difficulty in locating
adequately-sized, affordable housing.
The 2010 Census documents 305 large households, representing five percent of all households
in Mill Valley. 20 percent of these households earn lower incomes. The 2000 Census identified
298 rental units in Mill Valley with three or more bedrooms, which is the appropriately-sized
unit for a large household. In comparison, the city has only 57 large renter households per
Census data, indicating that Mill Valley has an adequate supply of rental units suitable for the
city’s large families. However, market rents for a 3-bedroom rental unit exceed the level of
affordability for lower income large family households. As this is not a significant special needs
group in Mill Valley, the Housing Element focuses more broadly on addressing the housing
needs of families with children, which comprise over 30 percent of the city’s households.
d.         Single-parent and Female-headed Households
Female-headed households generally have lower-incomes and higher living expenses and could
lack the resources needed for adequate child care or job training services, often making the
search for affordable, decent and safe housing more difficult.
The 2010 Census identified 465 female-headed householders in family households with no
husband present, which is 7.6 percent of all Mill Valley households. Nearly 60 percent of these
female-headed families (276 households) included children under the age of 18. The American
Community Survey estimates that 4.6 percent of Mill Valley’s female-headed households with
children were living in poverty, compared to a 1.2 percent poverty rate for all families with
children. While this special needs group is limited in number, there are critical needs for
assistance through housing subsidies, and accessible and affordable day care.
e.         Homeless Persons
Homelessness in California is a continuing and growing crisis affecting almost one in every 100
California residents. Homeless individuals and families are without permanent housing largely
due to a lack of affordable housing and often compounded by a lack of job training and
supportive services related to mental illness, substance abuse or domestic violence. Pursuant to
Senate Bill 2, the Housing Element is required to provide a detailed analysis of the homeless
population, and quantification of the need for emergency shelters, as well as the identification
of a zoning district that will allow emergency shelters as a permitted use.
The Marin Point in Time Homeless Count in January 2013 identified three homeless persons in
Mill Valley on the day of the count, therefore creating an unmet need for three emergency
shelter beds.
Program #31 (Homeless Assistance) supports Countywide programs to address the needs of
homeless persons and those at risk of becoming homeless.
f.         Farmworkers
Farmworkers are traditionally defined as persons whose primary incomes are earned through
permanent or seasonal agricultural labor. Farmworkers have special housing needs due to their
limited income and the often unstable nature of their employment. In addition, farmworker
III. Housing Needs Summary                                                                  Page III-6

                                                                                         May 4, 2015
households tend to have high rates of poverty; live disproportionately in housing which is in the
poorest condition; have very high rates of overcrowding; have low homeownership rates; and
are predominately members of minority groups.
The 2006-2010 American Community Survey identified only 18 Mill Valley residents employed in
the industries of agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting and mining, representing 0.3% of the
city’s labor force. Given the limited presence of this special needs group, the City of Mill Valley
plans to provide for this group through the overall programs targeted at housing affordability.
B.        Future Housing Needs
Housing Element law requires the documentation of projections and quantification of the Mill
Valley’s existing and projected housing needs for all income levels. These projected needs must
include Mill Valley’s share of the regional housing need.
This “fair share” allocation concept is also known as the Regional Housing Allocation (RHNA). It is
a state-mandated process that determines the amount of future housing growth each city and
county must plan for in their housing elements. The process is administered by the California
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), while the methodology and
assigned share to each jurisdiction is developed by the Association of Bay Area Governments
(ABAG). A fair share allocation is given to each jurisdiction every planning period or cycle, which
is approximately every seven or eight years.
The process seeks to ensure that each jurisdiction accepts responsibility for the housing needs
of not only its resident population, but also for the jurisdiction’s projected share of regional
housing growth across all income categories.
1.        The 2007-2014 and 2014-2022 RHNA Cycles
Table 3-2 below shows Mill Valley’s RHNA for the current (2014-2022) Housing Element planning
period in comparison to the 2007-2014 RHNA. In the previous Housing Element update process,
the City consulted with State HCD. Based on their suggestions, the City incorporated certain long
term actions for the future 2014-2022 Housing Element cycle within the 2009-2014 Element due
to the short timeframe between the October 2013 adoption and the start of the next RHNA
cycle in 2014. In setting the approach to meet the 2007-2014 RHNA, the City has also set a solid
foundation to meet the lower RHNA presented in the 2014-2022 cycle.
                            Table 3-2: 2007-2014 and 2014-2022 RHNA
             Income Level            Percent of AMI        2007-2014       2014-2022
             Very Low                      <50%                74              41
             Low                          51-80%               54              24
             Moderate                    81-120%               68              26
             Above Moderate               >120%                96              38
             Total                                            292             129
III. Housing Needs Summary                                                                 Page III-7

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Since the RHNA is not cumulative between planning periods (except in the instance where an
unaccommodated housing need triggers a RHNA carry over), the residential sites inventory may
be utilized to address Mill Valley’s RHNA needs for each planning period. As long as identified
residential sites remain available for development and the zoning remains in place, sites may be
carried forward to future Housing Element cycles.
The City’s goal is to continue to provide adequate residential sites zoned at appropriate
densities to address Mill Valley’s RHNA by income category for both the current and future
planning periods.
III. Housing Needs Summary                                                               Page III-8

                                                                                           May 4, 2015
IV.      Housing Resources
An important component of the Housing Element is the identification of sites for future housing
development, and an evaluation of the adequacy of these sites in fulfilling the City’s regional
housing needs allocation (RHNA). This “Housing Resources” chapter describes the resources
available for development, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing in Mill Valley, including
sites for new housing; financial and administrative resources available to facilitate housing
production and housing-related services; and opportunities for energy conservation in existing
and new residential development as a means of reducing housing costs.
A.       Accommodating 2014-2022 RHNA
The Mill Valley Housing Element Update aims to meet State mandates, achieve California
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) certification, and also reflect the
values and desires of the community.
Housing Element law requires local governments to adequately plan to meet their existing and
project housing needs, including their share of the regional housing need. HCD recommends
that jurisdictions identify enough residential capacity within their boundaries that is above and
beyond the required housing numbers identified in each RHNA cycle, to help offset sites that
may be developed at lower densities than identified in the capacity analysis. A healthy buffer
above the required RHNA therefore demonstrates a “margin of safety”.
Mill Valley has developed a realistic approach to the identification of sites suitable for housing
development and at appropriate densities, within the 2014-2022 RHNA cycle to accommodate
the City’s identified need for 129 units.
As shown in Table 4.1, an adequate number of new housing units have been identified to satisfy
the 2014-2022 RHNA cycle. The Housing Needs Analysis documented in Table 4.1 includes: a)
units in projects issued building permits in 2014, or with project entitlements; b) potential sites
with additional capacity as outlined in the Capacity Analysis in Appendix C; and c) projected new
second units. This table will be updated in the next Housing Element Update to reflect actual
new units that were built/permitted/approved through the entire 2014-2022 RHNA cycle.
IV. Housing Resources                                                                        Page IV-1

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Table 4.1: Mill Valley’s 2014-2022 Housing Needs Analysis
                                      Very Low       Low        Moderate     Above Mod
               Income Levels            (<50%      (51-80%      (81-120%       (>120%          Total
                                         AMI)        AMI)         AMI)          AMI)
          RHNA                            41          24            26           38             129
  A       Units in Projects with
          Building Permits Issued
          in 2014, or with
          Planning Entitlements
                 Second Units*             3           3             2            -              8
                 Single-Family             -           -             -            3              3
                 Units
                 Multi-Family              -           -             4           23             27
                 Units
          Total New Units                  3           3             6           26             38
          Permitted or Entitled
  B       Potential new units
          identified in the
          Capacity Analysis
                 RS                        -           -             -           30             30
                 RM                       20          20             -            -             40
                 C-N/C-G/C-R/P-A          60          60             3            -             123
          Total New Units                 80          80             3           30             193
          Projected based on Site
          Capacity Analysis and
          Existing Residential
          Zoning
  C       Additional Projected            22          25            14            3             64
          Second Units (2015-
          2022)*
           GRAND TOTAL (A+B+C)           105          108           23           59             295
          Remaining Need /                -64         -84            3           -21           -166
          Unaccommodated
          RHNA
* Affordability based on Mill Valley’s 2014 second unit survey, which documents 35 percent of Second
Units are affordable to very low Income; 39 percent are rented at the low income level; 22 percent are
rented at the moderate income level; and 4 percent are rented at levels suitable for above moderate
income households.
See details below for further explanation of numbers provided in Table 4.1.
IV. Housing Resources                                                                        Page IV-2

                                                                                                          May 4, 2015
1.         Units in Projects with Building Permits Issued in 2014, or with Project Entitlements
Residential projects issued building permits in 2014, as well as projects with planning
entitlements that have not yet pulled a building permit, are credited towards Mill Valley's 2014-
2022 RHNA1. As indicated in Table 4.2 below, the City has permitted/entitled eight second units,
three single-family units, and 27 multi-family units which will contribute towards addressing the
City's future regional housing needs. Mill Valley's 2014 second unit rent survey provides the
basis for assigning affordability to the approved second units. Affordability for the approved
multi-family units is based on inclusionary requirements (542 Miller) and rents for comparably
sized units (862 Blithdale).
Table 4.2: Residential Projects Issued Building Permits or with Entitlements in 2014
                                                                               Income Level
Unit Type                          Total Units
                                                      Very Low            Low           Moderate Above Mod
Second Units                             8                 3                 3              2                 -
Single-family                            3                 -                 -              -                 3
Multi-family
                 542 Miller             16                 -                 -              3                13
                 500 Miller              9                 -                 -              -                 9
              862 Blithdale              2                 -                 -              1                 1
                Total Units
                                        38                 3                 3              6                26
      Permitted/Entitled
2.         Site Capacity within Existing Residential Zoning
Housing Element law requires Housing Elements to include a detailed land inventory and
analysis of properties to identify sites that can be developed for housing within the planning
period, noting zoning and general plan designations, size and existing uses; general analysis of
environmental constraints and the availability of infrastructure, and the evaluation of the
suitability, availability and realistic development capacity of sites.
All parcels in the city were reviewed to identify sites that would be realistic candidates for infill
residential development, to fulfill the RHNA. To ensure a meaningful analysis, a list of criteria
was developed to identify only properties that had realistic development potential. Please see
Appendix C for the list of criteria and details for identified sites.
a.         Default Density
“Default density” is a feature of state law and is a very important component of the
methodology for the capacity analysis. The RHNA is divided into different income levels, as a
jurisdiction needs to show its intent to provide housing for households of various income levels
(the Association of Bay Area Governments, or ABAG, determines the calculation methodology
and number of units per income category).
1
  Projects which were issued building permits prior to 2014, but which are under construction in 2014 (such as the
four unit Aloha Lofts), are credited towards the City's progress in meeting its 2007-2014 RHNA (see Table D.2 under
Appendix D).
IV. Housing Resources                                                                                       Page IV-3

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
In order to assess this from a planning perspective, a “default density” is assigned to determine
the number of units that could be counted in individual income categories. Generally speaking,
the higher the potential density of a site, the more affordable the resultant development will be
and the lower the income level it will be assigned to. Default density is therefore used for the
purpose of assessing whether a jurisdiction is able to meet its RHNA, but actual development
circumstances may vary.
Pursuant to Housing Element statutes, sites in Mill Valley with zoning designations that allow
residential development at a density of at least 20 dwelling units per acre (du/ac) are
categorized as affordable to very low and low-income households. Sites with unit potentials of
at least 10 du/ac but less than 20 du/ac are considered affordable to moderate income
households, and sites with unit potentials lower than 10 du/ac are considered affordable to
above-moderate income households only.
b.         Residentially Zoned Sites
A review of all parcels within the city with residential zoning in place in the Single-Family
Residential, Multiple Family, Planned Single-Family Residential, Residential Planned, and
Planned Multi-Family Residential Districts (RS, RM, RSP, RP, RMP respectively) currently yields a
total of 32 parcels that are considered good candidates for infill residential development. On
these parcels, it is estimated that 70 new residential units could be built in the future under
existing zoning regulations.
c.         Commercially Zoned Sites
Mill Valley’s existing zoning regulations allow for residential uses in certain commercially zoned
districts, including the General Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial, Commercial Recreation,
and Professional Administrative Office Districts (C-G, C-N, C-R, and P-A respectively). This form
of mixed-use infill development is an ideal way for the City to utilize its existing stock of parcels
currently served by existing roads and utilities. Residents next to or over ground floor
commercial provide passive security for the area, provide a built-in customer base, and create
increased activity and vitality within commercial areas. This form of traditional mixed-use
enhances the historic development pattern found in the commercial areas of Mill Valley where a
number of apartments and flats exist above and next to street level retail spaces.
24 parcels in the Commercial zoning districts were identified as good candidates for mixed-use
development. It is estimated that 123 new residential units could be built in the future on these
sites under existing zoning regulations. Some sites could potentially support the addition of new
residences above existing buildings, or the reconfiguration of parking to allow for residential
development, or a complete redevelopment of the site.
Table 4.3: Summary of Capacity Analysis for 2015-2023 Planning Period
                        Zoning Districts         Number of Parcels        Potential Unit Capacity
Residential             All RS, RSP, RP, RM,              32                           70
                        RMP
Commercial              C-G, C-N, C-R, P-A                24                          123
                                           Total          56                          193
More detailed information about the capacity analysis can be found in Appendix C.
IV. Housing Resources                                                                       Page IV-4

                                                                                         May 4, 2015
3.       Second Dwelling Units
Second units are small, self-contained dwelling units that provide a kitchen, bathroom and
sleeping area. The unit can be attached to the main home with a separate entrance or can be a
small detached unit located in the rear yard or above a garage. Because of their small size,
second units typically rent for less than apartments, and can provide affordable rental options
for smaller households, and can provide rental income for the homeowner.
Second units are an integral segment of Mill Valley's housing stock, comprising an estimated 550
units, including 88 new units permitted in the prior 2007-2013 Housing Element RHNA cycle, and
an additional eight permitted in 2014. In order to obtain information on the use and rent
structure of second units in the community, the City mailed a survey to 416 property owners
identified as having a legal second unit on their property. A total of 117 completed surveys
were received from respondents with a second unit, with 100 of these respondents providing
information on the rent charged for their unit. As presented in Table 4.4 below, 35 percent of
rents were within the level affordable to very low income households, 39 percent were
affordable to low income households, 22 percent were affordable to moderate income
households, and four percent were at levels affordable to above moderate income households.
(refer to Appendix E for the complete Second Unit Survey report).
              Table 4.4: Second Unit Rents and Affordability - 2014 Mill Valley Survey
                                           # Survey         % of Qualifying Affordability
     Rent Range                         Responses           total                      Level
     Utilities only                               1
     $0/No rent charged                          28          35%           Very Low Income
     $400-$700                                    6
     $701-$1,000                                 16
     $1,001-$1,300                               14          39%                Low Income
     $1,301-$1,500                                9
     $1,501-$1,800                               12          22%          Moderate Income
     Over $1,800 (1 bdrm)                        10
     Over $1,800 (2 bdrm)                         4            4%          Above Moderate
     Total                                      100
Given Mill Valley's strong track record in providing second units, combined with the continued
capacity to provide such units, the City’s objective will be to achieve the creation of an average
of eight new units per year, for a total of 64 units during the 2015-2023 planning period. The
affordability of the projected 64 second units is based on rent levels from the City’s survey as
presented in Table 4.4.
4.       Residential Development Potential and RHNA
The City’s approved and built units, together with its residential development potential shown in
Table 4.1 and Table 4.5, demonstrate that the City has provided sufficient sites to address its
2014-2022 RHNA of 129 units, as well as the affordability targets established by the RHNA,
IV. Housing Resources                                                                     Page IV-5

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
therefore leaving no remaining housing need. The City aims to further encourage the production
of affordable housing through the programs contained in Chapter 2.
Table 4.5: Comparison of RHNA to Total Built Units and Zoning Potential
                                      Very Low   Low      Moderate Above Mod
             Income Levels             (<50%   (51-80%     (81-120%       (>120%        Total
                                        AMI)     AMI)        AMI)          AMI)
  RHNA                                    41       24          26            38          129
  Total Projected Units:                105      108           23            59          295
  Projects with
  Permits/Entitlements;
  Capacity Analysis/Existing
  Residential Zoning; and
  Additional Second Units in
  2015-2022
  Remaining Need/                        -64      -84           3           -21         -166
  Unaccommodated RHNA
IV. Housing Resources                                                                 Page IV-6
                                                                                            May 4, 2015
B.       Availability of Infrastructure and Public Services
Mill Valley is an established community, and new developments on land designated for
residential use can be easily connected to the existing infrastructure systems for power, sewer,
storm drains, water pipes, and other utilities. The Mill Valley Refuse Service provides residential
and commercial garbage collection to Mill Valley and several other surrounding communities in
Marin County. Water is provided by the Marin Municipal Water District, which obtains 75% of its
water from rainfall collected in Marin reservoirs. The Marin Municipal Water District laid out its
most recent Urban Water Management Plan in 2011, which considered population projections
and does not anticipate any shortfall in its ability to provide water to its service areas.
Mill Valley is served by The Sewerage Agency of Southern Marin for wastewater treatment
services. Mill Valley’s sewer system is aging, as most of the city’s pipes were installed over 50
years ago, primarily three to four-foot sections of vitrified clay pipe, which are therefore brittle
and with many connecting joints, which are susceptible to intrusion from groundwater and tree
roots. Street debris has also impeded flow and caused sewage to overflow into the public street.
A major spill in 2008 resulted in 2.5 million gallons of sewage into Pickleweed Inlet in Richardson
Bay, resulting in $1.6 million in fines from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The City
was required to implement a sewage spill reduction plan, which has reduced sewage overflows
by 68 percent since 2008. The City was also required to clean its sewers on a five-year cycle, and
mandated a citywide inspection of its pipes. A partial survey focused on high-risk zones with a
higher density of housing and pipes that have not been fixed recently showed a variety of
defects in the system, estimating the total repair cost at $13 million. The City had been spending
$550,000 a year on sewer system repairs.
In response, Mill Valley’s City Council approved a plan in 2012 to raise approximately $2.4
million a year to fix its aging sewer system, and shifted to a “flow-based” system to charge users
based on the amount of water consumed and therefore discharged into sewers. Continued
efforts have been pursued by the City to repair and strengthen its sewer system. Recent rate
increases have been implemented in order to continue to upgrade the collection system and the
treatment facilities and process. System upgrades will improve the efficiency and capacity of the
Sewerage Agency of Southern Marin treatment plant. Collection system or treatment plant
capacity has not been identified as a constraint on future development consistent with the
Housing Element or the General Plan.
IV. Housing Resources                                                                        Page IV-7

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
C.         Financial Resources
The ability of the City of Mill Valley to achieve its housing goals and objectives will, to a large
extent, depend on the financial resources that are available to the City and its residents. The list
below summarizes major sources of such funding at the local and State levels.
1.         Local Programs
Affordable Housing Fund
Chapter 2 of the Housing Element establishes a new program to establish a Mill Valley
Affordable Housing Fund that will be used to construct or help leverage construction of
affordable housing. Potential Housing Fund resources include, but are not limited to: in-lieu
fees from the Inclusionary Housing Program; a potential affordable housing impact fee on single-
family development; and in-lieu fees on condominium conversions. Implementing regulations
will be established to manage the Fund and establish parameters for allocation of funds towards
projects.
Marin Workforce Housing Trust
The Marin Workforce Housing Trust is a public/private partnership that has been created to
meet the challenges of housing affordability for workers in Marin County. Through a revolving
loan fund, the Trust provides low‐interest rate loans to nonprofit and for‐profit developers who
are constructing homes affordable to lower income families, as well as special needs
populations. Every dollar that is contributed to the Housing Trust is matched by both the Marin
Community Foundation and the County of Marin, thereby tripling the value of each donation.
Marin County Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
Mill Valley is a participating city in Marin County’s Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
program, and thus income qualified residents are eligible for participation in several of the
County’s CDBG programs, including the Residential Rehabilitation Loan Program.
Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC)
The Marin County Community Development Agency administers the MCC Program for first-time
homebuyers. This program operates as a federal income tax credit, reducing the potential
federal income tax liability of the borrower, in effect creating additional net spendable income
that a borrower may use towards the monthly mortgage payment. A first-time homebuyer may
convert a portion (currently 20%) of their annual mortgage interest into a direct income tax
credit on their income tax return for the life of the loan.
2.         State Programs
The State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) administers more than
20 programs that award loans and grants for the construction, acquisition, rehabilitation and
preservation of affordable rental and ownership housing. Most of these programs award points
for jurisdictions with an adopted housing element found in substantial compliance by HCD. The
following highlights several of the State’s programs with potential relevance in Mill Valley:
IV. Housing Resources                                                                      Page IV-8

                                                                                         May 4, 2015
Local Housing Trust Fund Grant Matching Program (LHTF)
State funding is available to assist existing and new Local Housing Trust Funds (LHTFs). The State
will provide matching grant funds to LHTFs. Approved activities include development of
affordable multi‐family rental and ownership housing and emergency shelters. New Local
Housing Trust Funds that are in a county with a population of less than 425,000 persons are
given priority in each round of funding, making activities funded through Mill Valley’s Affordable
Housing Fund eligible for priority funding.
Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods (BEGIN) Program
BEGIN provides grants to cities and counties which then make deferred-payment, second
mortgage loans to qualified first-time low and moderate-income homebuyers of new homes, in
projects where affordability is enhanced by local regulatory incentives or barrier reductions.
Infill Incentive Grant (IIG) Program
This State program assists by providing grants to qualifying infill projects and areas, in the new
construction and rehabilitation of infrastructure that supports higher-density affordable and
mixed-income housing in such infill locations.
Housing Related Parks Program
Provides financial incentives to jurisdictions who construct new units affordable to very low and
low income households. Grants may be used for the creation of new parks, or rehabilitation or
improvements to existing parks.
HOME Investment Partnership Programs (HOME)
The HOME Program provides grants to cities, counties, and Community Housing Development
Organizations (CHDOs) for housing rehabilitation, new construction, and acquisition and
rehabilitation for both single‐family and multi‐family housing projects serving lower income
renters and owners.
Housing Enabled by Local Partnership (HELP) Program, California Housing Finance Agency
The HELP Program and the Residential Development Loan Program (RDLP) offer reduced rate
loans to local government entities for locally determined affordable housing activities and
priorities (acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, single‐family homeownership, or
preservation of multi‐family and special needs units).
Multifamily Housing Program (MHP)
Provides deferred payment loans to assist the new construction, rehabilitation and preservation
of permanent and transitional rental housing for lower income households. The conversion of
non-residential structures to rental housing are also eligible.
IV. Housing Resources                                                                      Page IV-9

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
D.         Administrative Resources
The Bay Area is home to numerous nonprofit housing developers who have produced thousands
of high-quality affordable housing projects over the past 40 years. These non-profit agencies can
serve as resources in helping Mill Valley to address its housing needs, and in the implementation
of its Housing Element programs. Several non-profits already have a track record of producing
and managing affordable housing in Mill Valley, including EAH, BRIDGE Housing and Mercy
Housing.
The Ecumenical Association for Housing (EAH) is a well-known affordable housing non-profit
developer with projects in Marin County and the western United States. In 2009, EAH Housing
joined Interfaith Housing Foundation (IHF) to renovate and extend affordability at the 75 unit
Shelter Hill family apartments in Mill Valley.
Bridge Housing is one of the largest affordable housing developers in the State, having produced
over 13,000 units since its founding in San Francisco over two decades ago. The City of Mill
Valley has partnered with BRIDGE by providing ground leases on City-owned land to realize the
development of the 32 unit Pickleweed and 17 unit Alto Station family apartments.
Mercy Housing is a national housing organization involved in the development, preservation,
management and financing of affordable housing for low-income families, seniors and people
with special needs. In Mill Valley, Mercy provides 24 units of service-enriched housing for
persons with disabilities at Camino Alto Apartments.
 The Marin Housing Authority (MHA) owns and manages two affordable senior housing
developments in Mill Valley – Homestead Terrace and Kruger Pines. The City also contracts with
MHA to monitor deed restricted affordable rental and ownership housing provided through the
City’s inclusionary housing program.
The Nonprofit Housing Association of Northern California (NPH) serves as a local networking
agency, advocacy group and resource organization for affordable housing developers in the Bay
Area. In addition, the recently incorporated Mill Valley Village can also serve as a resource to
the City in implementing its senior-oriented housing programs.
E.         Opportunities for Energy Conservation
Housing Element statutes require an analysis of opportunities for energy conservation with
respect to residential development. Planning to maximize energy efficiency and the
incorporation of energy conservation and green building features can contribute to reduced
housing costs for homeowners and renters, in addition to promoting sustainable community
design and reduced dependence on vehicles. Such planning and development standards can also
significantly contribute to reducing greenhouse gases.
The Housing Element sets forth Goal 6 “promote a healthy and sustainable Mill Valley through
support of existing and new housing which minimizes reliance on natural resources and
automobile use,” (see Housing Programs #32-Sustainable Housing Projects; #33-Green Building;
IV. Housing Resources                                                                     Page IV-10

                                                                                             May 4, 2015
and #34 Energy Conservation for details). along with a series of policies and implementing
programs, to specifically address residential energy efficiency and sustainability (see below).
The Housing Element also identified additional sites as part of the Capacity Analysis (Appendix
C), identifying sites based on sustainability criteria, including solar access, walkability and access
to amenities (1/4 mile). See C-7 for details.
1.       Sustainability Policies and Practices in Mill Valley
The City of Mill Valley has a long-standing commitment and track record in environmental and
sustainable policies and initiatives. The City hired a Sustainability Director in 2008 to provide
leadership and coordination services for the City’s sustainability efforts. Mill Valley’s City Green
Committee, composed of representatives from each of the City’s departments, was originally
formed in 2007 to incorporate environmental practices into City operations and the community
as a whole. City Green continues to meet regularly to determine the most effective
sustainability measures to advance in the city, and encourages ongoing and effective flow of
communication throughout the city relative to sustainability initiatives. The City website
provides extensive information on sustainability and energy efficiency practices and initiatives, a
sampling of which include:
      Community Outreach and Education through City Green
      Climate Protection/Greenhouse Gas Inventory
      Curbside Compost Pick-Up Service
      Environmentally Preferable Food Packaging
      Paper Reduction and Recycled Content Directive
      Reducing Employee Commute Trips
      Testing the Energy Efficiency of LED Streetlights
The City employs several measures at City Hall and throughout the city to promote
sustainability. These include energy conservation measures for City and community buildings
and water conservation measures for new building projects. The City also has a Construction and
Demolition Waste Recovery Ordinance which requires building contractors to recycle or reuse
50 percent of the waste generated from a construction project (wood, metal, windows, doors).
Large building projects are required to provide recycling areas. The Recycled Lumber program
mills lumber in Mill Valley with fallen trees, trees removed for safety, and tree donations from
professional tree services, and uses this lumber for City projects.
2.       Green Building Practices
Green Building practices are a major component of Mill Valley’s approach to sustainability. On
December 1, 2008, the Mill Valley City Council unanimously adopted a Green Building Ordinance
that establishes green building requirements for all new residential and commercial
development, including building additions and renovations. The objectives of the Green Building
Ordinance are to:
             Encourage resource conservation;
             Reduce waste generated by construction projects;
             Increase energy and water efficiency; and
             Promote the health of residents.
IV. Housing Resources                                                                        Page IV-11

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
The Green Building Ordinance requires applicants to comply with Build It Green (“BIG”) green
building requirements during Planning or Building applications. Applicants complete a BIG
checklist identifying Green Building features intended for incorporation in the project and
compliance with BIG Green Building Guidelines, and a LEED-Accredited Professional or
GreenPoint rater checks the list prior to the issuance of the Building Permit.
In addition to Mill Valley’s Green Building Ordinance, the California Statewide Green Building
Code, or CALGREEN, went into effect on January 1, 2011, and updated the California Building
Standards Code (otherwise known as Title 24). CALGREEN has mandatory requirements that
apply to residential and non-residential construction, that achieve material and water
conservation, and reduced waste in construction practices, but not a higher level of energy
efficiency compared to Title 24. Mill Valley’s Green Building Ordinance, based on Build It Green
requirements, fills in this gap by typically exceeding Title 24’s energy efficiency standards by
15%.
3.         Pacific Gas and Electric programs
The California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) Program
The PG&E CARE program provides a monthly discount on energy bills for income-qualified
households and housing facilities.
The Relief for Energy Assistance through Community Help (REACH) Program
REACH provides emergency energy assistance to low-income families within the PG&E service
area who are in jeopardy of losing their electricity services. REACH is a one-time energy-
assistance program sponsored by PG&E and administered through the Salvation Army from 170
offices in northern and central California. Those who have experienced an uncontrollable or
unforeseen hardship may receive an energy credit up to $200, credit amount based on the past
due amount of the bill. REACH assistance may be available once within an 18 month period, but
exceptions can be made for seniors, the physically challenged and the terminally ill.
The Balanced Payment Plan (BPP)
Customers who enroll in the BPP will eliminate fluctuations in energy costs and therefore
unpredictable expenses. PG&E averages the customer’s energy costs in the previous 12 months
to arrive at a monthly balanced payment amount. PG&E monitors the account for appropriate
changes to the BPP once every four months.
The Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) Block Grant
The LIHEAP Block Grant is funded by the federal Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS) and provides two basic types of services. Eligible low-income persons, via local
governmental and nonprofit organizations, can receive financial assistance to offset the costs of
heating and/or cooling dwellings, and/or have their dwellings weatherized to make them more
energy efficient. LIHEAP accomplishes its goals through three programs: a Weatherization
Assistance Program, a Home Energy Assistance Program, and an Energy Crisis Intervention
Program.
The Family Electric Rate Assistance (FERA) Program
The FERA program provides a monthly discount on electric bills for low to moderate income
households of three or more persons.
IV. Housing Resources                                                                  Page IV-12

                                                                                      May 4, 2015
4.       Marin Energy Authority Programs
Marin Energy Authority (MEA) is a joint powers authority formed in 2008 to address climate
change by reducing energy related greenhouse gas emissions and securing energy supply, price
stability, energy efficiencies and local economic and workforce benefits. Marin Clean Energy
(MCE) is a program under the MEA to collectively buy renewable power on behalf of Marin
County residents, cities and towns. Mill Valley residents are automatically enrolled in the
program and can choose to opt out to remain with PG&E. The MCE program has “light green”
and “dark green” options, with 25-50% of renewable power and 100% renewable power
respectively.
The Mill Valley City Council approved an ordinance to join MEA in December of 2008 such that
residents and businesses could choose their electric energy supplier. As of July 2012, electric
service is offered to all Mill Valley customers.
MCE’s rebate funds for energy efficiency upgrades and home energy assessments were recently
exhausted in May 2012 and no new rebates are currently being offered.
5.       Other Energy Conservation Programs
California Youth Energy Services "Green House Call"
California Youth Energy Services "Green House Call" offers indoor efficiency evaluations from
professional young staff. This program includes the free installation of energy and water saving
equipment.
Smart Lights Program
The Smart Lights Program offers free start-to-finish technical assistance and instant rebates to
help defray the cost of upgrading and/or repairing existing equipment for businesses. This
program offers assistance with comprehensive lighting retrofits, refrigeration tune-ups, controls
and seals replacement, domestic hot water heater replacements, and referrals to appropriate
HVAC programs.
Energy Upgrade California
This Statewide program offers incentives to homeowners who complete select energy-saving
home improvements on a single-family residence and two-to-four-unit buildings. The incentive
packages encourage customers to take the “whole house” approach by combining several
improvements at one time to achieve greater energy efficiencies and savings. Homeowners are
required to hire a contractor and perform an initial assessment. EUC has a list of participating
contractors and raters.
IV. Housing Resources                                                                  Page IV-13

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
IV. Housing Resources                 Page IV-14
APPENDICES TABLE OF CONTENTS
Appendix A. Housing Needs Assessment                           A-1 to A-42
Appendix B. Housing Constraints                                B-1 to B-46
Appendix C. Housing Capacity Analysis                          C-1 to C-23
Appendix D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under
                                       Adopted Housing Element D-1 to D-16
Appendix E. Second Unit Survey Results                           E-1 to E-8
Appendix F. Glossary                                            F-1 to F-16
                                                                                                                          May 4, 2015
Appendix A.             Housing Needs Assessment
Table of Contents
        A.      Executive Summary ........................................................................................... A-3
        B.      Introduction ....................................................................................................... A-7
        C.      Demographic Profile .......................................................................................... A-8
                1. Population Growth and Trends .................................................................... A-8
                2. Age Characteristics ..................................................................................... A-10
                3. Race and Ethnicity ...................................................................................... A-11
                4. Employment ............................................................................................... A-12
        D.      Household Profile ............................................................................................ A-14
                1. Household Type .......................................................................................... A-14
                2. Household Income ...................................................................................... A-15
        E.      Special Needs Populations .............................................................................. A-18
                1. Senior Households ...................................................................................... A-18
                2. Persons with Disabilities ............................................................................. A-20
                3. Large Households ....................................................................................... A-22
                4. Female-headed Households ....................................................................... A-22
                5. Homeless .................................................................................................... A-23
                6. Farmworkers ............................................................................................... A-27
        F.      Housing Stock Characteristics .......................................................................... A-28
                1. Housing Growth .......................................................................................... A-28
                2. Housing Type and Tenure ........................................................................... A-29
                3. Housing Age and Condition ........................................................................ A-30
                4. Housing Costs and Affordability ................................................................. A-31
                5. Assisted Housing At Risk of Conversion ...................................................... A-37
                6. Housing Problems ....................................................................................... A-39
        G.      Regional Housing Needs Allocation ................................................................. A-41
                1. The 2014-2022 RHNA Cycles ....................................................................... A-41
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                                                  Page A-1
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
List of Tables
Table A.1: Regional Population Growth Trends 1990 – 2010 .........................................................................8
Table A.2: Regional Population Projections 2010 - 2040 ................................................................................9
Table A.3: Age Distribution 2000-2010 .........................................................................................................11
Table A.4: Racial and Ethnic Composition 2000-2010 ..................................................................................11
Table A.5: Occupations of Employed Residents - 2012 ................................................................................12
Table A.6: Primary Jobs by Industry Sector 2010 .........................................................................................13
Table A.7: Household Characteristics 2000-2010 ........................................................................................14
Table A.8: State Income Categories ..............................................................................................................15
Table A.9: Household Income Distribution 2010 ..........................................................................................16
Table A.10: Bay Area Wages for Select Occupations - 2013 .........................................................................17
Table A.11: Special Needs Populations - 2010 ..............................................................................................18
Table A.12: Developmentally Disabled Residents Served by GGRC within Mill Valley Zip Code ...................21
Table A.13: Key Findings of the 2013 Marin County Point in Time Homeless Count ....................................24
Table A.14: Marin County Unsheltered Homeless 2013 ...............................................................................25
Table A.15: Specific Service Needs of Adult Homeless Population ...............................................................26
Table A.16: Regional Housing Growth Trends 1990-2010 .............................................................................28
Table A.17: Housing Unit Type 2000 - 2010.................................................................................................29
Table A.18: Owner/Renter Tenure 1990-2010 ............................................................................................29
Table A.19: Age of Housing Stock - 2010 ......................................................................................................31
Table A.20: Survey of Vacant Rental Units – September 2014 ......................................................................32
Table A.21: Regional Single-Family Homes and Condominium Sales Jan – Dec 2013 .................................32
Table A.22: Mill Valley Home and Condominium Sales Prices January - September 2014 .........................33
Table A.23: 2014 Marin County Maximum Affordable Housing Cost (Moderate Income) ...........................34
Table A.24: 2014 Maximum Affordable Rents in Marin County ....................................................................35
Table A.25: Second Unit Rents and Affordability - 2014 Mill Valley Survey ..................................................36
Table A.26: Assisted Housing Inventory .......................................................................................................37
Table A.27: Housing Overpayment - 2010 .....................................................................................................39
Table A.28: Overcrowded Households - 2010 ...............................................................................................40
Table A.29: Mill Valley 2014-2022 RHNA.......................................................................................................41
List of Figures
Figure A.1: Regional Population Growth Trends 1990 – 2010 ........................................................................8
Figure A.2: Regional Population Projections 2010 - 2040 .............................................................................10
Figure A.3: Household Income Distribution 2010 .........................................................................................16
Figure A.4: Regional Housing Growth Trends 1990-2010..............................................................................28
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                                                            Page A-2

                                                                                      May 4, 2015
A.      Executive Summary
The major findings of the Housing Needs Assessment are presented below.
1.      Demographic Profile
      While Mill Valley has experienced only modest population growth over the past several
        decades, analysis of the city’s demographic and household characteristics illustrate
        changes in the make-up of the population.
      The community has evidenced a noticable increase in the school age population (5-17
        years) over the past decade, growing to 18 percent of the population. The Mill Valley
        School District K-8 enrollment figures confirm this trend, with a 30% increase in
        enrollment between 2002 and 2011.
      Young adults (25-44 years) have decreased from 28 to just 20 percent of Mill Valley’s
        population during the 2000-2010 period. Factors contributing to this decline include an
        aging in place of young adults into middle age, and a limited number of young adults
        and young families moving into Mill Valley due in part to high housing costs and low
        vacancy rates. Most young adults depart Mill Valley in their early 20’s and are replaced
        by adults in their 30’s with school age children.
      Since 2007, a “demographic shift” in existing single-family housing from older “empty
        nesters” to young families with school-aged children has created a population growth
        spurt (mostly school ages children) which has the potential to continue for many
        decades. This should be monitored to determine if it is likely to continue in the long
        term.
      Senior citizens (age 65+) continue to represent a growing segment of the community,
        currently comprising 19 percent of Mill Valley residents, compared to just 15 percent a
        decade ago. With approximately half of Mill Valley’s seniors age 75 and above, this
        population may require more supportive housing options as they age and become
        frailer.
      The employment base in Mill Valley is dominated by lower paying retail and service-
        related jobs, and given the shortage of local affordable housing opportunities, has
        resulted in a large segment of people who work in the community being unable to live
        here.
2.      Household Profile
      Mill Valley has experienced a significant increase in both the number and proportion of
        family households over the past decade. Of the increase in over 200 families between
        2000 and 2010, families with children comprised over 80 percent, consistent with the
        increase in the school age population during this same period.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                              Page A-3

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
       Approximately 20 percent of Mill Valley households earn low incomes (<80% area
           median income- AMI), with an additional 12 percent earning moderate incomes (80-
           120% AMI). Among the community’s 2,100 renter households, one-third are lower
           income and 15 percent moderate income.
       Housing overpayment among lower income households is high, with 70 percent of both
           lower income owners and lower income renters spending greater than 30 percent of
           their incomes towards housing. The community’s special needs populations – seniors,
           persons with disabilities, and female-headed households with children – are particularly
           vulnerable to losing their housing due to an inability to pay.
       Seniors are the largest special needs group in Mill Valley, comprising 30 percent of all
           households. Some of their more pressing housing needs include:
                o Rental affordability
                o Housing accommodations for disabilities
                o Housing maintenance
       Addressing the diverse needs of Mill Valley’s senior population will require strategies
           which foster independent living (such as accessibility improvements, second units,
           shared housing, rehabilitation assistance), as well as strategies which encourage the
           provision of variety of supportive living environments for seniors of all income levels.
       Approximately 1,500 Mill Valley residents (12%) are living with a disability, a number
           that will likely increase as the population continues to age. The design and affordability
           of housing, modifications to improve accessibility, proximity to services and transit, and
           group living opportunities represent some of the considerations important in serving
           this need group.
3.         Housing Stock Characteristics
       The 2010 Census documents a total of 6,534 housing units in Mill Valley, reflecting a net
           increase in approximately 400 units over the past two decades, or an average of 20
           units/year. The proportion of owner (65%) and renter (35%) households has remained
           unchanged during this period.
       During the most recent decade, Mill Valley has seen a net loss in over 100 multi-family
           units, whereas a net increase in over 300 single-family detached and attached homes
           were developed. The decline in multi-family housing is concentrated among smaller
           properties with two to four units.
       Second units represent an important segment of Mill Valley’s housing stock, with 89
           new second units issued building permits during 2000-2010. In addition, 74 previously
           unpermitted second units were legalized and brought up to code through the City’s
           2002-2003 second unit amnesty program.
       Mill Valley is home to eight rental housing developments owned by non-profits or the
           Marin Housing Authority, providing 301 units affordable to lower income families,
           seniors and persons living with disabilities. In addition, the City’s Inclusionary Housing
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                   Page A-4

                                                                                         May 4, 2015
        Ordinance has resulted in the integration of 38 affordable rental and ownership units
        within market rate developments.
      The waiting list at each of Mill Valley’s affordable housing developments is long. In
        addition, Marin Housing reports that 135 Mill Valley households are currently on the
        waiting list for Section 8 rent subsidies, indicative of the general shortage of affordable
        housing in the area.
      A vacancy rate of five percent for rental housing and two percent for ownership housing
        is generally considered a healthy balance between the demand and supply of housing.
        As measured by the 2010 census, the residential vacancy rate in Mill Valley was 1.2
        percent for ownership units and 4.5 percent for rental units, indicating vacancies are
        slightly below ideal levels for normal resident turn over.
      High property values and a strong sense of neighborhood pride have contributed to
        ongoing upkeep and renovation of the housing stock. Nonetheless, given that half of
        Mill Valley’s housing is more than 50 years old, combined with a sizable senior
        population who may face difficulties maintaining their homes as they age, both code
        enforcement and housing rehabilitation programs continue to be important.
4.      Housing Costs and Affordability
a.      Rental Housing
      The September 2014 rent survey identified a limited number of vacant apartments listed
        for rent in Mill Valley. Median apartment rents on advertised units were $2,500 for a
        one-bedroom and $2,850 for a two-bedroom, with no three-bedroom units listed. In
        comparison, the 2012 rent survey conducted for the City's 2009-2014 Housing Element
        identified median rents of $1,750 for a one-bedroom and $2,200 for a two-bedroom
        apartment.
      Rental listings for single-family homes were more prevalent than apartments in Mill
        Valley, commanding median rents of $4,000 for a two bedroom home, $5,000 for a
        three bedroom home, and $6,800 for a home with four or more bedrooms.
      Market rents in Mill Valley are well beyond the level of affordability for very low and low
        income (<80% AMI) households. The Housing Element rent survey conducted in 2012
        documented an affordability gap for low income two person households of just $90, and
        $140 for households with three persons, whereas the 2014 rent survey identifies a gap
        ranging from $800 to $950 per month, indicative of the steep increase in rents over the
        past several years.
b.      Ownership Housing
      During the January - September 2014 period, a total of 134 single-family home sales
        were recorded within the Mill Valley city limits, with prices ranging from a median of
        $1,158,000 (one-bedroom) to $1,212,000 (three-bedroom) up to $1,971,000 (five-
        bedroom). Housing sales reflect the diversity of Mill Valley’s housing stock, ranging
        from smaller, more modest units (one and two bedroom homes averaged 1,400 square
        feet in size, with two homes selling for under $500,000), to larger lot, luxury units (lot
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                 Page A-5

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
           sizes for four and five bedroom homes averaged 15,000 and 22,500 square feet, with 15
           homes selling for over $3 million).
       Forty condominium units were sold in Mill Valley during the first nine months of 2014,
           with median prices ranging from $455,000 for a one-bedroom, to $660,000 for a two-
           bedroom and $650,000 for a three-bedroom unit. Among all condominiums sold, the
           overall median sales price was $610,000 for a 1,200 square foot unit.
       The maximum affordable purchase price for a moderate income household (120% AMI)
           ranges from $470,000 (two person household) up to $676,000 (five person household),
           rendering single-family home prices in Mill Valley well out of reach. Condominiums,
           however, do provide an affordable homeownership option for many moderate income
           households. Expanding the supply of condominiums, combined with downpayment
           assistance programs and inclusionary housing requirements, may be an effective
           strategy to extend affordable homeownership opportunities to households earning
           moderate incomes.
5.         Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
       The results of the residential sites analysis for the Housing Element indicate that Mill
           Valley has sufficient sites to address its 129 unit regional housing needs (RHNA) for the
           2014-2022 period.
       Because the RHNA is not cumulative between planning periods (except in the instance
           where an unaccomodated housing need triggers a RHNA carry over), the residential sites
           inventory developed for the prior 2009-2014 Housing Element is able to be updated and
           utilized to address Mill Valley’s RHNA needs for the current Housing Element.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                Page A-6

                                                                                                    May 4, 2015
B.       Introduction to the Housing Needs Assessment
The Housing Needs Assessment serves as the foundation for Mill Valley’s Housing Element. Its
purpose is to provide a comprehensive assessment of the community’s existing housing needs,
and to evaluate household and demographic trends impacting those needs. The results of the
Needs Assessment will provide direct input into creation of an effective housing strategy for Mill
Valley’s Housing Element update.
The Mill Valley Housing Needs Assessment is comprised of the following chapters, as required
under State Housing Element law:
                      Demographic Profile
                      Household Profile
                      Special Needs Populations
                      Housing Stock Characteristics
                      Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
Much of the demographic and household data in the Needs Assessment is derived from the
2010 US Census and the 2006-2010 American Community Survey. Current housing market data
is compiled from a variety of sources, including DataQuick sales transactions and internet rental
listings. Marin Housing provided information on affordable rental and ownership housing in
Mill Valley, and California Housing Partnership Corporation assisted in evaluating assisted units
at risk of conversion to market rates. Finally, the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG)
provided future projections of population, employment and regional housing needs.
                      Image by Frank Schulenburg, Mill Valley resident / CC-BY-SA-3.0 (via Flickr).
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                          Page A-7

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
C.         Demographic Profile
Demographic changes such as population growth or changes in age can affect the type and
amount of housing that is needed in a community. This section addresses population, age, and
race and ethnicity of Mill Valley residents.
1.         Population Growth and Trends
As of the 2010 Census, Mill Valley had just over 13,900 residents, a modest 6.7 percent increase
over the past two decades (see Table A.1). This rate of population growth is fairly comparable
to similar sized southern Marin jurisdictions (Larkspur and San Anselmo), though considerably
below that of Tiburon, Corte Madera and Marin County as a whole.
                      Table A.1: Regional Population Growth Trends 1990 – 2010
                                                                                  % Change
                   Jurisdiction            1990           2000         2010
                                                                                  1990-2010
              Mill Valley                 13,029         13,600       13,903         6.7%
              Corte Madera                 8,272         9,100        9,253         11.9%
              Larkspur                    11,068         12,014       11,926         7.8%
              San Anselmo                 11,735         12,378       12,336         5.1%
              Sausalito                    7,152         7,330        7,061         -1.3%
              Tiburon                      7,554         8,666        8,962         18.6%
              Marin County                230,096       247,289      252,409         9.7%
              Source: U.S. Census 1990, 2000 and 2010.
                      Figure A.1: Regional Population Growth Trends 1990 – 2010
  20%
  15%
                                                                                        Mill Valley
                                                                                        Corte Madera
  10%                                                                                   Larkspur
                                                                                        San Anselmo
    5%                                                                                  Sausalito
                                                                                        Tiburon
                                                                                        Marin County
    0%
          Mill Valley   Corte Larkspur         San     Sausalito Tiburon    Marin
                       Madera                Anselmo                       County
   -5%
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                       Page A-8

                                                                                           May 4, 2015
Over the next three decades (2010-2040), the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG)
projects that Marin County will remain one of the least populated and slowest growing counties
in the region. Countywide population growth is projected at just 13 percent; comparable
growth rates are projected for most southern Marin jurisdictions. In Mill Valley, ABAG estimates
the population will grow to approximately 15,400 by 2040, an increase in 1,500 residents above
the city’s current population. Factors contributing to the region’s slow growth include the aging
population, small household sizes and limited job growth.
However, an analysis of the city’s demographic and household characteristics illustrates changes
in the make‐up of the population (also known as “demographic shift”) that may result in higher
population growth than estimated by ABAG. According to annual Department of Finance data,
Mill Valley’s population rose significantly from 1992 to 2001 (by 600 people) and again from
2007 to 2013 (by 651 people), with a lull following the dot.com bust in 2001 to 2007. The
community has also seen a noticeable increase in the school age population (5‐17 years) over
the past decade. In fact, the increase in school age children was larger than the entire
population increase for the city over this period. This appears to be attributable to an on-going
turnover in existing single-family housing from elder “empty nesters” (looking to find smaller
units closer to shopping and services) to young families with school-aged children. This
“demographic shift” may become a long term trend with older, single or two occupant
households in existing single-family homes being replaced by younger households with school-
aged children. But the trend is too short to be proven (broken by the lull following the dot.com
bust), so the ABAG population growth estimates will used in this version of the General Plan.
Nevertheless, the “demographic shift” trend will be closely watched over the term of this
General Plan as this population growth, predominately in school-aged children, could
significantly impact community facilities and services, especially traffic, schools and recreational
facilities.
                       Table A.2: Regional Population Projections 2010 - 2040
                                                                                      % Change
        Jurisdiction          2010           2020      2030             2040          2010-2040
    Mill Valley             13,903          14,300    14,800           15,400            11%
    Corte Madera             9,253           9,500     9,800           10,200            10%
    Larkspur                11,926          12,400    12,900           13,500            13%
    San Anselmo             12,336          12,600    13,000           13,400             9%
    Sausalito                7,061           7,300     7,600            7,900            12%
    Tiburon                  8,962           9,200     9,500            9,900            10%
    Marin County           252,409         261,100    272,100         285,400            13%
                     Source: ABAG 2013 Projections.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                  Page A-9

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
                        Figure A.2: Regional Population Projections 2010 - 2040
         14%
         12%
         10%                                                                  Mill Valley
                                                                              Corte Madera
          8%
                                                                              Larkspur
          6%                                                                  San Anselmo
                                                                              Sausalito
          4%
                                                                              Tiburon
          2%                                                                  Marin County
          0%
                  Mill    Corte Larkspur   San    Sausalito Tiburon Marin
                 Valley  Madera          Anselmo                    County
2.         Age Characteristics
Table A.3 displays the age distribution of Mill Valley’s population in 2000 and 2010, and
compares this with Marin County as a whole.
      Just under one-quarter of Mill Valley’s population is comprised of children under the age
           of 18. The community has evidenced a noticeable increase in the school age population
           (5-17 years) over the decade, with the proportion of school children (17.7%) now
           surpassing the County (15.2%). The Mill Valley School District K-8 enrollment figures
           confirm this trend, showing a 30% increase in enrollment between 2002 and 2011 (from
           2,288 students in 2002 to 2,964 students in 2011). The impact of the increase in school
           age children is an on-going challenge to Mill Valley schools.
      Using a longitudinal approach and analyzing the number of Mill Valley residents age 20-
           34 in 2000 (1,670 persons) with this same age cohort ten years later when they are age
           30-44 (2,558 persons) depicts a net increase in 888 young adults age 30-44 moving into
           the community between 2000 and 2010. The results of this longitudinal analysis
           indicates that young adults are moving into Mill Valley starting in their 30’s, bringing
           new families and contributing to the community’s increasing school enrollment.
           Conversely, Mill Valley experienced an exodus of young persons over the past decade,
           with the number of residents in the 10-19 age cohort in 2000 (1,458 persons) declining
           to just 580 persons in 2010 when they are 20-29 years, illustrating the challenge for
           young persons to afford to live in Mill Valley.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                Page A-10

                                                                                          May 4, 2015
      Senior citizens (age 65+) continue to represent a growing segment of the community,
         comprising nineteen percent of Mill Valley residents compared to fifteen percent a
         decade ago. The proportion of seniors in Mill Valley exceeds both Marin County (17%)
         and the State (11%). With approximately half of Mill Valley’s seniors age 75 and above,
         this population may require more supportive housing options as they age and become
         frailer.
While the increase in Mill Valley’s median age from 43.9 years to 46.6 over the past ten years
depicts a maturing population, the significant growth in families with school age children serves
to moderate this trend.
                                 Table A.3: Age Distribution 2000-2010
                                                2000                          2010
     Age Group
                                        Persons      Percent  Persons      Percent   Marin Co. %
     Preschool (<5 yrs)                   749          5.5%     825         5.9%       5.5%
     School Age (5-17 yrs)               2,043        15.0%    2,466        17.7%      15.2%
     College Age (18-24 yrs)              482          3.5%     459         3.3%       5.7%
     Young Adults (25-44 yrs)            3,818        28.1%    2,816        20.3%      24.3%
     Middle Age (45-64 yrs)              4,418        32.5%    4,714        33.9%      32.6%
     Early Seniors (65-74 years)          995          7.3%    1,362        9.8%       9.2%
     Late Seniors (75+ years)            1,095         8.1%    1,261        9.1%       7.5%
     TOTAL                               13,600       100%    13,903        100%       100%
     MEDIAN AGE                              43.9 years            46.6 years        44.5 years
     Source: U.S. Census 2000 and 2010.
3.       Race and Ethnicity
The 2010 Census documents that persons identifying themselves as White continue to make up
the majority of the Mill Valley community, although this segment of the population has
decreased slightly from 89 percent in 2000 to 86 percent in 2010 (Table A.4). During the most
recent decade, the city’s Asian/Pacific Islander and Hispanic populations has each grown by one
percent, as has persons identifying themselves as belonging to “Two or More Races”. Mill Valley
is less racially diverse than Marin County as a whole, with the lower percentage of Hispanic
residents the most significant difference.
                         Table A.4: Racial and Ethnic Composition 2000-2010
                                            2000                               2010
     Racial/Ethnic Group
                                   Persons        Percent    Persons         Percent   Marin Co %
  White                             12,118         89.1%      11,934          85.8%       72.8%
  Asian/Pacific Islander             581            4.2%       754            5.4%         5.6%
  Hispanic                           472            3.5%       622            4.5%        15.5%
  African American                   132            1.0%       109            0.8%         2.6%
  American Indian/Alaskan             26            0.2%        15            0.1%         0.2%
  Two or More Races                  258            1.9%       428            3.1%         2.9%
  Other Race                          13            0.1%        41            0.3%         0.4%
  TOTAL                             13,600         100%       13,903          100%        100%
      Source: U.S. Census 2000 and 2010.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                Page A-11

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
4.         Employment
The State Employment Development Department estimates that as of March 2012, 7,500 Mill
Valley residents are in the labor force, with 5.2% unemployment, compared to an
unemployment rate of 7.0% in Marin County and 10.7% in the State.
Table A.5 presents the occupations of Mill Valley residents. Two-thirds of the working
population is employed in Management, Business, Science and Arts occupations, although the
majority of these workers are employed outside the County in urban centers such as San
Francisco and Oakland. Twenty percent of Mill Valley’s labor force is employed in Sales and
Office occupations, with just six percent employed in Service occupations. While the average
commute time to work is 26 minutes, a significant number of residents (16%) work from home,
with an additional eight percent taking public transportation, five percent carpooling and three
percent walking to work.
Like Marin County, the Mill Valley’s resident workforce is overwhelmingly white collar. Nearly
three-quarters of the adult population holds a Bachelor’s degree or above, compared to fifty
percent in the County and thirty percent statewide. These higher than average educational
levels directly correlate with higher earnings potential, with a median household income of
approximately $105,500 in Mill Valley, 18 percent higher than Marin and 90 percent above that
of California as a whole.
                          Table A.5: Occupations of Employed Residents - 2012
                                                                                                  Marin Co.
                             Occupation                               Persons       Percent        Percent
    Management, business, science and arts occupations                 5,032         67.1%          51.0%
    Sales and office occupations                                       1,523         20.3%          22.9%
    Service occupations                                                 480          6.4%           14.8%
    Natural resources, construction, maintenance occupations            285          3.8%           6.9%
    Production, transportation, material moving occupations             180          2.4%           4.4%
    TOTAL                                                              7,500         100%           100%
   Source: 2006-2010 American Community Survey. Percentage distribution by occupational category applied to 2012
   State EDD estimate of employed residents (age 16+)
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                          Page A-12

                                                                                                      May 4, 2015
The 2010 census documents 4,360 primary jobs1 within the Mill Valley city limits. As depicted in
Table A.6, retail (22.2%) is the most dominant employment sector, followed by educational
services (12.2%), accommodation and food services (12.2%), and health care and social
assistance (12%).
                             Table A.6: Primary Jobs by Industry Sector 2010
                                                                                               % Total
         Industry Sector                                                            # Jobs
                                                                                                 Jobs
         Retail Trade                                                                968        22.2%
         Educational Services                                                        530        12.2%
         Accommodation and Food Services                                             530        12.2%
         Health Care and Social Services                                             525        12.0%
         Other Services (excluding Public Administration)                            355        8.1%
         Professional, Scientific and Technical Services                             338        7.8%
         Public Administration                                                       251        5.8%
         Finance, Insurance and Real Estate                                          183        4.2%
         Arts, Entertainment and Recreation                                          160        3.7%
         Wholesale Trade                                                             133        3.1%
         Construction                                                                127        2.9%
         Information Technology                                                      105        2.4%
         Administration & Support, Waste Mgmt and Remediation                         61        1.4%
         Transportation and Warehousing                                               46        1.1%
         Manufacturing                                                                18        0.4%
         Utilities                                                                    15        0.3%
         Management of Companies and Enterprises                                      10        0.2%
         Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting                                    5        0.1%
         TOTAL                                                                      4,360       100%
         Source: U.S. Census 2012. OnTheMap Application. http://onthemap.ces.census.gov/
With such a large segment of Mill Valley’s employment in modest paying retail and service-
related jobs, there is a significant disparity between the types of jobs in Mill Valley and the high
cost of housing. Wage records compiled by the Census Bureau document the following annual
wage distribution for the 4,360 workers employed in Mill Valley:
                              < $15,000                       942 (22%)
                              $15,000-$40,000               1,549 (35%)
                              >$40,000                      1,869 (43%)
While this employment data does not capture the significant number of self-employed Mill
Valley residents who work at home (approximately 1,000 residents) and in general earn higher
incomes, it nonetheless depicts the prevalence of lower paying jobs in the community. The
Census documents that ninety percent of the 4,360 persons employed within Mill Valley
commute in from outside the city limits, indicative of the severe shortage of local affordable
housing opportunities. Therefore, one focus of this Housing Element is to address the issue of
better matching housing costs and types to the needs and incomes of the community’s
workforce.
1
  A primary job is the highest paying job for an individual worker for the year. Employment count does not include
self-employed or “informally employed” workers.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                            Page A-13

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
D.         Household Profile
Household type and size, income levels, and the presence of special needs populations all affect
the type of housing needed by residents. This section details the various household
characteristics affecting housing needs in Mill Valley.
1.         Household Type
A household is defined as all persons living in a housing unit. Families are a subset of
households, and include persons living together related by blood, marriage, or adoption. A
single person living alone is also a household. “Other” households are unrelated people residing
in the same dwelling unit. Group quarters, such as dormitories or convalescent homes are not
considered households.
The 2010 Census documents 6,084 households in Mill Valley, with an average household size of
2.27 persons and average family size of 2.97 persons (Table A.7). This represents a minimal
increase in household size (2.20) from 2000, and remains below the Marin County average
household size of 2.36.
Mill Valley has experienced a significant increase in both the number and proportion of family
households over the past decade, a continuation of the more modest increase in families
evidenced during the 1990s. Of the increase in over 200 families between 2000 and 2010,
families with children comprised over 80 percent, consistent with the increase in the school age
population during this same period. In contrast, the number of single-person households
evidenced little change, whereas the proportion and number of other non-family households
(unrelated roommates) declined by nearly 200 households. Persons living alone comprise one-
third of Mill Valley’s households, with seniors making up the majority (44%) and divided
relatively equally among senior renters and senior homeowners.
                            Table A.7: Household Characteristics 2000-2010
                                              2000                           2010
          Household Type                                                               Marin Co.
                                      Households   Percent    Households     Percent
                                                                                           %
Families                                3,420       55.7%         3,627       59.6%      60.7%
    With children under 18              1,663       27.1%         1,835       30.2%      27.5%
    Without children                    1,757       28.6%         1,792       29.4%      33.2%
Singles                                 2,098       34.1%         2,016       33.1%      30.8%
Other non-families                       629        10.2%          441         7.3%      8.5%
Total Households                        6,147       100%          6,084       100%       100%
Average Household Size                        2.20                      2.27              2.36
Average Family Size                           2.85                      2.94              2.94
Source: U.S. Census 2000 and 2010.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                            Page A-14

                                                                                                 May 4, 2015
2.       Household Income
Household income is one of the most important factors affecting housing opportunity and
determining a household’s ability to balance housing costs with other basic necessities of life.
a.       Income Definitions
The State and Federal government classify household income into several groupings based upon
the relationship to the County area median income (AMI), adjusted for household size. The
State of California utilizes the income groups presented in Table A.8, which are thus used
throughout the Housing Element document. By way of example, the 2014 Marin County income
limits are presented for each of the five income categories based on a one, two and three
person household size (Mill Valley’s average household size is 2.48 for owner households and
1.88 for renter households).
                                   Table A.8: State Income Categories
                                   % County                 2014 Marin County Income Limits
                                   Adjusted
      Income Category                                1 person           2 person            3 person
                              Median Income
                                    (AMI)           household          household           household
    Extremely Low                 0-30% AMI           $23,750            $27,150            $30,550
    Very Low                     31-50% AMI           $39,600            $45,250            $50,900
    Low                          51-80% AMI           $63,350            $72,400            $81,450
    Moderate                    81-120% AMI           $86,500            $98,900            $111,250
    Above Moderate               120%+ AMI           >$86,500           >$98,900           >$111,250
   Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development, 2014 Income Limits.
b.       Income Characteristics
Between 2000 and 2010, the median household income in Mill Valley grew from approximately
$90,800 to $105,500, an increase of 16 percent. During this same period, the median household
income in Marin County increased by 25 percent, although at $89,200 in 2010, household
income levels in Mill Valley continue to exceed the countywide median. As illustrated in Table
A.9 on the following page, significant income disparity exists between Mill Valley’s owner and
renter populations, with the median income of renter households roughly forty percent below
that of homeowners. Approximately one-quarter of Mill Valley’s 2,110 renter households and
nine percent of the 3,974 owner households earn less than $35,000, and thus fall under the
2014 very low income thresholds for one to three person households (refer to Table A.8 above).
Another seven percent of Mill Valley’s renter and owner households earn between $35,000 and
$50,000 (generally low income), with 15 percent of renters and eleven percent of owners
earning between $50,000 and $75,000 (generally moderate income).
According to the CHAS Databook prepared by HUD, an estimated 272, or 13 percent, of renter
households, and 304 (8%) of owner households in Mill Valley earn extremely low incomes (<30%
AMI).      Extremely low income renter households in particular are considered at-risk of
homelessness.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                       Page A-15

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
                            Table A.9: Household Income Distribution 2010
                                        Owner                  Renter                Total      Marin
     Income Level                                                                                Co. %
                                 Households      %    Households          %            %
     Less than $20,000                171       4.3%        276         13.1%        7.1%       10.1%
     $20,000 - $34,999                175       4.4%        267         12.6%        7.0%       10.0%
     $35,000 - $49,999                270       6.8%        154         7.3%         7.0%        9.2%
     $50,000 - $74,999                453       11.4%       314         14.9%       12.5%       14.0%
     $75,000 - $99,999                465       11.7%       344         16.3%       13.2%       11.9%
     $100,000 - $149,999              707       17.8%       390         18.5%       18.0%       18.4%
     $150,000 or more               1,733       43.6%       365         17.3%       35.2%       26.6%
     Total households               3,974       100%       2,110        100%         100%        100%
     Median Income                     $131,179                $76,198             $105,478    $89,268
 Source: 2006-2010 American Community Survey. Percentage income distribution applied to 2010 Census count of
 households.
                            Figure A.3: Household Income Distribution 2010
          50.00%
          45.00%
          40.00%
          35.00%
          30.00%
          25.00%
          20.00%
          15.00%                                                                     Owner %
          10.00%
                                                                                     Renter %
            5.00%
            0.00%
Many of the workers who make up Mill Valley’s workforce earn modest incomes, making it
challenging to afford to live and work in the city. Table A.10 presents a sampling of occupations
in Mill Valley which fall within very low, low and moderate income thresholds (based on a single
worker household). The analysis of housing costs and affordability presented in Section D4 of
the Housing Needs Assessment compares current market rents and sales prices in Mill Valley
with the amount that households of different income levels can afford to pay for housing. This
analysis illustrates that very low and low income occupations, such as elementary school
teachers and retail sales workers, cannot afford to rent in Mill Valley, and that moderate income
occupations, such as realtors and accountants, cannot afford to purchase a home.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                      Page A-16

                                                                                                       May 4, 2015
                         Table A.10: Bay Area Wages for Select Occupations - 2013
                                                                                                      Max. Monthly
Very Low Income
                                                               Hourly Wage        Annual Income        Affordable
(< $45,250 - 2 person household)
                                                                                                      Housing Cost
Waiters/Waitresses                                                $12.13              $25,220              $630
Janitors and Cleaners                                             $13.55              $28,180              $700
Home Health Aides                                                 $13.64              $28,370              $700
Retail Salespersons                                               $14.53              $30,220              $750
Child Care Workers                                                $15.05              $31,300              $780
Security Guards                                                   $15.27              $31,770              $790
Preschool Teachers                                                $17.60              $36,610              $910
                                                                                                      Max. Monthly
Low Income
                                                              Hourly Wage        Annual Income         Affordable
($45,250 - $72,400 - 2 person household)
                                                                                                      Housing Cost
Transit Bus Drivers                                               $22.47              $46,740             $1,160
Tax Preparers                                                     $28.92              $60,160             $1,500
Elementary School Teachers                                          n.a.              $66,780             $1,660
Electrical and Electronic Engineering Technicians                 $32.60              $67,810             $1,690
Executive Secretaries and Administrative Assistants               $33.10              $68,850             $1720
Computer User Support Specialists                                 $33.43              $69,530             $1,730
Graphic Designers                                                 $34.41              $71,580             $1,780
                                                                                                      Max. Monthly
Moderate Income
                                                              Hourly Wage        Annual Income         Affordable
($72,400 - $98,900 - 2 person household)
                                                                                                      Housing Cost
Librarians                                                        $36.78              $76,500             $1,910
Insurance Sales Agents                                            $41.23              $85,760             $2,140
Accountants and Auditors                                          $41.51              $86,340             $2,150
Loan Officers                                                     $47.52              $98,840             $2,470
Architects                                                        $48.55             $100,980             $2,520
Physical Therapists                                               $49.25             $102,450             $2,560
Landscape Architects                                              $51.59             $107,300             $2,680
Source: 2013 California Occupational Employment Statistics – San Francisco- San Mateo-Redwood City MD
Income categories based on two person household with single wage earner
Maximum affordable housing cost based on standard of 30% of income on housing, including rent/mortgage, utilities, taxes,
insurance, HOA fees.
   Hourly Wage Annual Income Affordable
   A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                          Page A-17

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
E.         Special Needs Populations
Certain segments of the population may have greater difficulty finding adequate and affordable
housing due to special circumstances related to employment and income, family type and
characteristics, disability or various other household characteristics. State Housing Element law
defines “special needs” groups to include the following: senior households, persons with
disabilities, large households, female-headed households, homeless persons and farmworkers.
Table A.11 summarizes the special needs populations in Mill Valley. Each of these population
groups, as well as their housing needs, is described in the section which follows.
                                 Table A.11: Special Needs Populations - 2010
                    Special Needs Groups                       Persons          Households          Percent*
       Seniors (65+)                                            2,623                                 18.9%
       Senior Households                                                           1,822              30.0%
          Renter                                                                    491               (27%)
             Living Alone (Senior Renter)                                           416
          Owner                                                                    1,331              (73%)
             Living Alone (Senior Owner)                                            472
       Persons Living with Disabilities**                       1,562                                 12.2%
          Age 5 – 64                                             960                                  (61%)
          Age 65+                                                602                                  (39%)
       Large Households (5+ persons)                                                305                5.0%
          Renter                                                                     57               (19%)
          Owner                                                                     248               (81%)
       Female-Headed Households in Families                                         465                7.6%
          with Related Children under 18                                            276               (59%)
       Homeless                                                    3                                    1%
       Farmworkers***                                             18                                   0.3%
      TOTAL Persons or Households                              13,903              6,084
         Source: U.S. Census 2010, American Community Survey 2006-2010, Marin County 2013 Point in Time
         Homeless Count.
         * Numbers in ( ) reflect the% of the special needs group and not the % of the total City population/
         households. For example, of the City’s senior households, 27% are renters and 73% are owners; of the
         City’s senior renter households, 85% are comprised of a senior living alone.
         **Persons with disabilities based on 2000 Census. % applied to City’s 2000 population > 5 years in age.
         ***Reflects persons employed in agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining in the American
         Community Survey.
1.         Senior Households
Seniors are a significant special needs group in Mill Valley, with persons age 65 and above
comprising 30 percent of the community’s households. Senior citizens are considered to have
special housing needs because their fixed incomes, higher health care costs and physical
disabilities make it more difficult to find suitable and affordable housing. Concurrent with the
trends throughout the nation, this population is expected to continue increasing as the baby
boom generation approaches retirement.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                                   Page A-18

                                                                                        May 4, 2015
Although often viewed as homogeneous, Mill Valley’s senior population is quite diverse. Among
the city’s 1,822 senior households, 73 percent (or 1,331) own a home and 27 percent (or 491)
rent housing. Many of the renters receive Section 8 rent vouchers, or reside in one of Mill
Valley’s senior housing projects. Approximately half of Mill Valley’s seniors are 75 years of age
and above, a population which may require more supportive housing options as they age and
become more frail.
Some of the more pressing housing needs of Mill Valley’s seniors include:
        Rental affordability. Rising rents are a particular concern due to the fact that most
         seniors are on fixed incomes. Of Mill Valley’s approximately 500 senior renter
         households, three-quarters are lower income (<80% AMI), with one-quarter extremely
         low income (<30% AMI). Market rents in Mill Valley are well beyond the level affordable
         to lower income households, as confirmed by the Census which documents 55 percent
         of the city’s lower income senior renters spending more than half their incomes on rent.
         Forty-one Mill Valley seniors are on the Marin Housing Authority waiting list for Section
         8 rent subsides.
        Disabilities. The Census identifies 31 percent of Mill Valley’s seniors as having one or
         more disabilities, encompassing physical, sensory and mental disabilities, as well as
         conditions which limit the senior’s ability to leave their home. Combined with the
         significant number of older seniors (age 75+) indicates a large segment of the senior
         population which may require various levels of housing support.
        Housing maintenance. Of Mill Valley’s approximately 1,300 senior homeowners, over
         one-third live alone. As these homeowners age, many may be unable to maintain their
         homes or perform minor repairs. The installation of grab bars and other assistance
         devices may be necessary to enhance accessibility.
While assisted living provides an option for some seniors requiring a more supportive housing
environment, lower income seniors often cannot afford the cost of licensed facilities in Marin.
According to the Marin County Division of Aging, the average basic rent averages between
$3,500 and $4,500 per month for assisted living (room, bathroom, and three meals a day).
Personalized care is an additional cost above the basic charge for housing and meals. The State
of California Community Care Licensing Division identifies two residential care facilities in Mill
Valley for the elderly: Marin Terrace, an assisted living facility which provides 49 beds, and The
Redwoods with 150 apartment units, and additional assisted living studios and rooms.
As discussed in the “Housing Stock Characteristics” chapter which follows (Assisted Housing At
Risk of Conversion), Mill Valley has three senior housing facilities which provide a total of 144
affordable housing units for very low income seniors. Homestead Terrace and Kruger Pines are
owned and operated by the Marin Housing Authority, and provide a combined total of 84
affordable rental units. The Redwoods, originally established by the Community Church of Mill
Valley, is a continuing care community offering 150 independent senior apartments, 90 assisted
living apartments, and skilled nursing. While the majority of The Redwoods is market rate, 60 of
the 150 apartment units receive project-based Section 8 subsidies, providing affordability to
very low income seniors.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                              Page A-19

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Addressing the diverse housing needs of Mill Valley’s senior population will require strategies
which foster independent living (such as accessibility improvements, second units, shared
housing, rehabilitation assistance), as well as strategies which encourage the provision of variety
of supportive living environments for seniors of all income levels.
2.         Persons with Disabilities
A disability is defined as a long lasting condition that impairs an individual’s mobility, ability to
work, or ability to care for themselves. Persons with disabilities include those with physical,
mental, or emotional disabilities. Disabled persons have special housing needs because of their
fixed income, shortage of affordable and accessible housing, and higher health costs associated
with their disability.
The 2000 Census identifies 12.2 percent of Mill Valley residents over the age of 5 as having one
or more disabilities (1,562 persons). Among the working age population with disabilities (908
persons), one-quarter have an employment disability which prevents them from maintaining a
job. Of the city’s senior population, approximately one-third have one or more types of
disabilities.     As Mill Valley’s population continues to age, the number of residents with
disabilities will also increase.
People living with disabilities represent a wide range of different housing needs, depending on
the type and severity of their disability as well as personal preference and lifestyle. The design
of housing, accessibility modifications, proximity to services and transit, and group living
opportunities represent some of the types of considerations and accommodations that are
important in serving this need group. Incorporating barrier-free design in all new multifamily
housing is especially important to provide the widest range of choice.
Special consideration should also be given to the issue of income and affordability, as many
people with disabilities may be in fixed income situations. Marin Center for Independent Living,
for example, indicates that most of their clients live below the level of poverty. Mill Valley has
two affordable housing developments reserved for persons living with disabilities: Camino Alto
Apartments provides 24 units and Mill Creek Apartments provides 9 units. In addition, three
affordable senior housing projects (Homestead Terrace, Kruger Pines and The Redwoods) also
serve Mill Valley’s disabled residents.
Both the federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act impose
an affirmative duty on local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e.
modifications or exceptions) in their zoning and other land use regulations when such
accommodations may be necessary to afford disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling. For example, it may be a reasonable accommodation to allow covered ramps
in the setbacks of properties that have already been developed to accommodate residents with
mobility impairments.
The City has reviewed all of its zoning laws, policies and practices for compliance with fair
housing laws. Mill Valley provides reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities with
respect to zoning, permit processing and building laws, and makes this information available to
the public through handouts and through notices published in the Planning Commission and City
Council agendas. The City does not restrict the siting of group homes nor require a minimum
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                Page A-20

                                                                                                       May 4, 2015
distance between group homes. Group homes with under seven occupants are permitted by
right in single-family homes. New or significantly remodeled group homes are required to go
through the design review process, as is any residential development, and obtain approval by
the Planning Commission. Administrative review of requirements for exceptions to zoning
standards is provided. Mill Valley allows displacement of required on-site parking if it is to
accommodate ADA accessibility facilities (ramps, etc.) and offers reduced parking standards for
any development, including housing for the disabled, wherever reduced need can be
demonstrated. The Building Department administers Title 24 provisions consistently for all
disabilities-related construction and responds to complaints regarding any violations.
a.       Developmental Disabilities
Due to the dramatic rise in autism spectrum disorders (ASD), in 2010 the California legislature
passed SB 812 which requires the housing element to specifically analyze the housing needs of
persons with developmental disabilities, and to identify resources available to serve this
population.         The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides
community-based services to 6,000 adults diagnosed with ASD; over 4,000 California teenagers
diagnosed with ASD will reach adulthood over the next five years, many of whom will want to
live independently and need appropriate housing.
The Golden Gate Regional Center (GGRC), which serves the counties of Marin, San Francisco and
San Mateo, is among 21 regional centers operated by the State DDS to serve the
developmentally disabled population. The goal of these centers is to: 1) prevent/minimize
institutionalization of developmentally disabled persons and their dislocation from family and
community; and 2) enable this population to lead more independent and productive lives. The
living arrangements for persons served by the GGRC in 2010 were as follows:
                              69% Parent’s Home
                              13% Community Care Facility
                              6% Own Home Independent Living
                              4% Own Home Supported Living
                              4% Intermediate Care/Skilled Nursing Facility
                              2% Developmental Center
                              1% Family Home Agency/Foster Care
                              1% Other
The GGRC provides services to approximately 1,200 individuals with developmental disabilities
in Marin, San Francisco and San Mateo counties, and estimates that 380 of these individuals are
in need of housing assistance. Within zip code 94941, which encompasses greater Mill Valley,
the Regional Center currently provides services to 105 residents with developmental disabilities,
generating an estimated need for 35 housing units:
Table A.12: Developmentally Disabled Residents Served by GGRC within Mill Valley Zip Code
                 0 - 14        15 - 22          23 - 54        55 - 65                                   Estimated
 Zip Code                                                                   65+ years       Total
                 years          years            years          years                                Housing Need*
                                                                                             105
  94941      24 persons      15 persons      53 persons      10 persons     3 persons                35 units
                                                                                          persons
Source: Golden Gate Regional Center (GGRC), 2012
* GGRC utilizes the following need factors to estimate housing need by age group: age 0-14 25% need hsg; age 15-22
50% need hsg; age 23-54 35% need hsg; age 55-65 25% need hsg; age 65+ 20% need hsg.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                              Page A-21

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Golden Gate has identified a number of community-based housing types appropriate for
persons living with a developmental disability: licensed community care facilities and group
homes; supervised apartment settings with support services; SB 962 homes (for persons with
special health care and intensive support needs); and for persons able to live more
independently, rent subsidized homes; inclusionary housing, and Section 8 rental vouchers.
Founded in 1919, the non-profit Cedars of Marin is one of California’s original programs for
persons with developmental disabilities. Cedars provides housing for 48 disabled adults on its
main campus in Ross, and in addition provides ten community-based group homes (for 6 or
fewer residents) in Novato and San Rafael.
Mill Valley’s Housing Element will set forth programs which seek to encourage and facilitate
housing for persons with disabilities, enable group homes and ensure reasonable
accommodation.
3.         Large Households
Large households, defined as households with five or more persons, typically consist of families
with children. They are considered a special needs group due to the limited availability of
affordable and adequately sized housing in many communities. This shortage of large units is
especially evident in communities with an older rental stock with few three bedroom units.
The 2010 Census documents 305 large households in Mill Valley, representing five percent of all
households. Of these large households, approximately 80 percent are homeowners and 20
percent are renters. Based on the CHAS (Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy)
Databook prepared by HUD, 20 percent of Mill Valley’s large households earn lower incomes
(<80% AMI).
The 2000 Census identifies 298 rental units in Mill Valley with three or more bedrooms, in
general, the appropriate sized units for a large household with five or more members. In
comparison, the city has just 57 large renter households, indicating that Mill Valley has an
adequate supply of rental units suitable for the city’s large families. However, market rents for a
3-bedroom apartment exceed the level of affordability for lower income large family
households.
As large households are not a significant special needs group in Mill Valley, the Housing Element
will more broadly focus on addressing the housing needs of families with children which
comprise over 30 percent of the city’s households.
4.         Female-Headed Households
Single parent and female-headed households may have difficulty finding appropriately sized
housing and need affordable housing with day care and recreation programs on-site or nearby,
in proximity to schools and with access to services. Also, despite fair housing laws,
discrimination against children in rental housing may make it more difficult for this group to find
adequate housing. Women in the housing market, especially the elderly, lower and moderate
income individuals, and single-parents, face significant difficulties finding housing, and both
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                              Page A-22

                                                                                                May 4, 2015
ownership and rental units are extremely expensive relative to the incomes of many people in
this population category.
The 2010 Census identifies 465 female-headed householders in family households with no
husband present, accounting for 7.6 percent of all Mill Valley households. Nearly 60 percent of
these female-headed families (276 households) included children under the age of 18. The
American Community Survey estimates that 4.6 percent of Mill Valley’s female-headed
households with children were living in poverty, compared to a 1.2 percent poverty rate for all
families with children. This special needs group, while limited in number, have critical needs for
assistance with housing subsidies, as well as accessible and affordable day care.
5.        Homeless
Pursuant to Senate Bill 2 (2008), Housing Element statutes now require a more detailed analysis
of the needs of the homeless population, and quantification of the need for emergency shelters.
Based on the outcome of this analysis, SB 2 requires jurisdictions to identify zones that will allow
emergency shelters as a permitted use. The following section presents the homeless needs
assessment for Mill Valley; the identification of zoning for emergency shelters will be addressed
in the governmental constraints and Housing Plan chapters of the Housing Element.
a.        Homeless Population Count
The most reliable source of information for evaluating the homeless population in Marin County
is the 2013 Marin Point in Time Homeless Count. The Marin County Department of Health &
Human Services, in partnership with housing and service providers, faith based groups and
schools, led the effort to conduct the biennial census of persons experiencing homelessness in
Marin, consistent with U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
requirements for jurisdictions receiving HUD Continuum of Care funding. In addition to meeting
HUD requirements, Marin County used this federal mandate as an opportunity to conduct a
community count of broader populations of homeless not formally recognized by HUD as
homeless.2
Marin County conducted its “Point in Time Count” on January 24, 2013. The Count is intended as
a one day snapshot of unduplicated numbers of homeless families and individuals in sheltered,
unsheltered and other locations. The County’s methodology includes a detailed survey of each
individual counted, with surveys administered at 50 locations/programs throughout Marin on
the day of the Count. The following summarizes key findings of the Count:
2
  In addition to persons defined under the HUD “literally homeless” definition (a person sleeping in a place
not meant for human habitation -including living on the streets, in an abandoned building, or in a vehicle -
or residing in an emergency shelter or transitional housing program), Marin County’s community count
included the following “other homeless populations”: any person in jail or an institution who would not
have a permanent address after release or “literally homeless” prior to incarceration; any person who
stayed temporarily with family or friends due to loss of housing and identified themselves as homeless on
the day of the count; any person living in motel/hotel and; any person in hospital but homeless prior to
admission.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                      Page A-23

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
         Table A.13: Key Findings of the 2013 Marin County Point in Time Homeless Count
            Total 2013 Marin County Homeless Count                                      933
                 Persons counted in places not meant for human habitation               196
                 Persons counted in shelters and transitional housing                   519
                 Persons counted as part of “other homeless populations”                218
                                              3
            Persons Precariously Housed                                                4,388
           Source: Marin County 2013 Point in Time Homeless Count
          The number of homeless persons counted in Marin decreased from 1,770 in 2009 to
           1,220 in 2011, and then to 933 in 2013. This continual decrease may be attributable, in
           part, to an infusion of over $2 million in federal stimulus funds to prevent homelessness.
          Of the 933 homeless counted, 195 (21%) were children and 53 (6%) were “transition age
           youth” between ages 18 and 24.
          Despite the decrease in the number of homeless individuals, the number of precariously
           housed persons increased by 5% compared to the 2011 count, reflecting the impact of
           perpetually high housing costs and lack of affordable housing options.
          The primary reasons stated for the cause of homelessness was loss of job, lack of
           affordable housing and lack of income.
Table A.14 presents a breakdown of the unsheltered homeless count by jurisdiction in Marin
County. In response to the question “In what city/area did you stay in last night?,”
approximately 48 percent of the unsheltered and other homeless populations identified San
Rafael, 9 percent identified Novato, and seven percent identified Bolinas. Three homeless
individuals indicated they had stayed in Mill Valley the night prior to the survey, representing
one percent of the total 368 unsheltered/other homeless counted. This limited number of
homeless in Mill Valley is consistent with the City Police Department’s qualitative assessment of
the lack of homeless visible in public locations. Because Mill Valley is not on a major public
transportation route and provides no shelters or services for the homeless, people who become
homeless in Mill Valley are likely to gravitate to locations with transit and services.
Data is not available on the breakdown of the sheltered homeless population by jurisdiction,
and since the vast majority of Marin’s emergency shelters and transitional housing are located in
either San Rafael or Novato, it is likely that most of the sheltered homeless people were residing
in one of those two jurisdictions on the night of the count.
3
  A person is considered precariously housed and at risk of homelessness if they are about to lose housing
and have no other place to live, or are housed but living temporarily with friends or family because they
lack the resources or support networks to retain or obtain permanent housing and/or are housed but
have moved frequently due to economic reasons and/or are living in severely overcrowded housing.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                      Page A-24

                                                                                  May 4, 2015
                  Table A.14: Marin County Unsheltered Homeless 2013
               City/Location on the night # Unsheltered % Unsheltered
               prior to the Count                      Homeless          Homeless
               Belvedere/Tiburon                            2               1%
               Bolinas                                     27               7%
               Corte Madera                                 4               1%
               Fairfax                                      3               1%
               Forest Knolls                                2              <1%
               Greenbrae                                    0               0%
               Inverness                                    2              <1%
               Kentfield                                    0               0%
               Lagunitas                                    0               0%
               Larkspur                                     0               0%
               Marin City                                   1              <1%
               Mill Valley                                  3              1%
               Novato                                      32               9%
               Olema                                        1              <1%
               Out of area                                  7               2%
               Pt. Reyes                                    9               2%
               Ross                                         2               1%
               San Anselmo                                  3               1%
               San Geronimo                                 1              <1%
               San Rafael                                 175              48%
               Sausalito                                   23               6%
               Stinson                                      0               0%
               West Marin                                   0               0%
               Woodacre                                     0               0%
               Not stated                                  71              19%
               Total                                      368             100%
                  Source: Marin County 2013 Point in Time Homeless Count
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                        Page A-25
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
b.         Homeless Subpopulations and Service Needs
The detailed surveys conducted for the 2013 Marin Homeless Point in Time Count provides
information on disabilities and other special needs of Marin’s homeless, offering insight into the
specific service needs of the adult homeless population. The following summarizes the results
to the question “Do you have any of the following health issues?”
                   Table A.15: Specific Service Needs of Adult Homeless Population
                                                                     Number       Percent
               Physical disability                                     175         24%
                Mental Illness                                         177         24%
                Multiple Disabilities                                  122         17%
                Developmental Disability                                36          5%
               Alcohol Use Issues                                      233         32%
               Drug Use Issues                                          51          7%
               Chronic Health Condition                                 50          7%
               HIV                                                      19          3%
               At Least One Health Issue                               384         52%
                  Source: Marin County 2013 Point in Time Homeless Count
Fifty-two percent (384) of adults counted reported having at least one-type of health issue such
as a physical or developmental disability, chronic illness or a substance abuse problem.
Seventeen percent reported suffering from two or more illnesses or conditions (multiple
disabilities). Health issues are not atypical to the population experiencing homelessness. The
lack of medical insurance and access to housing can exacerbate problems which could be better
managed in a stable living environment.
The Marin Count found that 89 persons, or 24 percent, were chronically homeless, meaning they
had a disability and had been homeless continuously for 12 months or had experienced four
episodes of homelessness over a three year period. This data is consistent with national studies
that have found high levels of disability among homeless people and suggests that both health
and behavioral health services are needed to assist this population. Consistent with what has
been found nationally, 26 percent of adults in the Marin Count reported experiencing domestic
violence, and nine percent of the adults were veterans.
c.         Inventory of Resources Available
SB 2 also requires that the Housing Element include an inventory of the homeless housing
resources available within the community, including emergency shelters, transitional housing
and supportive housing. Mill Valley does not have a dedicated emergency shelter, transitional
housing or supportive housing within its jurisdictional boundary. The nearest emergency
shelters are located in Novato and San Rafael. The Fireside Apartments, located on Shoreline
Highway just outside the Mill Valley city limits, provides ten of its fifty affordable rental units as
permanent supportive housing for homeless families.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                 Page A-26

                                                                                       May 4, 2015
d.       Unmet Need for Emergency Shelter, Transitional and Supportive Housing
There is no data presently available documenting the increased level of demand for shelter in
Marin County during particular times of the year. Due to the relatively mild climate, the only
time of year when increased demand appears to be a factor is during the winter months
(December to February). The County’s biannual homeless count always takes place in the last
week of January, a period when demand for shelter typically is at its highest. Since the year-
round need described above is based on that biannual count, the seasonal need for emergency
shelter is no likely greater than the year-round need.
In Mill Valley, the estimated three unsheltered homeless individuals determined by the 2013
Marin Point in Time Homeless Count creates an unmet need for three emergency shelter beds.
6.       Farmworkers
Farmworkers are traditionally defined as persons whose primary incomes are earned through
seasonal agricultural work. Farm workers have special housing needs because they earn lower
incomes than many other workers and move throughout the season from one harvest to the
next. The 2006-2010 American Community Survey identifies only 18 Mill Valley residents
employed in the industries of agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting and mining, representing
0.3 percent of the city’s labor force. Most, if not all, Mill Valley residents employed in these
industries are employed in wholesale or horticultural businesses and there are no localized
needs for seasonal or other types of farmworker housing. Therefore, given the extremely limited
presence of farmworkers in the community, the City has no specialized housing programs
targeted to this group beyond overall programs for housing affordability.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                             Page A-27

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
F.         Housing Stock Characteristics
This section evaluates the characteristics of Mill Valley’s housing stock, including housing unit
mix, conditions, prices/rents and affordability, and assisted housing at-risk of conversion.
1.         Housing Growth
The 2010 Census documents a total of 6,534 housing units in Mill Valley, reflecting a net
increase in approximately 400 units over the past two decades, or an average of 20 units/year
(Table A.16). This relatively slow rate of growth is fairly comparable to other southern Marin
jurisdictions, though below that of Tiburon and Marin County. ABAG 2013 Projections identify
Marin as the slowest growing county in the region, with Countywide household growth
projected at just 8.6 percent over the next three decades (2010-2040); in Mill Valley, a 7.5
percent increase in households is projected during this same time period.
                        Table A.16: Regional Housing Growth Trends 1990-2010
                                                                                 % Change
                   Jurisdiction            1990          2000        2010
                                                                                 1990-2010
              Mill Valley                  6,131         6,286       6,534         6.6%
              Corte Madera                 3,717         3,850       4,026         8.3%
              Larkspur                     5,965         6,413       6,376         6.9%
              San Anselmo                  5,325         5,408       5,538         4.0%
              Sausalito                    4,378         4,511       4,536         3.6%
              Tiburon                      3,443         3,893       4,025         16.9%
              Marin County                99,757        104,990    111,214         11.5%
              Source: U.S. Census 1990, 2000 and 2010.
                         Figure A.4: Regional Housing Growth Trends 1990-2010
                                                   % Change
          18%
          16%
          14%
          12%
          10%
            8%
            6%
            4%
            2%
            0%
                  Mill Valley    Corte     Larkspur      San    Sausalito  Tiburon     Marin
                                Madera                 Anselmo                        County
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                  Page A-28

                                                                                              May 4, 2015
2.       Housing Type and Tenure
Table A.17 presents the mix of housing types in Mill Valley. Of the 6,534 housing units in 2010,
76 percent were single-family detached and attached homes and 24 percent were multi-family
units. In contrast, the city’s 2000 housing stock of 6,286 units was comprised of 74 percent
single-family homes and 26 percent multi-family units. During the past decade, Mill Valley has
seen a net loss in over 100 multi-family units, whereas over 300 single-family homes were built.
The decline in multi-family housing is entirely concentrated among smaller properties with two
to four units, while multi-family properties with five or more units actually increased during the
period. Second units also represent an important segment of Mill Valley’s housing stock, with
89 new second units issued building permits between 2000 and 2010. In addition, 74 previously
unpermitted second units were legalized and brought up to code through the City’s 2002-2003
second unit amnesty program.
                               Table A.17: Housing Unit Type 2000 - 2010
                                                       2000                            2010
 Unit Type
                                                 Units          Percent          Units         Percent
 Single-Family (SF) Detached                     4,092           65.1%           4,353          66.7%
 SF Attached                                      536             8.5%            594            9.1%
           Total Single-Family                   4,628           73.6%           4,953          75.8%
 2 to 4 Units                                     532             8.5%            332            5.0%
 5 or more units                                 1,126           17.9%           1,241          19.0%
            Total Multi-Family                   1,658           26.4%           1,568          24.0%
 Mobile Homes & Other                              0                --             14            0.2%
 Total Housing Units                             6,286           100%            6,534          100%
 Vacancy Rate                                          2.2%                            6.9%
 Source: 2000 Census. State Department of Finance, E5 Population and Housing estimates with 2010 Census
 benchmark.
Table A.18 presents the owner/renter tenure of Mill Valley households, and illustrates a
consistent proportion of owner (65%) and renter (35%) households over the past decade.
Given the loss of multi-family housing during this same period without a corresponding decrease
in the proportion of renter households would indicate an increasing number of single-family
homes are being used as rentals. The rental survey presented later in this section confirms the
prevalence of single-family rentals in the community.
                             Table A.18: Owner/Renter Tenure 1990-2010
                                        2000                             2010
         Occupied
         Housing Units                                                                Marin Co.
                             Households      Percent     Households     Percent
                                                                                         %
         Renter                 2,121         34.5%         2,110        34.7%         36.0%
         Owner                  4,026         65.5%         3,974        65.3%         64.0%
         Total                  6,147         100%          6,084         100%         100%
         Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                    Page A-29

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
a.         Vacancy Rate
A vacancy rate measures the overall housing availability in a community and is often a good
indicator of how efficiently for-sale and rental housing units are meeting the current demand for
housing.       A low vacancy rate may indicate that households are having difficulty in finding
housing that is affordable, leading to housing overpayment and/or overcrowding. A particularly
tight housing market with insufficient vacant units for normal mobility may also lead to high
competition for units, placing upward pressure on rents and for-sale housing prices.
A vacancy rate of five percent for rental housing and two percent for ownership housing is
generally considered healthy and suggests that there is a balance between the demand and
supply of housing. As measured by the 2010 census, the residential vacancy rate in Mill Valley
was 1.2 percent for ownership units and 4.5 percent for rental units, indicating vacancies are
below ideal levels for normal resident turn over. In Marin County, ownership vacancies were
also low at 1.3 percent, although the rental vacancy rate was a healthy 5.2 percent.
In situations where the housing market is extremely tight, there can be a greater tendency
among landlords to discriminate against renters. Fair Housing of Marin is a civil rights agency
that investigates housing discrimination complaints, including discrimination based on race,
disability, gender and familial status. Their caseload consists almost entirely of renters. The
organization receives approximately 1,200 inquires a year county-wide, of which approximately
250 are discrimination complaints that are fully investigated. Fair Housing of Main also conducts
extensive education and outreach to landlords, property owners and tenants on rights and
responsibilities under fair housing laws.
                                      Image by Egan Snow, Flickr
3.         Housing Age and Condition
The age of a community’s housing stock can provide an indicator of overall housing conditions.
Typically housing over 30 years in age is likely to have rehabilitation needs that may include new
plumbing, roof repairs, foundation work and other repairs. Table A.19 displays the age of Mill
Valley’s occupied housing stock by owner/renter tenure as of 2010.
Mill Valley’s housing stock is relatively old, with 80 percent of the community’s housing built
prior to 1980, 50 percent built prior to 1960 and 25 percent built prior to 1940. Despite the
advanced age of the housing stock, problems with property maintenance and housing
deterioration have not been an issue thus far in Mill Valley. High property values and a strong
sense of neighborhood pride have contributed to ongoing upkeep and renovation of the housing
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                               Page A-30

                                                                                         May 4, 2015
stock and well maintained neighborhoods. Nonetheless, given the community’s aging housing
stock, combined with a growing senior population who may face difficulties maintaining their
homes, both code enforcement and housing rehabilitation programs continue to be important.
                               Table A.19: Age of Housing Stock - 2010
                                     Owner-Occupied Units          Renter-Occupied Units
       Year Structure Built
                                        #             %               #              %
       2005 or later                   95             2%              0               --
       2000-2004                       28             1%              0               --
       1990-1999                      164             4%             92              5%
       1980-1989                      543            13%            238             12%
       1970-1979                      358             9%            711             36%
       1960-1969                      525            13%            300             15%
       1950-1959                      895            21%            189              9%
       1940-1949                      294             7%             81              4%
       1939 or earlier               1,254           30%            389             19%
       Total                         4,156          100%           2,000           100%
       Source: 2006-2010 American Community Survey.
In terms of developing a general estimate of the number of units in need of rehabilitation in Mill
Valley, the City used the following approach. Using 30 years as the benchmark when residential
structures begin requiring major systems replacement or repair, units built prior to 1980 can be
considered as potential candidates for rehabilitation needs. Of Mill Valley’s approximately 1,700
pre-1980 rental units, an estimated 25 percent, or 425 units, may require some degree of
rehabilitation. Among the city’s 3,300 pre-1980 owner units, an estimated ten percent, or 330
units, may be in need of rehabilitation. No units have been identified as needing replacement.
4.       Housing Costs and Affordability
a.       Rental Housing Market
A rent survey was conducted in September 2014 to evaluate rental trends down to the city level.
Rental data was collected based on asking rents for units advertised on rental websites,
including Craigslist and Trulia.
Mill Valley has a very limited number of vacant apartment units listed for rent. A total of 24 one
and two bedroom units were identified, ranging in price from $1,000 to $3,550 and
commanding median rents of $2,500 and $2,850 respectively. No studios or three bedroom
apartments were advertised for rent in Mill Valley.
With a total of 35 single-family homes advertised, a greater number of homes were listed for
rent in Mill Valley than apartment units. Single-family homes commanded median rents of
$4,000 for a two bedroom home, $5,000 for a three bedroom home, and $6,800 for a home
with four or more bedrooms.
In addition to the full rental units surveyed, 11 individual rooms were listed for rent within
condominiums and single-family homes, ranging in price from $700 to $1,500.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                               Page A-31

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
                       Table A.20: Survey of Vacant Rental Units – September 2014
              Unit Type and         # Units
                                                        Rental Range            Median Rent
                Bedrooms         Advertised
             Apartments/Condominiums
                     1                13              $1,000 - $3,000             $2,500
                     2                11              $1,950 - $3,550             $2,850
                  Total               24              $1,000 - $3,550             $2,600
             Single-Family Homes
                     2                 8             $2,600 - $5,400              $4,000
                     3                12              $3,500 - $9,500             $5,000
                    4+                15              $5,000 - $9,500             $6,800
                  Total               35              $2,600 - $9,500             $6,000
             Rooms for Rent
                     1                11               $700 - $1,500              $1,100
             Source: www.craigslist.org and Trulia.com
b.         Homeownership Market
Table A.21 compares median home sales prices during calendar year 2013 in Mill Valley and
other southern Marin communities by zip code, and contrasts this with sales prices during the
prior year. Within the greater Mill Valley zip code 94941 (encompasses Mill Valley and
unincorporated communities of Almonte, Alto, Tamalpais-Homestead Valley, and Strawberry), a
total of 489 single-family homes and condominiums were sold in 2013 for an overall median
sales price of $1,050,000. In comparison to calendar year 2012, the median price in zip code
94941 increased 16.7 percent and the volume of sales increased 6.1 percent. The 2013 median
sales price in greater Mill Valley was significantly higher than San Anselmo, Sausalito, and Corte
Madera, slightly below Larkspur, and well below that of Tiburon/Belvedere. However, as the
median sales price figures in Table A.21 include both single-family and condominiums, a
comparison among communities should consider the relative mix of single-family homes and
condominiums given the generally higher sales prices of homes.
        Table A.21: Regional Single-Family Homes and Condominium Sales Jan – Dec 2013
                                          # Homes/        % Change      Median      % Change Price/
   Community               Zip code
                                         Condos old       from 2012   Sales Price  from 2012 Sq. Ft.
   Mill Valley               94941           489              6.1%    $1,050,000      16.7%   $616
   Corte Madera              94925           158             11.3%     $872,000       3.8%    $592
   Larkspur                  94939            92            -29.8%    $1,255,000      19.5%   $638
   San Anselmo               94960           285             11.8%     $869,500       11.0%   $535
   Sausalito                 94965           162              8.7%     $895,000       34.9%   $707
   Tiburon/Belvedere         94920           223             -6.7%    $1,800,000      21.8%   $769
   Source: Dataquick Annual Sales Price Charts by Zip Code, 2013.
While the prior Table A.21 provides an overview of the sub-regional housing sales market, the
following Table A.22 provides detailed information on all sales of existing and new single-family
homes and condominiums within the Mill Valley jurisdiction between January and September
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                  Page A-32

                                                                                                               May 4, 2015
  2014. A total of 134 single-family home sales were recorded during this nine month period, with
  prices ranging from a median of $1,158,000 (one-two bedroom) to $1,212,000 (three-bedroom)
  up to $1,971,000 (five-bedroom). Housing sales reflect the diversity of Mill Valley’s housing
  stock, ranging from smaller, more modest units (one and two bedroom homes averaged 1,400
  square feet in size, with two homes selling for under $500,000), to larger lot, luxury units (lot
  sizes for four and five bedroom homes averaged 15,000 and 22,500 square feet respectively,
  with 15 homes selling for over $3 million). The overall median single-family home sales price in
  Mill Valley was $1,550,000 for a 2,300 square foot home built in 1950. In comparison, the
  January 2012 - June 2013 real estate survey conducted for Mill Valley's last Housing Element
  documented a median single-family sales price of $1,075,000, testimony to the dramatic
  increase in home prices over the past several years.
  Forty condominium units were sold in Mill Valley during this nine month period, representing
  nearly one-quarter of all units sold. Median condo prices were substantially below that of
  single-family homes, ranging from $455,000 for a one-bedroom, to $660,000 for a two-bedroom
  and $650,000 for a three-bedroom. (The higher price of a two bedroom versus three bedroom
  unit is in part explained by the greater number of newer, post-1980 two bedroom units).
  Among all 40 condominiums sold, the median sales price was $610,000, reflecting a 25 percent
  increase above the $488,000 median sales price documented in the January 2012 - June 2013
  sales survey.
      Table A.22: Mill Valley Home and Condominium Sales Prices January - September 2014
    #        Units                                                            Avg. Unit        Avg. Parcel       Avg. Year
                               Price Range                Median Price
 Bdrms        Sold                                                               Size              Size            Built
Single-Family Homes
   1/2         27         $280,000 - $2,650,000            $1,158,000         1,400 s.f.        7,700 s.f.         1946
    3          52         $208,000 - $2,885,000            $1,212,000         1,900 s.f.       12,000 s.f.         1950
    4          39         $202,000 - $5,875,000            $1,930,000         2,800 s.f.       14,900 s.f.         1952
   5+          16        $1,505,000 - $5,550,000           $1,971,000         3,600 s.f.       22,500 s,f,         1958
 Total        134         $202,000 - $5,875,000            $1,550,000         2,300 s.f.       13,200 s.f.         1950
Condominiums
    1          12          $350,000 - $600,000              $455,000           800 s.f.             --             1994
    2          19          $505,000 - $920,000              $660,000          1,300 s.f             --             1973
    3           9         $525,000 - $1,050,000             $650,000          1,500 s.f.            --             1975
 Total         40         $350,000 - $1,050,000             $610,000          1,200 s.f.            --             1975
Source: Dataquick On-Line Real Estate Database. Compiled by Karen Warner Associates.
Note: Sales are limited to the City of Mill Valley jurisdictional boundary, and exclude properties within the 94941 zip code
outside the city limits.
  A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                                   Page A-33

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
c.         Housing Affordability
The affordability of housing in Mill Valley can be assessed by comparing market rents and sales
prices with the amount that households of different income levels can afford to pay for housing.
Compared together, this information can reveal who can afford what size and type of housing as
well as indicate the type of households that would most likely experience overcrowding or
overpayment.
For purposes of evaluating home purchase affordability, Table A.23 presents the maximum
affordable purchase price for moderate income households (120% AMI), and compares this with
market sales prices for single-family homes and condominiums in Mill Valley (refer to Table
A.22). As illustrated below, the maximum affordable purchase price ranges from $470,000 (two
person household) up to $676,000 (five person household), rendering median single-family
home prices in Mill Valley well out of reach. Condominiums, however, do provide an affordable
homeownership option for some moderate income households. For example, a two person
moderate income household can afford a purchase price up to $470,000 and is thus able to
afford the $455,000 median priced one bedroom condominium. While the median price of a
three bedroom condominium ($650,000) exceeds the level affordable to a four person
moderate income household ($620,000), three two-bedroom and three three-bedroom
condominiums sold in 2014 fell within this affordability threshold. Expanding the supply of
condominiums, combined with downpayment assistance programs and inclusionary housing
requirements, can be an effective way to extend affordable housing opportunities and ensure
households earning moderate incomes remain part of the Mill Valley community.
      Table A.23: 2014 Marin County Maximum Affordable Housing Cost (Moderate Income)
 Moderate Income                                1 Bedroom        2 Bedroom      3 Bedroom       4 Bedroom
 Affordable Housing Cost                        (2 persons)      (3 persons)    (4 persons)     (5 persons)
 Household Income @ 120% Median                    $98,900         $111,250       $123,600        $133,500
 Income Towards Housing @ 35% Income               $34,615          $38,937        $43,260         $46,725
 Maximum Monthly Housing Cost                      $2,885            $3,245        $3,605           $3,995
       Less Ongoing Monthly Expenses:
                      1
             Utilities                              ($150)           ($175)         ($200)          ($225)
             Taxes (1.1% affordable hsg price)      ($425)           ($493)         ($556)          ($622)
                        2
             Insurance (0.2% sales price)            ($75)            ($87)          ($99)          ($110)
                                      3
             HOA Fees & Maintenance                 ($400)           ($400)         ($400)          ($400)
 Monthly Income Available for Mortgage             $1,835            $2,090        $2,350           $2,638
 Supportable 30 yr Mrtg @ 4.2% interest           $375,000         $427,000       $482,000        $541,000
 Homebuyer Downpayment (20%)                       $95,000         $107,000       $120,000        $135,000
 Maximum Affordable Purchase Price                $470,000         $534,000       $620,000        $676,000
 Mill Valley Median Single-Family Price                --         $1,158,000     $1,212,000      $1,930,000
 Mill Valley Median Condo Price                   $455,000         $660,000       $650,000            --
 Source: Karen Warner Associates.
 1
   Utilities based on Marin Housing Authority single-family utility allowance schedule for gas appliances.
 2
   Homeowner insurance based on quote from Progressive Insurance.
 3
   HOA fees based on fees for condominiums currently on the market
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                        Page A-34
                                                                                                May 4, 2015
Table A.24 presents the maximum affordable rents for very low, low and moderate income
households by household size, and compares with median apartment rents in Mill Valley (as
documented in the rent survey presented in Table A.20). The following summarizes the findings
of rental affordability by income level:
     Very Low Income: Median rents for all unit sizes are well above the level of affordability
         for all very low income households, with a monthly affordability gap ranging from
         approximately $210 for a single person renting a room, to $1,717 for a three person
         household seeking a two bedroom apartment. Examples of very low income
         occupations priced out of the rental market in Mill Valley include retail salespersons,
         childcare workers and home health aides (refer to Table A.10).
     Low Income: A low income single person household can afford to rent a room in a
         shared unit in Mill Valley; single individuals preferring a separate unit may be limited to
         one bedroom apartments (no studio apartments were identified in the rent survey),
         which exceeds their maximum affordable rent level by over $1,000. The rent survey
         conducted for the Housing Element in 2012 documented an affordability gap for low
         income two person households of just $90, and $140 for households with three persons,
         whereas the 2014 rent survey identifies a gap ranging from $800 to $950 per month,
         indicative of the steep increase in rents over the past several years. Low income
         occupations which will be constrained in finding appropriate housing in Mill Valley
         include elementary school teachers, graphic designers and administrative assistants.
     Moderate Income: Households earning moderate incomes are also limited in the rental
         housing available within their price range. While the 2012 rent survey depicted a local
         housing market affordable to moderate income households, the current 2014 survey
         indicates that moderate income households with two or more persons can no longer
         afford the median rent in Mill Valley. There are however a limited number of lower
         priced apartments affordable to households earning moderate incomes. Single-family
         home rentals – the majority of rental housing currently available in Mill Valley – are well
         beyond the level affordable to moderate income households.
                  Table A.24: 2014 Maximum Affordable Rents in Marin County
                                          Maximum Affordable Rent After Utilities Allowance*
Income Level                        Studio             1 Bedroom           2 Bedroom         3 Bedroom
                                  (1 person)           (2 person)          (3 person)        (4 person)
Very Low Income                      $890                $1,016              $1,133             $1,249
Low Income                          $1,484               $1,695              $1,896             $2,098
Moderate Income                     $2,062               $2,358              $2,640             $2,925
Median Apartment Rent               $1,100**             $2,500              $2,850               --
Median Single-family Rent              --                  --                $4,000             $5,000
Source: Karen Warner Associates
*Utility costs based on Marin Housing Authority apartment utility allowance schedule (assumes gas
heating, cooking and water heating): $100 for studios, $115 for 1 bedrooms, $140 for 2 bedrooms, and
$165 for 3 bedrooms.
** As no studio apartments were listed for rent, reflects median price of rooms advertised for rent
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                      Page A-35

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
d. Second Units and Affordability
Second units are an integral segment of Mill Valley’s housing stock, comprising an estimated 550
units, including 88 new unit permitted in the prior 2007-2013 Housing Element RHNA cycle, and
an additional eight permitted in 2014. Because of their small size, second units typically rent for
less than apartments, and can offer affordable rent options for seniors and single persons. In
order to obtain more detailed information about their use and rent structure in Mill Valley, in
August 2014, the City mailed a survey to 416 properties with potential legal second units based
on Planning Department records. A total of 126 responses were received (30% response rate),
with 117 respondents indicating they currently have a second unit on their property. The
following summarizes the results of the second unit survey, with the complete survey report
included in Appendix E of the Housing Element.
          96 survey respondents provided information on the current occupants of their second
           unit: 56% were tenants, 27% were relatives/family members, 6% were occupied by the
           owner, 6% were house guests, 3% were nannies/Au-pairs, and 1% were caretakers. Two-
           thirds of respondents indicated their ADU was currently occupied, and three- quarters
           of respondents indicated their ADU was rented to a tenant.
          100 respondents provided information on the rents charged for their second unit. . As
           presented in Table A.25 below, 35 percent of rents were within the level affordable to
           very low income households, 39 percent were affordable to low income households, 22
           percent were affordable to moderate income households, and four percent were at
           levels affordable to above moderate income households.
               Table A.25: Second Unit Rents and Affordability - 2014 Mill Valley Survey
                                              # Survey       % of Qualifying Affordability
       Rent Range                           Responses        total                       Level
       Utilities only                                1
       $0/No rent charged                           28        35%           Very Low Income
       $400-$700                                     6
       $701-$1,000                                  16
       $1,001-$1,300                                14        39%                 Low Income
       $1,301-$1,500                                 9
       $1,501-$1,800                                12        22%           Moderate Income
       Over $1,800 (1 bdrm)                         10
       Over $1,800 (2 bdrm)                          4          4%           Above Moderate
       Total                                       100
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                Page A-36

                                                                                                  May 4, 2015
           5.         Assisted Housing At-Risk of Conversion
           State Housing Element law requires an analysis of the potential for rent-restricted low income
           housing units to convert to market rate housing and to propose programs to preserve or replace
           any units “at-risk” of conversion. Table A.26 presents a complete inventory of deed restricted
           affordable rental and ownership housing in Mill Valley.
                                         Table A.26: Assisted Housing Inventory
                                                     Total units/                     Potential
Project Name                Year Built    Tenant     Affordable    Deed Restriction    Subsidy        Ownership/
                                           Type         units            Source       Expiration     Management
Publicly-Assisted Rental Housing
Homestead Terrace                         Senior/                   Public housing-
                              1969                        28                          perpetuity          MHA
100 Linden Lane                          disabled                          HUD
Kruger Pines                              Senior/                   Public housing-
                              1971                        56                          perpetuity          MHA
47 North Knoll Road                      disabled                          HUD
                                                                                                       Non-profit
The Redwoods                              Senior/
                              1972                    149 / 60     HUD Section 231      2028     Community Church of
40 Camino Alto                           disabled
                                                                                                       Mill Valley
Shelter Hill                                                         Refinanced in                     Non-profit
                              1977        Family          75                            2066
37 Miwok Way                                                      2011 – Tax Credits                      EAH
Camino Alto Apts                                                   HUD Section 202                     Non-profit
                              1983       Disabled         24                            2028
260 Camino Alto Court                                              CDBG, Section 8                  Mercy Housing
Pickleweed Apts                                                        CHFA bond                       Non-profit
                              1986        Family          32                            2031
651 Miller Avenue                                                 City Ground-lease                 BRIDGE Housing
                                                                         HOME
Alto Station Apts                                                                                      Non-profit
                              1995        Family          17           State RHCP       2047
290 Camino Alto Court                                                                               BRIDGE Housing
                                                                  City Ground-lease
Mill Creek Apts                                                       Section 202                      Non-profit
                              2004       Disabled          9                            2029
60 Camino Alto                                                          Section 8                N Bay Rehab Services
Fireside Apartments                       Family/                  Low Income Tax                      Non-profit
                              2009                        49                            2064
(outside City limits)                     Senior                          Credit                     Eden Housing
Rental Housing with Affordable Inclusionary Units
420 Miller Avenue             2004        Family         4/1          Inclusionary     50 year           Private
211 Miller Avenue             2007        Family         4/1          Inclusionary     50 year           Private
505 Miller Avenue             2009        Family        21/5          Inclusionary     50 year           Private
                            Approved/                16/3 second
542 Miller Avenue                         Family                      Inclusionary     50 year           Private
                             Not built                   units
Ownership Housing with Affordable Inclusionary Units
Ashford Court                 1979        Family        28 / 8          BMR HOP         2017             Private
                                                                  City of Mill Valley
Eucalyptus Knoll I            1981        Family        40 / 6                          2026             Private
                                                                        BMR HOP
                                                                  City of Mill Valley
Eucalyptus Knoll II-IV        1987        Family        80 / 5                          2017             Private
                                                                        BMR HOP
Sunrise Pointe                1987        Family        66 / 6          BMR HOP         2017             Private
Strawberry Vista              1996        Family        20 / 2          BMR HOP         2026             Private
8 Old Mill                    2011        Family         4/1            BMR HOP         2062             Private
Throckmorton Village          2014        Family        11/2            BMP HOP         2064             Private
           A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                             Page A-37

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Within the Mill Valley city limits, eight publicly assisted multi-family rental housing
developments provide 301 units affordable to lower income families, seniors and persons living
with disabilities. An additional 49 affordable units, including ten units of permanent supportive
housing, are provided at the Fireside Apartments located just outside the city limits. In addition,
the City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance has resulted in the development of 37 affordable
rental and ownership units integrated within ten market rate developments.
None of the assisted rental developments in Mill Valley are considered at high risk of conversion
to market rents within the planning period, as confirmed by the risk assessment published by
the California Housing Partnership Corporation (CHPC) of HUD subsidized properties (2014).
Two of the eight assisted rental projects are owned and operated by the Marin Housing
Authority, with the remaining six properties owned and managed by non-profit corporations
that have a public purpose to develop and own affordable housing.
a.         Case Study: Shelter Hill Refinancing
Shelter Hill Apartments, 75 units of affordable family housing developed in 1977 under Mill
Valley’s inclusionary ordinance, was financed under a HUD Section 236(j) loan that had become
eligible for prepayment. Project-based Section 8 contracts were also maintained on two-thirds
of the units and were subject to appropriations from Congress and periodic renewals from HUD.
In 2009, EAH Housing joined forces with the project’s non-profit owner and property manager –
Interfaith Housing Foundation (IHF) – taking a majority role on the IHF board of directors and
assuming project management of Shelter Hill. After assuming managerial control, EAH worked
with architects and engineers to evaluate the physical rehabilitation needs of the 35 year old
property, and determined renovations in the order of $95,000/unit would be necessary,
inclusive of significant seismic upgrading.
EAH secured predevelopment funds from the Marin Workforce Housing Trust, providing the
resources necessary to begin structuring a financing plan for the Shelter Hill renovations. The
final plan involved multiple layers of financing, and included paying off the HUD Section 236 loan
and securing 4 percent low income housing tax credits, critical to the project’s long term
preservation as affordable housing. Rehabilitation improvements are currently underway, and
in addition to extensive structural and property improvements, include the installation of
photovoltaic panels to supply a portion of the development’s power needs.
                                         Shelter Hill Apartments
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                               Page A-38

                                                                                                May 4, 2015
6.       Housing Problems
A continuing priority of communities is enhancing or maintaining the quality of life for residents.
A key measure of the quality of life in Mill Valley is the extent of “housing problems.” One
measure of housing problems used by both the State and Federal governments is the extent of
housing overpayment and overcrowding within a community.
a.       Overpayment
Housing overpayment, as defined by the State and Federal government, refers to spending more
than 30 percent of income on housing; severe overpayment is spending greater than 50 percent
of income. Table A.27 shows the incidence of overpayment in Mill Valley.
                               Table A.27: Housing Overpayment - 2010
                                                                                          Marin Co.
      Overpayment                                        Households        Percent            %
      Owners
      Overpayment
                                                             1,709           43%             42%
      (>30% income on housing)
        Severe Overpayment
                                                              596            15%             20%
           (>50% income on housing)
         Lower Income Households Overpaying                   490            71%             60%
      Renters
      Overpayment
                                                              780            37%             54%
      (>30% income on housing)
         Severe Overpayment
                                                              422            20%             28%
           (>50% income on housing)
           Lower Income Households Overpaying                 607            66%             66%
      Total Overpayment                                      2,489           40%             46%
      Source: American Community Survey (ACS) 2006-2010. Percentage overpayment from ACS applied to
      2010 Census count of owner/renter households. Lower income overpayment derived from HUD CHAS.
      Note: Severe overpayment is a subset of overpayment.
According to the 2006-2010 American Community Survey, 43 percent of owners and 37 percent
of renters in Mill Valley were spending more than 30 percent of their total income on housing.
Severe overpayment impacts 20 percent of the city’s renters, which while a significant housing
need, remains below the 28 percent renter overpayment Countywide. In terms of overpayment
among lower income households (<80% AMI), 607 lower income renter households and 490
lower income owners were faced with overpayment in Mill Valley, translating to nearly 70
percent of the city’s lower income households overpaying. The impact of housing overpayment
on Mill Valley’s lower income households is significant, with the community’s special needs
populations – seniors, persons with disabilities, and female-headed households with children -
most vulnerable to losing their housing due to an inability to pay.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                      Page A-39

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
b.         Overcrowding
The State defines an overcrowded housing unit as one occupied by more than 1.01 persons per
room (excluding kitchens, porches, and hallways). A unit with more than 1.51 occupants per
room is considered severely overcrowded. The incidence of overcrowded housing is a general
measure of whether there is an available supply of adequately sized housing units.
Table A.28 shows the incidence of overcrowding in Mill Valley and Marin by tenure, as measured
by the 2006 -2010 American Community Survey. As indicated, less than one percent of owner
households in Mill Valley are considered overcrowded, though all 25 of these households meet
the definition of severe overcrowding. The incidence of overcrowding is more prevalent among
Mill Valley’s renter households, with 4.2 percent overcrowded; none of these households are
severely overcrowded. Overall, household overcrowding remains a relatively minor issue in Mill
Valley.
                              Table A.28: Overcrowded Households - 2010
                                                                                    Marin Co.
                          Overcrowding                Households         Percent       %
                  Owners
                  Overcrowding                              25            0.6%       0.7%
                     Severe Overcrowding                    25            0.6%       0.2%
                  Renters
                  Overcrowding                              89            4.2%       5.8%
                     Severe Overcrowding                     0             0%        2.3%
                  Total Overcrowding                       114            1.8%       2.5%
                  Source: American Community Survey (ACS) 2006-2010. Percentage overcrowding
                  from ACS applied to 2010 Census count of owner/renter households.
                  Note: Severe overcrowding is a subset of overcrowding.
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                   Page A-40

                                                                                          May 4, 2015
G.       Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
The Regional Housing Allocation (RHNA) is a state-mandated process, which determines the
amount of future housing growth each city and county must plan for in their housing elements.
This “fair share” allocation concept seeks to ensure that each jurisdiction accepts responsibility
for the housing needs of not only its resident population, but also for the jurisdiction’s projected
share of regional housing growth across all income categories.
The RHNA process begins with the California Department of Housing and Community
Development’s (HCD) projection of future statewide housing growth need, and the
apportionment of this need to regional councils of government throughout the state. As the Bay
Area’s designated Council of Government, the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) is
the agency responsible for developing an allocation methodology to allocate the region’s
assigned share of statewide need to cities and counties by income level. Once a jurisdiction
receives its RHNA allocation from ABAG, it must demonstrate in its Housing Element how it will
accommodate its RHNA number by providing “adequate sites” through general plan and zoning.
As the RHNA represents a planning target for new residential growth and not a building quota,
so long as a jurisdiction provides sufficient sites and does not impose constraints to
development, it is not penalized for falling short of its RHNA goals.
In communities with little or no remaining vacant land, the Housing Element sites inventory may
need to explore a variety of site options, such as: underutilized residential sites suitable for
intensification; areas with potential for mixed use; adaptive reuse of existing buildings; second
residential units; and publicly owned surplus land, among others. Under limited circumstances,
up to 25 percent of a jurisdiction’s lower income RHNA need may be met through alternatives to
new construction by providing committed financial assistance to make existing units affordable
through rehabilitation, conversion and/or preservation. The residential sites analysis conducted
for Mill Valley’s Housing Element evaluated a full range of site options, with the goal of providing
a balanced approach to addressing the community’s identified housing needs.
2014-2022 RHNA Cycle
As defined by the RHNA, Mill Valley's new construction need for the 2015-2023 period has been
established at 129 new units, distributed among the income categories as shown in Table A.29.
The 129 units for the fifth cycle RHNA is actually a decrease from the City's previous 2007-2014
RHNA of 292 units, which means that much of the planning for opportunity sites conducted in the
last Housing Element can serve as a solid foundation for this Housing Element.
                             Table A.29: Mill Valley 2014-2022 RHNA
                                        Percent of
            Income Level                                    2007-2014        2014-2022
                                           AMI
           Very Low                        <50%                 74               41
           Low                            51-80%                54               24
           Moderate                      81-120%                68               26
           Above Moderate                 120%+                 96               38
           Total                                               292              129
A. Housing Needs Assessment                                                                Page A-41

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
A. Housing Needs Assessment           Page A-42
                                                                                         May 4, 2015
Appendix B.                 Housing Constraints
A.        Constraints and Opportunities
Housing Development is affected by both market forces and public regulations and policies. This
chapter discusses both governmental and non-governmental constraints that affect housing in
Mill Valley. State Housing Law, Section 65583(a) of the Government Code, requires an
evaluation of these constraints within the local Housing Element.
Governmental constraints include potential and actual constraints upon the maintenance,
improvement or development of housing for all income levels, and persons with disabilities as a
result of land use controls and zoning regulations, building code standards and code compliance,
site improvements, fees and exactions, and processing and permitting procedures and local
housing programs. Non-governmental constraints to housing development include potential and
actual constraints upon the maintenance, improvement or development of housing for all
incomes resulting from land costs, construction and soft costs and the availability of financing.
State housing law requires the identification of these constraints so that where possible, such
constraints may be addressed and removed. An inventory of land suitable for residential
development is also required, including vacant sites and sites having the potential for
redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning, public facilities and services to
these sites. In addition, the analysis must include the identification of a zoning district or
districts where emergency shelters are allowed as a permitted use without a conditional use or
other discretionary permit.
B.        Governmental Constraints
Like all jurisdictions, the City of Mill Valley has procedures, regulations and requirements which
apply to development application review and processing and are intended to protect the long-
term health, safety, and welfare of the community. These requirements can affect the type,
appearance, and cost of housing built in Mill Valley, including: zoning standards, permitting fees,
subdivision standards and design review. Other building and design requirements enforced by
Mill Valley follow state laws, such as the California Building Code, Subdivision Map Act, and
energy conservation requirements.
Past efforts to remove governmental constraints in Mill Valley include:
     Preparation of a Residential Design Guidelines brochure and handouts to clarify review
          criteria, including definitions associated with second units and floor area ratio (2005
          with revisions in 2011-2012).
     Reduced parking standards for live/work opportunities and other development projects
          on a case by case basis.
     Encouragement of mixed use opportunities through reductions in parking requirements.
     Modification of Second Dwelling Unit development standards including reduction of
          parking requirements and increase in permitted unit size (2004).
     Initiation of additional amnesty program for unpermitted second units (July 2003-
          December 2004).
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                            Page B-1

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
      Adoption of Reasonable Accommodation procedures within the Zoning Ordinance to
           provide formal procedures for persons with disabilities to request reasonable
           accommodation.
      Adoption of zoning for special needs populations, including by right zoning for
           emergency shelters and treatment of transitional and supportive under zoning as a
           residential use.
      Adoption of a local density bonus ordinance consistent with State law.
The Housing Plan includes specific policies and programs to remove and reduce governmental
constraints on the maintenance, improvement and development of housing, while maintaining
community character.
The policies include:
      Policy 4.1 – Regulatory Incentives for Affordable Housing
      Policy 4.2 – Flexible Development Standards
      Policy 4.3 – Efficient Use of Multi-Family Zoning
      Policy 4.4 – Development Review
      Policy 4.5 – Regular Update to the Zoning Code to Reflect Housing Standards and
           Regulations (such as Density Bonus and Special Needs)
The programs include:
      Program #22 – Update Zoning Code, consistent with the Land Use Element, to define
           densities for residential uses with greater clarity for a more transparent and efficient
           development review process;
      Program #23 – Update Parking Standards, to increase effectiveness of parking standards
           by refining the standards;
      Program #24 – Fee Deferrals and/or Waivers for Affordable Housing, to provide
           information regarding fee breaks for affordable housing, and specify fee waivers for
           extremely low income households;
      Program #25– Density Bonus and Other Incentives for Affordable Housing, to maintain
           consistency with State law;
In addition, the City has established a Zoning and Design Guidelines Advisory Committee (ZDAC)
who have been providing input on refinements to multi-family and mixed use residential
development standards, in conjunction with the creation of a set of design guidelines for multi-
family and mixed use development, to more effectively guide development proposals and
reduce uncertainties.
1.         Land Use Controls & Development Standards
Government Code Section 65583(a) requires “An analysis of potential and actual governmental
constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all income
levels,…including land use controls, building codes and their enforcement, site improvements,
fees and other exactions required of developers, and local processing and permit procedures…”.
Although local ordinances and policies are enacted to protect the health and safety of citizens
and further the general welfare, it is useful to periodically reexamine local ordinances/policies to
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                           Page B-2

                                                                                       May 4, 2015
determine whether, under current conditions, they are accomplishing their intended purpose or
if in practice constitute a barrier to the maintenance, improvement or development of housing
for all income levels.
Such an examination may reveal that certain policies have a disproportionate or negative impact
on the development of particular housing types (e.g., multifamily) or on housing developed for
low- or moderate-income households.
Ordinances, policies or practices which have the effect of excluding housing affordable to low-
and moderate-income households may also violate State and federal fair housing laws which
prohibit land-use requirements that discriminate or have the effect of discriminating against
affordable housing.
There are many locally imposed land use and building requirements that can affect the type,
appearance, and cost of housing built in Mill Valley. The Mill Valley General Plan and Zoning
Ordinance establish the locations where housing can be built, at what density, lot size, setbacks,
and required site improvements. Zoning and land use designations in Mill Valley are largely
determined by the City’s goals that: (1) the health and well-being of people and physical safety
of property should be assured; (2) the natural environment should be protected and should
visually dominate the character of Mill Valley; and (3) new development should be compatible
with Mill Valley’s small-town character.
To implement these goals, Mill Valley has zoned major portions of its undeveloped hillside areas
at very low densities. The City has also zoned certain areas in the hillsides as permanent open
space after public acquisition or as a result of dedication from private interests. Community
design objectives, as they relate to undeveloped hillside areas, often coincide with
environmental constraints to development.
The City has adopted an objective of protecting its existing residential neighborhoods. The City
has generally developed into single-family residential neighborhoods, a pattern reinforced by
schools, parks and streets with limited traffic capacity. These neighborhoods provide a lifestyle
and housing stock which are among Mill Valley’s major assets. Policies have therefore been
adopted which guarantee that new development in established neighborhoods will be
compatible with existing neighborhood character; and development adjacent to established
neighborhoods will not generate significant levels of traffic through these neighborhoods.
Much of the remaining developable land area consists of large parcels with significant
environmental constraints and moderate to severe public health and safety constraints
including: steep slopes, underlying bay mud, drainage problems and fire risk. Detailed soils
reports, engineering and design studies and associated permits are required. Therefore most of
these parcels are only suitable for single family residential units. Because many of these sites
were originally subdivided into lot sizes that are inconsistent with current zoning regulations,
variances may be required.
Mill Valley’s land use density standards are driven by Zoning district categories and range from
0.01 dwelling units per acre to 29 dwelling units per acre, with an average density of about 6
dwelling units per acre (see Tables 1, 2 and 3). About 5.32 percent of the parcels in the city are
designated for development between 0-1 dwelling units per acre (RS-30, RS-43, RS-10A, RSP-1A,
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                          Page B-3

       Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
       RSP-1.5A, RSP-2A, RSP-2.5A, RSP-3A, RSP-4A, RSP-5A, RSP-10A, RSP-30); 20.29 percent is
       designated for development at 2-4 dwelling units per acre (RS-10, RS-15, RS-20); 51.65 percent
       is designated for development at 5-10 dwelling units per acre (R-P, RS-6, RS-7.5, RSP-5, RM-4.0,
       RM-5.5, RMP-5); 7.13 percent is designated for development at 11-19 dwelling units per acre
       (RM-2.5, RM-3.0, RM-3.5); and 7.47 percent is designated for densities at more than 20 dwelling
       units per acre (C-R, RM-1.5, RM-2.0).
       Tables 1, 2 and 3 list the existing residential development standards for all of Mill Valley’s
       residential districts. Additionally, the Mill Valley Residential Design Review Handbook offers
       guidelines for other development features including; relating new buildings to the natural
       topography and existing vegetation, minimizing grading activities, minimizing view and privacy
       impacts, minimizing water use and fire hazards, minimizing impervious surfaces, designing for
       energy efficiency and sustainability, keeping scale, mass and bulk compatible with the
       neighborhood.
       Table B.1: Single Family Residential Development Standards
Development
                       RS-6       RS-7.5      RS-10       RS-15      RS-20       RS-30    RS-43      RS-3A     RS-5A     RS-10A
Requirement
Min. parcel size
in SF for lots
                      6,000        7,500      10,000     15,000     20,000      30,000    1 acre    3 acres 5 acres 10 acres
with < 10%
slope
Min. lot width         60’          60’         80’        80’        100’       100’      150’       150’      150’      150’
Max. Units                               1 plus 1 Residential Second Unit on Lots over 5,000 square feet
(du/parcel)
Max. Density
(du/acre)              7.25         5.80       4.35        2.90       2.18       1.45       1.0       0.33      0.20      0.10
Max. Adjusted        35% of effective lot        10% plus 2,000 SF of
                                                                                5% plus 3,000 SF of effective lot area for lots >
Floor Area              area for lots <       effective lot area for lots of
                                                                                 30,000 SF, to a max. of 7,000 SF of floor area
                           8,000 SF                8,000 to 20,000 SF
Max. Building
                       40%          40%        40%         35%        35%        30%       25%        10%        7%        4%
Coverage
Minimum Setbacks
   Exterior
                                                                         15 ft.
Property Lines
   Interior
                             1 ft. for every 1,000 SF of effective lot area, but no less than 5 ft. or more than 15 ft.
Property Lines
Max. Height                                                  25 ft. above natural grade
Percentage of
                     31.92% 12.91% 13.41% 0.96%                    5.91%       0.16%     2.63%        0%         0%       0.59%
total parcels
Total acreage
                     298.58      205.27 273.73          12.18     169.91        7.40     131.10        0          0        89.24
of parcels
       Source: Mill Valley Zoning Ordinance
       B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                                          Page B-4

                                                                                                   May 4, 2015
   Table B.2: Single Family Residential Planned and Planned Single Family Residential
   Development Standards
Development                                    RSP-    RSP-    RSP-     RSP-                               RSP-
                      R-P    RSP-5 RSP-30                                      RSP-3A RSP-4A RSP-5A
Requirement                                     1A      1.5A     2A     2.5A                                10A
Min. parcel      10 acres
size               w/base
                   density 5,000 30,000         1       1.5      2       2.5      3       4                 10
                                                                                                5 acres
                 based on      SF      SF      acre acres acres acres acres acres                          acres
                   percent
                    slope
Min. lot
                                Determined through Planned Development (PD) review process
width
Max. Units            1
(du/parcel)          OR
                 Attached
                                  1 plus 1 Residential Second Unit on Lots over 5,000 square feet
                     and
                                               OR Attached dwellings w/ PD approval
                 detached
                 dwellings
                    w/ PD
                 approval
Max. Density       Varies
(du/acre)         from 5.8
                    to .01
                             8.71     1.45     1.0     0.66    0.50     0.40    0.33    0.25      0.20     0.10
                 dependin
                   g on %
                    slope
Max.
Adjusted                        Determined through Planned Development (PD) review process
Floor Area
Max.
Building                        Determined through Planned Development (PD) review process
Coverage
Minimum
                                 Determined through Planned Development (PD) review process
Setbacks
Max. Height                                                  30 ft.
Percentage
of total           6.38%    0.12% 0.02% 0.1% 0.59% 0.31% 0.07% 0.1% 0.03% 0.24% 0.45%
parcels
Total
acreage of         68.63     0.814 0.778 6.63 38.54 29.68 42.86 14.14 7.86                       57.42 132.77
parcels
   Source: Mill Valley Zoning Ordinance
   B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                                   Page B-5
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Table B.3: Multi Family Residential Development Standards
  Development
                         RM-1.5      RM-2.0      RM-2.5     RM-3.0     RM-3.5     RM-4.5         RM-5.5
  Requirement
  Min. land area
                         1,500        2,000       2,500      3,000       3,500     4,500          5,500
  per dwelling (SF)
  Max. Units                       1 plus 1 Residential Second Unit on Lots over 5,000 square feet
  (du/parcel)                                                      OR
                                                       Multiple family dwellings
  Max. Density
  (du/acre)                29         21.78       17.42      14.52       12.45     9.68            7.92
  Minimum useable
  open space
  1-bedroom                100          125         150        200         450       500            500
  2-bedroom                150          175         200        300         450       500            500
  3-bedroom                200          250         300        450         450       500            500
  Max. Lot
                          50%          50%         50%        50%         50%       45%            40%
  Coverage
  Minimum Setbacks
     Exterior
                                                                  15 ft.
  Property Line
     Interior
                        1 ft. for every 1,000 SF of lot area from a minimum of 5ft. to a maximum of 10 ft.
  Property Line
  Max. Height                         25 ft. at required setbacks to twice all required setbacks
                                     35 ft. if more than twice all required setbacks are provided
  Percentage of
                         1.78%         5.6%       2.15%     0.24%        4.74%       0%           0.05%
  total parcels
  Total acreage of
                         21.52        15.92       14.32       2.3        31.62        0            5.07
  parcels
   Source: Mill Valley Zoning Ordinance
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                                       Page B-6
                                                                                            May 4, 2015
  Table B.4: Examples of Recent Single-Family and Multi-Family Developments
Year     Project        Zoning    Parcel   Zoning    Housing       Built no. of    Built     Status
Built    Name/          District  Size     Density   Type          units           Density
         Address                           allowed
2007     505 Miller     PD        51,827   Zoned at  Townhom       21 (2 low, 3    17.6      Approved
         Ave            (over     sf       RM-2.0    es and        moderate,       du/ac     and Built
                        C-N)               (21.8     condos        16 above
                                           du/ac)                  moderate)
2007     90 Evelyn      RS-43     14,766   1 du per  Single-       1               2.9       Approved
         Ave                      sf       lot (plus family                        du/ac     and Built
                                           a second  home
                                           unit)
2008     8 Old Mill St  PD        6,500    29 du/ac  Single-       4 (1 low, 3     26.8      Approved
                        over      sf                 family        above mod)      du/ac     and Built
                        RM-1.5                       homes and
                                                     affordable
                                                     studio
2010     500 Miller     PD        52,678   Zoned at  Condo         9 (above        7.4       Approved,
                        over C-   sf       RM-2.5    units         moderate)       du/ac     not yet
                        N                  density                                           built
                                           (17.4
                                           du/ac)
2010     542 Miller     PD        1.58     17.4      Townhom       16 (3 mod,      10.1      Approved
                        over      acres    du/ac     es and        13 above        du/ac     and Built
                        RM-2.5                       condos        mod)
2011     227 W          RS-7.5    10,800   1 du per  Second        1 (Second       4.0       Approved,
         Blithedale               sf       lot (plus Unit          Unit)           du/ac     not yet
         Ave                               a second                                          built
                                           unit)
2012     65             C-N       48,351   29 du/ac  Multi-        4               3.6       Approved,
         Throckmort               sf       maximu    family                        du/ac     not yet
         on                                m         housing                                 built
2012     30             RM-3.5    13,549   12.4      Townhom       3               9.6       Approved,
         Laurelwood               sf       du/ac     es                            du/ac     not yet
                                                                                             built
  The Zoning Ordinance currently restricts building heights to 25 feet in all single family residential
  districts (RS), unless the structure is setback more than twice all required setbacks, then the
  height limit is 35 feet. The height limit is 30 feet in all Planned Residential Districts (R-P and
  RSP), and 35 feet in the office and commercial districts that allow residential uses (P-A, C-G, C-N,
  C-R,). The Ordinance restricts heights in the Multiple Family district based on setbacks, if the
  setbacks provided are less than twice the minimum required then the maximum height is 25
  feet, if the setbacks are more than twice the minimum then the maximum height is 35 feet.
  Chapter 20.08.050 of the Zoning Ordinance defines building height as the “vertical distance from
  the natural grade to the highest point of the structure”. The maximum building height would
  therefore depend on where the highest and lowest points of contact of the building are with the
  natural grade. Also, building height is computed individually for each detached structure (with a
  maximum height limit of 15 feet). This method of measurement presents design flexibility for
  many residential parcels as a large proportion of them are on sloping lots.
  B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                             Page B-7

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Limitations on height can constrain a development’s ability to achieve maximum densities
especially in culmination with other development controls. Height limits of two stories or less in
multifamily districts is one example of development standards that can constrain achieving
maximum densities.
The city has experienced projects achieving the maximum densities within the existing height
and other development standards. Reductions in density typically occur due to on-site
constraints such as creeks, slope or stands of existing trees.
2.         Provisions for Housing within the Commercial District
Mill Valley’s existing zoning regulations allow for combined residential uses on commercially-
zoned properties. This form of mixed-use infill development has contributed to an increase in
residential uses within the commercial core. Residences over ground floor commercial provide
passive security for the area, provide a built-in customer base for commercial and retail uses,
and create increased activity and vitality within commercial areas. This form of traditional
mixed-use enhances the historic development pattern found in the commercial areas of the city
where apartments exist above street level retail spaces.
The City’s Zoning Code currently provides for residential units and mixed use projects as
conditionally permitted uses within the primary commercial zones (C-G, C-N and P-A) subject to
Planning Commission review and approval. Densities for multi-family residential uses in
commercial districts are not specified in the Zoning Code, and are determined by the Planning
Commission at the time an application is submitted.
The recently constructed Tamalpais Commons at 505 Miller Avenue was in the C-N zone,
approved in 2007. The project consisted of a three-story mixed-use building along Miller Avenue
containing 6 street level commercial spaces with 9 residential units above and 12 townhomes
backing up to the Corte Madera Creek.
Another multi-family residential project approved in 2003 was 420 Miller Avenue, in the C-N
zoning district, for four units. The proposed project underwent rezoning to allow for a “PD”
(Planned Development) overlay. Development standards for the project were determined
through the PD approval process.
While these development regulations provide for creativity and variety in development
proposals, there is limited certainty in project approval due to development standards being
determined on a case-by-case basis. The City has established a Zoning and Design Guidelines
Advisory Committee (ZDAC) who have been providing input on refinements to multi-family
development standards, including the potential use of Floor Area Ratios (FAR) and other
regulatory tools to effectively guide development proposals and reduce uncertainties.
The Professional Administrative Office (P-A) district provides for multiple-family dwellings or
mixed use developments as conditionally permitted uses. The General Commercial (C-G) and
Neighborhood Commercial (C-N) districts provide for residential development and mixed use
development as conditionally permitted uses. The Commercial Recreation (C-R) district provides
for multiple-family dwellings only if they are accessory to a permitted use with approval of a
Planned Unit Development (PUD) permit. In these commercial districts the residential density is
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                         Page B-8

                                                                                               May 4, 2015
determined on a case-by-case basis by the Planning Commission. While the Commission retains
this discretion to determine the residential density in the commercial districts and does so
where justified, the City could provide greater certainty to developers by further defining its
multi-family development standards, including density and parking, in the Zoning Ordinance.
Several programs in the Housing Element serve to address these issues. The City will develop
and adopt Multi-Family Design Guidelines (Program #1 - Residential Design Guidelines), remove
the Conditional Use Permit for multi-family and mixed uses for residential above the ground
floor or off commercial street frontage, and evaluate modifications to residential development
regulations in Commercial districts (Program #6 – Mixed Use Zoning in Commercial Districts),
and update parking standards to facilitate specific types of housing (Program #23 – Update
Parking Standards).
3.       Provisions for a Variety of Housing Types
Housing element law specifies that jurisdictions must identify adequate sites to be made
available through appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the
development of various types of housing for all economic segments of the population. This
includes single-family homes, multi-family housing, mobile homes, emergency shelters and
transitional housing, among others. Table 4 below summarizes housing types permitted within
residential and commercial districts.
Table B.5: Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District
  Housing Types Permitted                     RS        RM        P-A         C-G       C-N        C-R
  Residential Uses
  Single family dwellings                      P          P                    C          C
  Two-family (duplex) dwelling                CP          P                    C          C
  Multiple family dwellings                   CP          P         C          C          C        PD
  Secondary dwellings                          P          P
  Mobile Homes                                 P
  Mixed Use Residential                                   C         C          C          C
  Special Needs Housing
  Residential facility, 6 or fewer clients     P          P                    C          C
  Residential facility, 7 or more clients                 C                    C          C
  Nursing homes                                           C
  Single Room Occupancy (SRO)                             C                    C          C
  Supportive Housing *                         P          P         C          C          C
  Transitional Housing*                        P          P         C          C          C
  Emergency Shelter                                                            P          P
Source: Mill Valley Zoning Ordinance.
Legend: P = Permitted, C = Conditionally Permitted, PD = Requires a Planned Development Permit
RS: Single Family, RM: Multiple Family, P-A: Professional Administrative Office, C-G: General Commercial,
C-N: Commercial Neighborhood, C-R: Commercial Recreation
* Transitional and supportive housing are permitted/conditionally permitted in residential and
commercial zoning districts subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the
same type in the same zone.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                                 Page B-9

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
a.         Condominiums
The Mill Valley Zoning Ordinance defines Condominiums in accordance with California Civil Code
Section 738 except that the definition is not applicable to proposed commercial or industrial
condominiums and includes community apartments (developments where an undivided interest
in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon).
In Mill Valley, condominiums are common in the commercial districts (C-N and C-R) and the
multifamily districts along Miller Avenue (R-M).
In order to preserve the supply of rental units and the affordable housing rental stock, Mill
Valley’s Zoning Ordinance includes regulations for condominium conversion aimed at
maintaining the availability of an adequate supply of rental housing, and ensuring that rental
apartments converted to condominiums meet applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
Pursuant to Program #4 in the City's adopted 2009-2014 Housing Element, the City has updated
its Condominium Conversion regulations (Zoning Ordinance Chapter 20.59,) prohibiting the
conversion of rental developments to condominium ownership unless the following findings can
be made:
A.      the proposed conversion will not substantially affect the availability of rental housing in
        the community;
B.      replacement housing for displaced tenants is available within Mill Valley; and
C.      the proposed conversion is consistent with the Mill Valley General Plan, and in particular,
        with the objectives, policies, and programs of the Housing Element of the General Plan
        designed to provide for the housing needs of all economic segments of the community, as
        well as with any and all applicable specific plans.
As part of the application process, new regulations require applicants to conduct a rental survey
to showing comparable rental housing within the municipal boundaries of Mill Valley to
illustrate to staff and City decision makers that the proposed condominium conversion project
will not substantially impact the availability of rental housing and that there is sufficient
replacement housing for the displaced tenants. The survey must include identification of all
rental housing in structures of two or more units within Mill Valley and shall include the number
of units, categorized by bedroom count and rents charged, as well as vacancies by unit type.
This will survey, along with the findings, creates sufficient regulations to address condominium
conversions.
Furthermore, the City’s regulations set forth a series of tenant protections associated with
condominium conversions, including relocation assistance, right of first purchase, and leasehold
rights such as notice of termination and restricting rent increases. Conversions are also subject
to Mill Valley's Inclusionary Housing regulations.
b.         Residential Second Units
The Zoning Ordinance has a section on Residential Second Units (Section 20.90) to regulate the
development standards, maximum floor area, and off-street parking standards for second units.
The Ordinance also provides a process to legalize existing second units within 150 to 1,000
square feet.
A residential second unit (RSU) is a dwelling accessory to a primary dwelling on a site. An RSU may
be either a detached or attached dwelling unit, in addition to the primary unit allowed in all
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                             Page B-10

                                                                                         May 4, 2015
residential zoning districts that provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more
persons, and which may include a kitchen or cooking area, sleeping area or sanitation facilities on
the same parcel as the primary unit. A residential second unit may not be less than 150 square feet
nor more than a maximum of 1,000 square feet and only one is permitted per lot.
Second units are an integral segment of Mill Valley’s housing stock, comprising an estimated 550
units, including 88 new units permitted in the prior 2007-2013 Housing Element RHNA cycle, and
an additional eight permitted in 2014.         The City has supported the legalization of existing
second units developed without proper permits, with 77 previously unpermitted second units
brought up to code during the 2003-2004 amnesty program.
The City has found that second units are a valuable form of housing that provides low rent
options for extended family members, students, elderly, disabled, in-home care providers and
others. The City encourages second units within certain locational and development standards
that aim to limit or prevent neighborhood problems. Any application of for a second unit that
meets the required standards is approved ministerially. The City requires owner occupancy of
either the primary or second unit. Off street parking requirements for second units of 700
square feet or less is one space per unit, units of more than 700 square feet up to the maximum
allowed floor area of 1,500 square feet must provide two spaces. New second units are not
permitted on lots less than 5,000 square feet. As an older city, there are numerous lots in Mill
Valley that were created prior to the current standards and are less than 5,000 square feet in
area. The city has 1,659 parcels that are less than 5,000 square feet in area, in which 2nd units
would not be allowed.
The Marin Municipal Water District (MMWD) charges a hook up fee of $5,000 for new units
which can be a significant disincentive for new second units.
c.       Multi-Family Dwelling Units
The Multiple Family Residential (RM) Zoning District provides areas for residential
neighborhoods of single-family dwellings, two family dwellings, duplexes, apartments, and other
multiple family attached dwelling units, such as condominiums. The multiple family district
provides for innovative site planning, while providing on-site open space requirements on a per
dwelling basis. Mill Valley has 843 individual parcels in the RM Zoning District, encompassing a
total of nearly 90.9 acres of land (excluding the RMP-5 Zoning District, which is 0.78 acres on
seven parcels).
d.       Manufactured Housing/Mobile Homes
Section 65852.3 of the California Government Code requires jurisdictions to administratively
allow manufactured homes on lots zoned for single-family dwellings if they meet certain
standards. More specifically, the Government Code requires the following:
“Except with respect to architectural requirements, jurisdictions can only subject the
manufactured home and the lot on which it is placed to the same development standards to
which a conventional single-family residential dwelling on the same lot would be subject,
including, but not limited to, building setback standards, side and rear yard requirements,
standards for enclosures, access, and vehicle parking, aesthetic requirements, and minimum
square footage requirements. Any architectural requirements imposed on the manufactured
home structure itself shall be limited to its roof overhang, roofing material, and siding material.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                           Page B-11

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
These architectural requirements may be imposed on manufactured homes even if similar
requirements are not imposed on conventional single-family residential dwellings, but
requirements may not exceed those which would be required of conventional single-family
dwellings constructed on the same lot. In no case may a jurisdiction apply any development
standards that will have the effect of precluding manufactured homes from being installed as
permanent residences.”
Mill Valley allows mobile homes as a land use under the definition of “Single-family dwellings”
as a form of affordable housing. Mobile homes are subject to design review and installation
standards pursuant to State codes.
e.         Residential Care Homes
Thirty percent of Mill Valley’s households are senior households, and 12.2 percent of Mill Valley
residents over the age of 5 have one or more disabilities. For these special needs groups with
diverse housing needs, residential care homes are one way to address such needs. Residential
care homes are typically inclusive of facilities that provide residential social and personal care
for the disabled including people with substance abuse and people with limited self-care
abilities, but where medical care is not a major element. Residential care homes include
children’s homes, halfway houses, orphanages, rehabilitation centers, and self-help group
homes.
The Mill Valley Zoning Ordinance currently allows “Nursing and Rest Homes” as a conditional
use in the R-M Zoning Districts, however these are not the same as residential care homes.
Nursing and rest homes are typically residences for disabled or recovering persons who require
constant nursing care and have difficulty with daily living activities, and medical care is a major
component of such facilities.
In order to better clarify zoning provisions for various types of care facilities, the City has added
the following definitions to the Zoning Ordinance:
           20.08.136 Nursing Homes.
           "Nursing home", also referred to as a rest home, convalescent home, skilled nursing
           facility, or intermediate care facility means a type of residential care for people who
           require continual nursing care and have significant difficulty coping with the required
           activities of daily living. Nursing aides and skilled nurses are usually available 24 hours a
           day.
           20.08.159 Residential Facility.
           "Residential facility," as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 1502,
           means any family home, group care facility, or similar facility determined by the Director
           of the California Department of Social Services, for 24-hour nonmedical care of persons
           in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the
           activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. "Small" residential facilities
           are those in which six or fewer persons live together, and pursuant to Health and Safety
           Code Section 1566.3, are required to be classified as a residential use for zoning
           purposes. "Large" residential facilities are those in which seven or more persons live
           together.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                                   Page B-12

                                                                                          May 4, 2015
Section 1566.3 of the California Health and Safety Code requires residential facilities serving six
or fewer persons to be considered a residential use of property for purposes of local zoning
ordinances. No local agency can impose stricter zoning or building and safety standards on these
residential facilities – such as a conditional use permit, variance or other zoning clearance - than
is required of a family dwelling of the same type in the same district. Consistent with these
requirements, Mill Valley's Zoning Ordinance now specifies that small residential facilities (6 or
fewer clients) are permitted by right in the RS and RM zones, and conditionally permitted in the
CG zone.
Mill Valley has amended its Zoning Ordinance to provide for large residential facilities (7 or more
clients) as a conditional use within the RM and CG zoning districts. Unlike small facilities, large
residential care facilities (those with seven or more residents) are subject to applicable local
land use regulations and other restrictions such as special permit requirements (for example,
having to obtain a local health department permit for central food service). Local governments
may impose notification and public hearing requirements. However, the requirements must not
apply exclusively to residential care facilities, and local governments must follow state
mandated procedural requirements such as holding hearings for zoning decisions. Local
government entities are required to make reasonable accommodations for programs serving
individuals with disabilities. In some instances, accommodation may include exceptions to
zoning ordinances for large facilities with seven or more residents. When public safety issues
occur, federal and state laws do not pre-empt local authority or responsibility to deal with it.
Local rules that are enacted and enforced to provide for the community’s safety are not
prohibited under federal or state law as long as they are applied to all community members and
groups.
A more detailed discussion of residential care homes can be found in Section D (Special Needs
Populations) of Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment, in relation to housing needs for
seniors and persons with disabilities.
Definition of Family: Local governments may unintentionally restrict access to housing for
households failing to qualify as a “family” by the definition specified in the Zoning Code.
Specifically, a restrictive definition of “family” that limits the number of and differentiates
between related and unrelated individuals living together may illegally limit the development
and siting of group homes for persons with disabilities, but not housing for families that are
similarly sized or situated. Until recently, Mill Valley’s Zoning Code did not include a definition
of “family”, although given the presence of numerous group living facilities within the
community, the City has not utilized a narrow interpretation of the term “family” to restrict the
provision of group housing within its single-family and multi-family zoning districts.
Nonetheless, in order to facilitate the provision of housing for persons with disabilities, the City
has added the following definition to the Zoning Ordinance:
         20.08.0915 Family.
         "Family" means two or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a
         single dwelling unit. Family also means the residents and operators of a licensed
         residential facility as that term is defined in California Health & Safety Code Section
         1502(a) (1), which serves six or fewer persons.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                            Page B-13

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
f.         Senior Housing Projects
Approximately 19 percent of Mill Valley’s population is made up of seniors (age 65 and over).
Seniors in Mill Valley have access to a range of services that support aging in place and prevent
premature institutionalization.
Many of the senior programs are operated by the Mill Valley Seniors’ Club, which is sponsored
by the Mill Valley Parks and Recreation Department and coordinated by City staff. The Club
offers assistance in many areas to seniors (age 55 and above) in the community, and currently
has 260 members.
The Terrace Lounge of the Mill Valley Community Center is open for drop-in activities such as
chess, scrabble, poker, and social bridge, Monday through Friday from 10 am to 4 pm, and the
Club meets on Tuesdays from 10 am until 2 pm at the Center. The Club also organizes events
such as the Senior Art Show, volunteer tax aid from AARP, legal counseling and free health
insurance counseling by appointment, tai chi classes, driver safety courses, craft classes, knitting
groups, and day trips for small groups.
Another organization, Mill Valley Village, together with its parent Marin Village, provides
resources and assistance to enable aging in place. The Mill Valley Village is actively recruiting a
growing team of community volunteers to offer support services such as transportation and
home support services, and other social, cultural, and fitness programs for seniors.
The Episcopal Church of Our Saviour provides bag lunches prepared by volunteers for seniors,
and Mount Tamalpais United Methodist Church provides support for worship services for
residents at the Redwoods retirement center.
Mill Valley has three senior housing facilities which provide a total of 144 affordable housing
units for very low income seniors, including Homestead Terrace (built in 1969, 28 affordable
rental units), Kruger Pines (built in 1971, 56 affordable rental units), Marin Terrace (assisted
living, 49 beds) and The Redwoods (built in 1972, 150 apartment units). Please see Appendix A,
Section F-5 (Housing Stock Characteristics, Assisted Housing At-Risk of Conversion) for more
details on past senior housing projects.
The Marin County Department of Health and Human Services, Division of Aging and Adult
Services, also offers programs, information and assistance to seniors on housing matters. The
Division has a publication called Choices for Living, which lists the various senior housing options
available in Marin County,
A more detailed discussion on the needs of the senior population can be found in Section D-1
(Senior Households) of Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment.
The Fireside Apartments is a 50-unit transit-oriented affordable housing development that will
serve low-income families and seniors. A total of 20 units of this property will serve formerly
homeless families and seniors with disabilities. Eligible low-income families and seniors will earn
between 15% and 60% of the area median income (AMI). The architectural design emphasizes
sustainable development and building methods and features the adaptive reuse of the historic
Fireside Inn building.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                            Page B-14

                                                                                          May 4, 2015
g.       Transitional and Supportive Housing and Emergency Shelters
Transitional housing is temporary housing (generally six months to two years) for a homeless
individual or family transitioning to permanent housing. Residents are also provided with one-
on-one case management, education and training, employment assistance, mental and physical
services, and support groups.
SB 2, effective January 2008, amended Housing Element law regarding planning and approval for
transitional and supportive housing. Specifically, SB 2 requires transitional and supportive
housing to be treated as a residential use and only subject to those restrictions that apply to
other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. For example, if the transitional
housing is a multi-family use proposed in a multi-family zone, then zoning should treat the
transitional housing the same as other multifamily uses in the proposed zone
Supportive housing is generally defined as permanent, affordable housing occupied by a target
population (persons with disabilities, AIDS, substance abuse, or chronic health conditions) linked
to on-site or off-site services that help residents transition into stable, more productive lives.
Services typically include assistance designed to meet the needs of the target population so they
can retaining their housing and jobs in the community, and/or improving their health. Support
services may include case management, mental health treatment, life skills, childcare, after-
school tutoring, career counseling, etc. Most transitional housing includes a supportive services
component.
         Consistent with SB 2, Mill Valley has incorporated the following definitions of
         transitional and supportive housing into the Zoning Ordinance, and as indicated in Table
         B.5, permits these uses in residential and commercial zoning districts subject to those
         restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same
         zone.20.08.193 Transitional Housing.
         "Transitional housing" means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but
         operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and
         recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a
         predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the
         beginning of assistance. Transitional housing is treated as a residential use, subject only
         to restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same
         zone.
         20.08.185 Supportive Housing.
         "Supportive housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by
         the target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite service that assists the
         supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status,
         and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.
         Supportive housing is treated as a residential use, subject only to restrictions that apply
         to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.
Emergency shelters are defined in California’s Health and Safety Code Section 50801(e) as
housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of
six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency
shelter because of an inability to pay.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                            Page B-15

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
SB 2 also requires the Housing Element address new planning and approval requirements for
emergency shelters. Jurisdictions with an unmet need for emergency shelters for the homeless
are required to identify a zone(s) where emergency shelters will be allowed as a permitted use
without a conditional use or other discretionary permit. The identified zone must have
sufficient capacity to accommodate the shelter need, and at a minimum provide capacity for at
least one year-round shelter. Permit processing, development and management standards for
emergency shelters must be objective and facilitate the development of, or conversion to,
emergency shelters.
As discussed in the homeless section of Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment, the 2013
Marin Homeless Point in Time Count conducted by the Marin Health and Human Services in
January 2013 identified 3 unsheltered homeless persons in Mill Valley, and therefore there is an
unmet need of 3 emergency shelter beds.
In compliance with SB 2, and as identified in Mill Valley's 2009-2014 Housing Element, the City
has adopted amendments to the Zoning Ordinance to allow emergency shelters as of right in the
C-G Zoning District, as well as the C-N district which is subject to the same provisions as C-G.
The purpose of the C-G Zoning District is to provide locations for retail and service related
businesses that offer needed services to the community, and to ensure that the land uses are
compatible with adjacent uses and the character of the area in which they are located.
Additionally, the C-G zone allows a variety of conditionally permitted uses including residential
and mixed-use development.
The C-G Zoning District covers a total of 56 acres and encompasses 53 parcels with an average
lot size of approximately 1.06 acres. Development standards in the C-G zoning district include
exterior setbacks of zero or 18 feet and interior setbacks of zero to matching adjacent
residential zones, and a maximum building height of 35 feet, which is sufficient for emergency
shelter use. There are five parcels below 3,000 square feet in size, 30 parcels above 3,000 square
feet but under 1 acre, and 18 parcels between 1 and 7.2 acres.
The parcels are generally along Camino Alto, Blithedale Avenue, and the Redwood Highway
Frontage Road, and are located centrally within the city and/or have good proximity to bus
transit service. Some parcels within the C-G Zoning District are either vacant, have large parking
lots, or have existing structures suitable for conversion to shelter use.
 As permitted under SB 2, the City has added the following objective standards to the Mill Valley
Municipal Code to regulate emergency shelters:
20.40.050.1 Property development standards - emergency shelters.
A. Shelter Capacity. An emergency shelter for homeless persons shall contain no more than
twenty (20) beds and shall serve no more than twenty (20) persons nightly.
B. Parking. On-site parking for shelter users shall be based on one space for every four beds,
plus 1 space for each employee on the maximum staffed shift. Employees include persons
directly employed by the shelter, as well as on-site staff, independent contractors and
volunteers.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                             Page B-16

                                                                                          May 4, 2015
C. Lighting. External lighting shall be sufficient to provide illumination and clear visibility to all
outdoor areas, with minimal shadows. The lighting shall be stationary and designed, arranged
and installed so as to confine direct rays onto the premises and to direct light away from
adjacent structures and public rights-of-way. External lighting shall be of an intensity compatible
with the neighborhood.
D. On-site Waiting and Intake Areas. An interior waiting and intake area shall be provided. This
area must contain a minimum of 200 square feet, but should be designed to accommodate the
maximum number of person(s) served (as identified in 20.40.050.1(A)), when feasible. An
exterior waiting area or queuing area shall be provided which contains a minimum of 10 square
feet per bed provided at the facility. Said exterior area shall not be located within or block the
public right-of-way. The Management Plan outlined in subsection 20.40.050.1G(4) below shall
establish hours in which persons are permitted to line up in the waiting area for admission to
the shelter, and will require monitoring of the waiting area by the shelter provider to avoid any
public nuisance.
E. Security. Security personnel shall be provided during operational hours whenever clients are
on the site. A security plan shall be submitted to the City prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
F. Concentration of Uses. No more than one emergency shelter shall be permitted within a
radius of 300 feet of another emergency shelter.
G. Emergency Shelter Operations. The agency or organization operating the emergency shelter
shall comply with the following requirements:
    1. Hours of Operation. Clients shall only be on site and admitted to the facility between 5:00
    p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
    2. Length of stay. Each emergency shelter resident shall stay for no more than 90 days
    (cumulative) in a 365 day period. Extensions up to a total stay of 180 days in a 365 day
    period may be granted by the shelter provider if no alternative housing is available.
    3. On-site Staff. At least one manager shall be on-site during all hours of operation of the
    facility. Such manager must be an individual who does not utilize the shelter's beds or other
    services and who resides off-site. The manager must be accompanied by one supporting
    staff member for every fifteen (15) beds occupied in the facility.
    4. Management Plan. Prior to commencing operation, the shelter operator shall provide a
    written management plan to the Planning and Building Director for approval. The
    management plan shall include: primary contact information for the facility, hours of
    operation, admission hours and intake process, staff training, neighborhood outreach and
    privacy, security, queuing and/or loitering regulations , noise control, resident counseling
    and treatment, maintenance plans, residency and guest rules, procedures, staffing needs,
    and other regulations, as appropriate, or as requested by the Planning and Building Director.
    5. Annual report. The provider shall provide an annual report of the use of the facility and
    determination of compliance with the City's development standards to the Planning and
    Building Director annually based on the start date of the said emergency shelter.
During the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) review of Mill
Valley's draft Housing Element, HCD staff raised concerns that certain emergency shelter
standards adopted by the City may exceed what jurisdictions are permitted to regulate under
the statutory parameters of SB 2. To address this issue, the City will amend Section 20.40.050.1
of the Municipal Code as follows: a) amend Section 20.40.050.1.G4 (Management Plan) to
eliminate the following words in the last sentence "and other regulations, as appropriate, or as
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                            Page B-17
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
requested by the Planning and Building Director"; and b) eliminate Mill Valley Municipal Code
Section 20.40.050.1.G5 (Annual Report).
Mill Valley also has local churches located in different residential zoning districts that are
providing services to the needy:
               Our Lady of Mt. Carmel Catholic Church (RS-6), provides a hot lunch once a month
                on Tuesdays, together with The Episcopal Church of Our Saviour and the Southern
                Marin Homeless Coalition, which was formed by three Mill Valley residents and
                one of the former mayors of Sausalito.
               Ambassadors of Hope and Opportunity (RS-6 zone) is a 501 (c) (3) organization
                designed for youth who are homeless or at-risk of homelessness. AHO provides
                such young adults aged 16 to 25 with a trained life coach, essential resources, and
                leadership opportunities, to become financially self-sufficient contributing adults.
                AHO has a drop-in cottage in a single-family residential district that takes in at-risk
                youths in Mill Valley.
h.         Single Room Occupancy
Single room occupancy (SRO) residences are small, one room units (generally 100-250 sq. ft.)
occupied by a single individual, and may either have shared or private kitchen and bathroom
facilities. SROs are rented on a weekly to monthly basis typically without rental deposit, and can
provide an entry point into the housing market for extremely low income individuals, formerly
homeless and disabled persons.
Until recently, the Mill Valley Zoning Ordinance did not explicitly address Single Room
Occupancy uses. As called for in the 2009-2014 Housing Element, the City has amended the
Zoning Ordinance to provide a definition of SROs, and to allow for them as a conditional use
within the C-G and R-M zoning districts.
i.         Inclusionary Housing
Chapter 20.80 of the Municipal Code sets forth Mill Valley’s Inclusionary Housing requirements
for providing affordable units within market rate developments, summarized as follows:
                   Table B.6: Existing City Inclusionary Standards
                    Project Size                       Inclusionary Requirement
                    2 – 9 units                        Permitted to pay in-lieu fee
                    10+ units
                    < 7 units or lots per acre         10% moderate income units
                    ≥ 7 units per acre                 15% moderate income units
These requirements allocate 15% of units in a development of two units or more to be
inclusionary, but typically the City requires at least 20% through the review process. Projects
that are between 2-9 units have the option to pay in-lieu fees. Projects that are greater than
nine units must build the units. The target income groups for the affordable units (both owner
occupied and renter occupied) are required by the Municipal Code to be Moderate income,
however through the discretionary review process the units are typically required to be for Low
income persons. In-lieu fees are calculated based on unit square footage. Units less than 700
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                              Page B-18

                                                                                            May 4, 2015
square feet are exempt, units between 701 and 1,000 square feet pay 5% of the current subsidy
differential1, units between 1,001 and 1,500 square feet pay 8%, and units over 1,501 pay 11%.
The affordable units remain permanently affordable unless they are occupied by one
homeowner for longer than 55 years. The Marin Housing Authority manages the affordable
units for the City. Due to the limited available land in Mill Valley, in-lieu fees or off-site
allowances are discouraged. Inclusionary units are to be compatible with the design of the
market rate units in terms of appearance, materials, and finished quality, unless the City finds
compelling reasons to the contrary. If the City approves, the applicant may reduce the interior
amenity level of the inclusionary units below that of market rate units, but still in conformity
with building and housing codes.
Pursuant policy direction adopted as part of the 2009-2014 Housing Element, the City has been
working with the Zoning and Design Guidelines Advisory Committee (ZDAC), Planning
Commission and City Council to re-evaluate key parameters of the City's current ordinance to
enhance its effectiveness, including analysis of the following:
       Increasing the percentage of affordable units required from 15% to 20%-25%;
       Reducing the project size threshold when projects are required to provide affordable
          units rather than being permitted to pay an in-lieu fee;
       Requiring deeper income targeting to address affordability for very low and low income
          households;
       Consideration of replacement unit requirements for removal of existing rental units;
       Requiring greater parity in development and design standards between project
          affordable and market-rate units;
       Extending affordable housing impact fees to single-family homes (see Program #16);
       Updating the current housing in-lieu fee calculation based on a nexus study and to more
          closely reflect the actual gap between market rate and affordable units;
       Modification to a fee-based program for rental housing with on-site and off-site
          alternatives to insure compliance with recent case law regarding inclusionary rental
          housing (the Palmer Decision); and
       Define additional public benefits that the City may require from housing developers.
4.        Density
Among all Marin County’s 14 cities Mill Valley’s density per square mile ranks 8th (see
Table B.7). Mill Valley’s current density is slightly above average for Marin County. Factoring in
the limitations posed by Mill Valley’s topography, aging sewers, narrow winding streets, and
close proximity to sensitive ecosystems, the prospect of increasing density becomes especially
challenging. In Mill Valley the highest residential densities are in areas of the city with the most
level topography while the hillside areas are the least dense.
           Table B.7: Marin Jurisdiction Population Densities Ranked High to Low
                   San Anselmo 4,584.4/sq mi             MILL VALLEY 2,868.3/sq mi
                   Belvedere 3,935.2/sq mi               Kentfield/GreenBrae 2,117/sq mi
                   Larkspur 3,833.7/sq mi                Novato 1,683/sq mi
1
  The difference between what a moderate income family can afford to pay for housing and the estimated
total cost of a new unit of appropriate size as determined by the City.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                               Page B-19

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
                    Fairfax 3,485.2/sq mi                 Ross 1,461.5/sq mi
                    San Rafael 3,352.3/sq mi             Stinson Beach 683/sq mi
                    Sausalito 3,331.8/sq mi              Tiburon 656.5/sq mi
                    Corte Madera 2,870.7/sq mi            Muir Beach 590/sq mi
                                   Marin County Average 2674.6/sq mi
           Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MillValley,California and based on the 2010 Census.
5.         Parking
HCD recognizes that excessive parking standards can pose a significant constraint to housing
development by increasing development costs and reducing the potential land availability for
project amenities or additional units. Parking requirements may not reflect actual parking
demand where less need is demonstrated, particularly for persons with disabilities, the elderly,
affordable housing, and infill and transit-oriented development.
Mill Valley has a severe shortage of street parking due to topography which results in many
narrow winding streets. Many houses were built before private ownership of cars was common
and on lots where it is difficult to provide on-site parking. As a result there is a shortage of on
street parking throughout the city and requires on-site parking be provided for new
development wherever possible.
Mill Valley’s Zoning Code establishes an off-street parking standard of two spaces per residential
unit, regardless of unit size or number of bedrooms. With the exception of nursing homes, the
Code does not specify reduced parking standards for specialized housing types, such as senior
housing, housing for persons with disabilities, or residential/commercial mixed use. The
Planning Commission can provide modified parking standards on a case-by-case basis based on
development and design review.
Currently, multiple family dwellings must provide two on-site parking spaces plus ¼ space per
unit for guest parking when on street parking is not available. In developments of four or more
units the guest parking must be provided on site. The requirement for such a large number of
parking spaces is a constraint to multi-family development in the city.
Tandem parking is allowed in Mill Valley. Second units are required to have one parking space
that is independent of the other spaces. Several homes have two-car garages with a tandem
second unit parking spot behind one of the garage spaces.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                                  Page B-20

                                                                                         May 4, 2015
Table B.8 and Table B.9 below compare the parking requirements for jurisdictions within Marin
County. In addition to having lower requirements in the amount of parking spaces required, Mill
Valley provides greater flexibility in that parking spaces are not required to be covered.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                            Page B-21
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Table B.8: Existing Parking Requirements for Single Family Dwellings
                                           Least             Most
                                       Restrictive        Restrictive                      Common
                                                                             Most
 Mill Valley’s Requirement            Requirement       Requirement                       Additional
                                                                          Common
                                      (other Marin      (other Marin                    Requirements
                                      jurisdictions)    jurisdictions)
 2 spaces/dwelling, plus one if         2 spaces/          4 spaces/      2 spaces/     1 or all spaces
 on-street parking not                   dwelling          dwelling        dwelling        covered
 available- none are required
 to be covered
Source: Marin Housing Element Workbook, 2009
Table B.9: Existing Parking Requirements for Multi-Family Dwellings
 Unit Type           Mill Valley’s         Least            Most           Most          Common
                     Requirement*      Restrictive      Restrictive      Common          Additional
                                      Requirement      Requirement                     Requirements
                                      (other Marin     (other Marin
                                      jurisdictions)   jurisdictions)
 Studio                   2.25               0                3              1
 1 bedroom                2.25               1                3             1.5
 2 bedrooms               2.25             1.25               3              2
 3 bedrooms+              2.25               2                3              2        1 covered space
 *No requirement to provide covered parking
Source: Marin Housing Element Workbook, 2009
In the Housing Plan, Program #23 - Update Parking Standards, increases the effectiveness of
parking standards by refining and modifying the standards to facilitate specific types of housing,
such as multi-family and mixed use developments in commercial areas, housing for seniors and
persons with disabilities, housing in proximity to transit, and one-bedroom, studio, and micro-
apartment units.
A key component of the update to the City's multi-family current development standards being
evaluated by the Zoning and Design Guidelines Advisory Committee (ZDAC) includes refining the
parking standards for multi-family housing. Strategies being considered by ZDAC include parking
requirements for multi-family housing in residential zones being tied to the size of unit (e.g., 1
space per units up to 700 square feet in size, 1.5 spaces for units 700-1,250 square feet, etc.).
Other considerations include shared parking provisions in commercial zones that would reduce
parking requirements by 50% in mixed-use development where the residential portion of the
development is 50% or greater.
6.         Historic Preservation
The City of Mill Valley has several mechanisms in place to preserve and maintain the older
structures in the city. The Historic Overlay (H-O) District adds provisions to the underlying zoning
on a parcel to protect designated buildings of historic importance. The H-O Ordinance requires
Design Review of additions or alterations of designated structures and delays their demolition
while alternative means of preserving the structure are examined by the City. The City requires a
discretionary Design Review Permit for any proposed exterior modifications to structures with
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                             Page B-22

                                                                                              May 4, 2015
the H-O classification or listed on the City’s list of historic structures. The City further defines a
qualified historical building as:
         Any structure or building deemed of importance to the history, architecture, or
         culture of an area by an appropriate local, State or Federal governmental
         jurisdiction. This shall include designated structures on official existing or future
         national, state or local historical registers or official inventories, such as the
         National Register of Historic Places, State Historical Landmarks, State Points of
         Historical Interest, and parcels to which the City has applied the Historic Overlay
         Zoning District.
Mill Valley has several mechanisms in place to preserve and maintain its historic resources. The
Historic Overlay (H-O) designation is currently applied to 27 designated buildings of historic
importance in Mill Valley. The H-O Ordinance utilizes the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for
Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings in design review of any
addition to, or alteration of, designated structures, and provides for a delay in any proposed
demolition of historic structures while alternative means of preservation are examined by the
City. Furthermore, the H-O Overlay designation provides the following incentives for
preservation:
     Waiver of building permit fees for exterior and interior building maintenance items
         requiring a permit.
     Provision of a list of pre-approved historic consultants for applicants for the review of
         modifications to historic structures in accordance with the California Environmental
         Quality Act (CEQA).
Historic assessment is in conjunction with the review of planning applications, which includes a
review of CEQA requirements. As stated in the Municipal Code Chapter 20.54.030, H-O District
Guidelines:
         All applications for construction, alteration, demolition or sign permits within any H-O
         Historic Overlay District shall be subject to Design Review as provided in Chapter 20.66 of
         this Title, if such permit involves the construction of any new structure, the demolition of
         any existing structure, exterior alterations or any interior alterations which would affect
         the exterior of any structure. In addition to other matters set forth in this Title, the United
         States Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for
         Rehabilitating Historic Buildings," GPO 937-843, with its latest revisions, subject to such
         considerations as may be appropriate for local Mill Valley conditions, shall be utilized as
         guidelines in exercising Design Review.
On October 11, 2010, the Planning Commission discussed possible changes to the Zoning Code
regarding standards for historic design review. The Commission agreed that modifications to a
historic structure in the H-O zone should be reviewed by a consultant selected by the applicant,
from the City’s pre-approved list of historic analysis consultants.
7.       Permit Processing
Government Code Section 65583(a) requires “An analysis of potential and actual governmental
constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all income
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                                Page B-23

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
levels,…including land use controls, building codes and their enforcement, site improvements,
fees and other exactions required of developers, and local processing and permit procedures…”.
Processing and permit procedures can pose a considerable constraint to the production and
improvement of housing. Common constraints include lengthy processing time, unclear
permitting procedures, layered reviews, multiple discretionary review requirements, and costly
conditions of approval. These constraints increase the final cost of housing, uncertainty in the
development of the project, and overall financial risk assumed by the developer.
Mill Valley strives to process permits on as timely a schedule as possible while providing the
opportunity for meaningful public input. However, the development review process for
discretionary permits required by the Zoning Ordinance can act as a constraint to the production
of affordable housing. A description and analysis of the current residential development review
process in the City is provided below. The analysis addresses properties that allow housing
development, both in residential districts and in commercial districts.
The City requires a discretionary Design Review Permit for development of all new single and
multi-family housing. The stated purpose of the Design Review Permit is “to encourage
development that is compatible with, integrated into, and subordinate to its natural setting.
The City strives to preserve, protect, and promote its unique environmental, community and
scenic attributes through the residential design review process.” To this end, the City has
developed a Residential Design Review Handbook to provide guidelines for development in
Residential (RS) zone districts, including principles for slope design, flora and fauna design, soils
and grading design, drainage design, and building design. The Guidebook was originally created
for hillside single-family residential development and does not provide design standards more
specific to “flatland” development or for multi-family (RM) development.
As a means of providing better up-front direction to the development community regarding the
desired character of multi-family residential development in Mill Valley, the City is in the process
of developing an illustrative set of Multi-family Design Guidelines. The Guidelines will be
informational, rather than prescriptive, and may be interpreted with flexibility in their
application to individual projects. In addition to building and site design elements, the Multi-
Family Design Guidelines will also integrate recommendations for sustainable site planning and
green building design to minimize reliance on natural resources and encourage alternative
modes of transportation.
Table B.10 lists the City’s required findings for approval of a Design Review Permit. The purview
of Design Review does not extend to the project’s overall merits or the residential use itself.
Table B.10: Required Findings for Approval of a Design Review Permit
A That the proposal is consistent with the City of Mill Valley General Plan and Mill Valley
      Municipal Code.
B The proposal is consistent with the Residential Design Guidelines adopted by the City.
C     The City has considered whether to apply any limitations on building, size, height and
      setbacks pursuant to Mill Valley Municipal code Section 20.66.045.
D     The approval of the proposal is in compliance with CEQA.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                            Page B-24

                                                                                       May 4, 2015
The Planning Commission acts on Design Review Permit applications involving a new building or
addition to an existing building on a property located in a PA, OA, CR, CN CG or CF Zoning
District; involves the construction of a new residential unit or units; or, in the opinion of the
Director of Planning and Building, raises significant planning or design issues. The Zoning
Administrator acts on all other projects subject to a Design Review Permit. While the
discretionary Design Review Permit triggers environmental review, the vast majority of projects
in Mill Valley are determined to be exempt from CEQA under the urban infill exemption (CEQA
Guidelines Section 15332). If the decision of the Planning Commission is appealed to the City
Council, the Council will hold an appeal hearing and make the final decision on the application.
Table B.11 presents the specific steps and typical timeline for a Design Review Permit. Past
approved residential infill projects that met City standards received Planning Commission
approval in approximately 2-3 meetings. Mill Valley’s design review process is comparable to
other Marin County communities, and does not serve as a constraint to development.
Table B.11: Typical Design Review Permit Timeline
 Task                                                                Time             Typical
 Application filed                                                   1-5 days         1 day
      Project sponsor submits completed application forms, plans,
      supporting documents and fees. Plans consist of
      architectural drawings at the schematic level, landscape
      drawings, and grading plans. A geotechnical analysis and/or
      traffic report may be required as supporting documents.
 Completeness review                                                 30 days          20 days
      The application is circulated to City departments (and
      applicable local, regional, state and federal agencies) to
      determine whether additional information is required and
      for recommended conditions of approval.
 Completeness Notification                                           1 day            1 day
      If a project is incomplete, a notice is sent to the project
      sponsor advising that additional information is required. The
      time to complete this task is determined by the project
      sponsor.
      If the application was initially found to be complete, this
      step is skipped and the project is directly scheduled for
      hearing.
 Follow-up Submittal                                                 Varies           Varies
     If the application has been determined to be incomplete, the
     sponsor will submit follow-up information as requested The
     time to complete this task is determined by the project
     sponsor. If the application was found to be complete, this
     task is skipped.
 Environmental Review                                                1 day -          1 day
      The application is reviewed to determine whether the           6 months
      project is exempt under CEQA or if an Initial Environmental
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                          Page B-25

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
 Task                                                                     Time         Typical
       Study is required. The vast majority of projects in Mill Valley
       are found to be exempt from CEQA under the urban infill
       exemption. If a Negative Declaration is prepared,
       environmental review may take the full 6 months allowed by
       law.
 Staff Report                                                             10 days -    2-3 weeks
       A detailed evaluation of the application is conducted by staff     6 weeks
       and a written report is prepared for public review as part of
       the public hearing and application review process.
 Public Hearing                                                           10 days      10 days
       A public hearing notice is sent at least 10 days before the
       meeting to property owners/occupants within 300 feet of
       the project site. The Planning Commission conducts a public
       hearing and takes action to approve or deny the project.
The City adopted the Residential Design Review Handbook to provide useful information
regarding the Design Review process for applicants and to assist the public in understanding the
process and what is required of applicants. Consistency with the Residential Design Review
Guidelines is a required finding of approval for all Design Review Permits. The City guidelines
address site design issues including; topography, building size to slope relationship, vegetation
protection and tree replacement, water conservation and fire hazard minimization, grading,
terracing and drainage, retaining walls and fences, protection of views and privacy, parking and
driveways, as well as architectural considerations including; scale, mass, height, color, windows,
roofs, skylights and rooftop equipment.
The PUD process follows the design review process described above, and runs concurrently with
other public review and approval processes required for development projects.
Mill Valley has an Inclusionary Ordinance (Chapter 20.80 of the Zoning Code) that has allowed
the City to typically achieve 20 percent affordable units, and a portion of units reserved for very
low and/or low income households. The Ordinance specifies that inclusionary units shall contain
on average the same number of bedrooms and be compatible in design with project market rate
units, although the City maintains the discretion to approve affordable units that are smaller in
size and with different interior features compared to market rate units. Currently, the decision
for the developer to provide on-site affordable units or the payment of an in-lieu fee is decided
by the Planning Commission through the conditions of approval.
                   Table B.12: Existing City Inclusionary Standards
                     Project Size                   Inclusionary Requirement
                     2 – 9 units                    Permitted to pay in-lieu fee
                     10+ units
                       < 7 units or lots per acre 10% moderate income units
                       ≥ 7 units per acre           15% moderate income units
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                           Page B-26

                                                                                       May 4, 2015
The Inclusionary Ordinance has resulted in the integration of 38 affordable rental and ownership
units within market-rate developments. The Housing Plan has a policy to continue utilizing the
Ordinance as a tool to integrate affordable units within housing developments, and to increase
the availability of affordable units within the community.
Pursuant policy direction adopted as part of the 2009-2014 Housing Element, the City has been
working with the Zoning and Design Guidelines Advisory Committee (ZDAC), Planning
Commission and City Council to re-evaluate key parameters of the City's current ordinance to
enhance its effectiveness, including analysis of the following:
      Increasing the percentage of affordable units required from 15% to 20%-25%;
      Reducing the project size threshold when projects are required to provide affordable
          units rather than being permitted to pay an in-lieu fee;
      Requiring deeper income targeting to address affordability for very low and low income
          households;
      Consideration of replacement unit requirements for removal of existing rental units;
      Requiring greater parity in development and design standards between project
          affordable and market-rate units;
      Extending affordable housing impact fees to single-family homes;
      Updating the current housing in-lieu fee calculation based on a nexus study and to more
          closely reflect the actual gap between market rate and affordable units;
      Modification to a fee-based program for rental housing with on-site and off-site
          alternatives to insure compliance with recent case law regarding inclusionary rental
          housing (the Palmer Decision); and
      Define additional public benefits that the City may require from housing developers.
8.       Fees and Exactions
Government Code Section 65583(a) requires “An analysis of potential and actual governmental
constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all income
levels…including…fees and other exactions required of developers, and local processing and
permit procedures…”.
Housing development is typically subject to two types of fees or exactions: permit processing
fees for planning and zoning; and impact fees or exactions, imposed to defray all or a portion of
the public costs related to the development project. These fees and exactions can impact the
cost, and feasibility of housing development and its affordability, and involve issues of private
property rights. High planning and site development fees can impact property owners’ ability to
make improvements or repairs, especially for lower-income households. Development projects
are subject to fees and exactions from a growing number of public entities, ranging from special
districts to regional agencies.
For both processing fees and impact fees, State law specifies procedural and nexus
requirements:
   Government Code Section 66020 requires that planning and permit processing fees do not
    exceed the reasonable cost of providing the service, unless approved by the voters; agencies
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                         Page B-27

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
     collecting fees must provide project applicants with a statement of amounts and purposes
     of all fees at the time of fee imposition or project approval.
    Government Code Section 66000 et. seq. (Mitigation Fee Act) sets forth procedural
     requirements for adopting, and collecting capital facilities fees and exactions, and requires
     they be supported by a report establishing the relationship between the amount of any
     capital facilities fee and the use for which it is collected.
In terms of cost of development, fees can be a more significant factor than processing time.
Particularly since Proposition 13, cities are concerned with the need to recover processing costs.
Mill Valley has a sliding scale fee system for a Design Review Permit based on project costs
between $50,000 and $1,000,000, and a flat fee system for other planning fees. However, the
City charges an hourly rate for additional staff time beyond the first five to ten hours, depending
on the type of permit. This approach aims to avoid disparity between controversial projects and
less controversial projects, where the nature or complexity of a project may attract a higher
level of community input, Planning Commission discussion, and staff time. Projects with features
addressing community and neighborhood concerns may result in less processing time. However
affordable housing projects are likely to be some of the most controversial projects and result in
the increased costs from staff time.
In Mill Valley permit costs can vary substantially from site to site depending on site conditions,
location and the type and design of development. Because much of the remaining developable
land is subject environmental constraints and moderate to severe public health and safety
constraints, detailed soils reports, engineering and design studies are often required and
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review may be necessary.
The processing time for multi-family projects is dependent on whether an Environmental Impact
Report (EIR) is required. Mill Valley follows the procedures set forth in the CEQA Guidelines.
Sites on the upper slopes of Mill Valley that may be available for housing would be more
expensive to develop due to known geotechnical and access problems. Environmental
protection requirements, including protection of endangered species, may add time to the
development process and additional cost where it is necessary to evaluate the effects of the
project and mitigate adverse impacts. Fees charged by the City for CEQA processing cover the
City’s processing costs.
CEQA Section 15332 (“Infill Development Projects”) allows the City to categorically exempt from
CEQA review infill development consistent with the Mill Valley General Plan and Zoning
requirements. In instances where CEQA Section 15332 would not apply, the City will consider
using the area-wide Environmental Assessment or Program EIR for the Miller Avenue Precise
Plan for assessing area-wide infrastructure and other potential off-site impacts to expedite the
processing of subsequent affordable housing development proposals.
Mill Valley also charges building permit fees according to a sliding scale based on the valuation
(labor and materials) of the project which again can vary dramatically based on the project
location. In addition to these fees, the City charges plan check fees up to 65 percent of the
prescribed building permit fee, a General Plan Maintenance fee and a Technology fee each
charged at 15% of the applicable building permit fee, a Planning and Development fee of $225
for the first bedroom and $150 for each additional bedroom, and a Road Impact fee of 1% of the
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                            Page B-28

                                                                                              May 4, 2015
project valuation for any permit issued with a valuation of $10,000 or more is collected to fund
improvements to the city’s roadway system. A Drainage Fee, in effect since the 1960’s, which
funds citywide drainage improvements is assessed once on every parcel in the city and is
triggered by a permit with a valuation of $5000+. The City also charges various fees for drainage,
plumbing, mechanical and electrical permits, and a seismic fee for residential projects at $0.10
per $1,000 of valuation. In addition to these City fees, project applicants pay School District fees
and water and sewer hook-up fees directly to the responsible agencies.
Table B.13 below summarizes the Planning, Building and Public Works fees collected by the City.
While these fees are assessed on a per unit share basis, they are an element in the cost of
housing and could potentially constrain the provision of affordable housing. Pursuant to
Municipal Code Section 5.32, the City provides a 50% reduction in City fees, licenses and taxes
for units provided at levels affordable to and occupied by lower and moderate income
households. An example of use of these affordable housing fee reductions is in the extensive
structural renovations being conducted by EAH on the 75 unit Shelter Hill Apartment, with the
50 percent reduction in fees equating to just under $65,000.
Table B.13: City of Mill Valley Planning and Building Fees
                                                                                        1        2
           Design Review ‐ varies valuation from $50,000 – $100,000+               $602 --$1,890
                                                                                        1
           Second Unit Permit                                                      $820
                                                                                        2
           Variance                                                                $990
           Conditional Use Permit                                                  $990
                                                                                           2
           Master Plan                                                             $1,290 + $50/lot or unit
                                                                                        1
           Precise Development Plan                                                $860 + $50/lot or unit
                                                                                           2
           General Plan Amendment/Rezoning                                         $1,075
                                                                                        1
           Environmental Review - Categorical Exemption                            $165
                                                                                        1
Planning   Negative Declaration - Staff Preparation                                $535
                                                                                         1
Fees       Environmental Impact Report - Consultant Preparation                    $ 535 + 15% of contract
                                                                                        1
           Lot Line Adjustment                                                     $775
                                                                                        1
           Tentative Subdivision Map (4 or less parcels)                           $880 (min.)
                                                                                           1
           Tentative Subdivision Map (5+ parcels)                                  $1,315 (min)
                                                                                        1
           Extension of Map                                                        $775
                                                                                        1
           Certificate of Compliance                                               $535
           Un-merger (staff review)                                                $108
                                                                                        1
           Un-merger (ZA/PC review)                                                $645
           Appeal                                                                  $250
           Building Permit Fees (based upon total valuation)*
            $1 to $50,000               $26 - $756
            $50,001 to $500,000         $755 $1,205
            $100,001 to $500,000        $1,169 - $3,969
            $500,001 to $1,000,000 $3,822 - $6,822
            $1,000,001 and up           $6,630 - $11,630 (based on a valuation of $2,000,000)
Building
Fees       General Plan                 15% of Basic Permit Fee
           Maintenance
           Technology                   15% of Basic Permit Fee
           Plan Check                   Up to 65% of Basic Permit OR cost +overhead for consultant inspections
           Building Standards           $4.00 per $100,000
           Administration
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                                Page B-29

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
                                      3
              Downstream Drainage            Per Acre                             >Acre
                       Varies by district    $160 - $680 410                      $80 - $ 340
              Microfilm                      $11 first sheet + $2 per additional sheet
              Planning & Development
                                4
              Fee Per Bedroom                 $225 for the first bedroom; $150 for each additional bedroom
              Road Impact Fee                1% of valuation
              Electrical Permit              $22 + .05/square foot - $53.00 minimum
              Mechanical/Plumbing            $21.53 + various fees per unit - $53 minimum
              Permit
              Inspections                    $86.50/hour OR cost +overhead for consultant inspections
              Seismic                        $10/per $100,000 valuation - Per State Strong Motion Instrumentation
                                             Program
              Revocable                      $70 per day minimum, or 2% of right-of-way work.
              Encroachment Permits
              Grading Permit                 50 cubic yards or less          $100
                                             51-100 cubic yards              $150
                                                                                        st
                                             101-1,000 cubic yards           $150 for 1 101 cubic yards, $15 for
                                                                             each additional 100 cubic yards
                                                                                        st
                                             1,001-20,000 cubic yards        $285 for 1 1,001 cubic yards, $10 for
                                                                             each additional 1,000 cubic yards
Public
              Plan Checking                  Record of Survey                $200
Works
                                             Lot Line Adjustments            $200
Fees
                                             Parcel Maps                     $500
                                             Subdivision                     $500 + $20 per lot
                                             Construction plan (work in      2% of value of right-of-way work, or
                                             right-of-way over $25,000)      $100 per sheet.
              Watercourse                    4% of value of work, for plan review, permit administration and
              Modification Permits           inspection.
              Residential Parking            $20 a year; $10 after August 1.
              Permit
1
 Includes first 5 hours of Planning staff time, additional time at $65/hour
2
 Includes first 10 hours of Planning staff time, additional time at 65/hour
3
  For permits with $5,000 valuation and over if not paid at subdivision
4
  Excise tax charged on building permits for new residential development having separate kitchen and bathroom
facilities.
Source: City of Mill Valley Planning Fee Schedule, updated August 4, 2010; Building Fee Schedule updated December
2, 2011; Public Works Fee Schedule updated June 2008.
The 2009 Marin Housing Workbook provides a comparison of development fees among
jurisdictions throughout the County, based development of two prototypical projects: a single-
family home, and a ten unit condominium project. Table B.14 provides a summary of these fees
in Mill Valley, and compares with the average fee amounts countywide. As indicated, total fees
for development of a single family home in Mill Valley were calculated at approximately
$45,000, slightly below the $47,000 average among all jurisdictions countywide. For the ten unit
condominium prototype, total fees ran $33,000 per unit both in Mill Valley and countywide.
In summary, Mill Valley’s development fees represent a small fraction of the cost of
development, are comparable to or less than the average among jurisdictions countywide, and
do not represent a significant constraint to the development or improvement of housing. In
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                                        Page B-30

                                                                                        May 4, 2015
addition, the City provides a significant 50 percent reduction in fees to offset the cost of
providing affordable housing.
              Table B.14: Total Fees for Prototypical Single and Multi-Family Projects
                                            Single Family House         10 Unit Condominium
            Fee Category                                     County                   County
                                        Mill Valley                 Mill Valley
                                                            Average                  Average
      Planning & Building Fees            $11,567           $11,125   $83,399         $56,467
      Impact Fees                          $7,800           $10,524   $68,000         $93,757
   Subtotal: City Fees                    $19,367           $21,649  $151,399        $150,224
       Water Fees                         $14,141           $15,054  $102,890        $100,219
       Sewer Fees                          $4,000            $6,615   $40,000         $59,164
       School Fees                         $7,128            $5,503   $35,640         $27,911
   Subtotal: Non-City Fees                $25,269           $24,984  $178,530        $176,546
   Total Project Fees                     $44,636           $46,633  $329,929        $326,770
   Total Fees per Unit (rounded)          $45,000           $47,000   $33,000         $33,000
        Source: Marin Housing Element Workbook, compiled in 2009
9.       Code Enforcement and Off-site Improvement Standards
Government Code Section 65583(a) requires “An analysis of potential and actual governmental
constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all income
levels,…including land-use controls, building codes and their enforcement, site improvements,
fees and other exactions required of developers, and local processing and permit procedures…”
Mill Valley complies with the California Health and Safety Code 17980(b)(2). - “In deciding
whether to require vacation of the building or to repair as necessary, the enforcement agency
shall give preference to the repair of the building whenever it is economically feasible to do so
without having to repair more than 75 percent of the dwelling, as determined by the
enforcement agency, and shall give full consideration to the needs for housing as expressed in
the local jurisdiction's housing element.
Mill Valley uses the Uniform Building Code (UBC) which sets minimum standards for residential
development and all other structures. The City has made one amendment to the Code
applicable to residences, requiring non-combustible fire-retardant roofs, a water supply meeting
ISO (Insurance Service Office) standards, and minimum driveway widths (12 to 16 feet wide
where feasible) in areas with high fire hazards (long response times, hazardous brush, poor
access and steep slopes). The City’s sewer, storm drain, and other engineering standards
conform to Marin County standards, and the City requires only minimum road widths and
improvements in new developments.
Mill Valley’s Building Code enforcement practices are complaint-driven, as are those of 70% of
the local governments surveyed by the State Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD). Code Enforcement practices allow the City to rehabilitate any buildings that
are not up to code.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                           Page B-31

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Improvement requirements for development in Mill Valley are limited, as the city is mostly
subdivided, and streets and utilities are mostly already in place. Several large undeveloped
parcels zoned Planned Residential (RP) and Planned Single-Family Residential (RSP) remain,
comprising 38 acres on 27 parcels in the RP Zoning District, and 136 acres for 26 parcels in the
RSP Zoning District, or a total of 174 acres. However, much of the remaining undeveloped land is
constrained by limited site access, utilities, sewer and drainage facilities, and may only be
suitable for single family residences at low densities. According to the General Plan, these 174
acres could support 53 new single family residences if none were subdivided.
For new residential development the City requires standard utility connections, for sewer, water
and stormwater runoff. Mill Valley requires sidewalk improvements on a case-by-case basis as
part of the conditions of approval. The City does not typically grant waivers for financial
hardship, and also does not typically require the undergrounding of overhead utilities.
To be eligible for water service, a property must be in close proximity to an existing water main.
A water hook-up fee of about $14,141 is required for new single-family housing by the Marin
Municipal Water District. This fee can be a disincentive for the construction of new second
units.
10.        Roads
Mill Valley’s streets are constrained by the city’s hillside topography, narrow widths and
inadequate parking. The steep and winding terrain generally makes road widening impractical.
Access by emergency vehicles, including fire trucks, is constrained along many streets in the city.
The City collects a road impact fee for any permit issued with a valuation of $10,000 or more.
This fee has been in effect since 2004 and is equal to one percent of the valuation of the permit.
The fees collected are not specific to the street in which the work is being performed, but are
deposited into a fund that helps the Department of Public Works maintain all roadways in Mill
Valley. The road impact fee for a typical single family home would be $5,000 while the fee for a
10 unit condominium project would be $40,000.
11.        Sewer System
Many cities in California have sewer infrastructure challenges, but Mill Valley is in a unique and
especially urgent situation. In 2008 the US Environmental Protection Agency issued and Order of
Compliance to the Sewerage Agency of Southern Marin (SASM) including the City of Mill Valley
to “consistently and substantially reduce the frequency and volume of sewage spills to waters of
the United States” and to “complete improvements necessary to eliminate conditions in its
collection system that cause or contribute to wastewater spills from SASM’s collection system or
wastewater treatment plant” and “achieve consistent compliance with its 2007 NPDES Permit”
(Sewage Spill Reduction Action Plan 2010).
Nearly all of the spills in Mill Valley are caused by sewer pipe blockages resulting from roots
growing into cracks in the sewer pipes. The city has over 59 miles of gravity sewer pipe and
nearly 90% are made of vitrified clay which has likely deteriorated over the years making the
pipes susceptible to blockage caused spills. Approximately half of all the city pipes are over 60
years old and most of the other half is between 30 to 60 years old. The city also has an unusually
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                           Page B-32

                                                                                        May 4, 2015
high percentage of small diameter sewer pipes that are highly susceptible to blockage.
Conditions are further exacerbated by the hilly terrain, shifting soils and dense vegetation, all of
which create a difficult environment for aging sewer pipes (Clean Water Act compliance
Evaluation Inspection 2008).
Mill Valley’s City Council approved a plan in 2012 to raise approximately $2.4 million a year to fix
its aging sewer system, and shifted to a “flow-based” system to charge users based on the
amount of water consumed and therefore discharged into sewers. Continued efforts have been
pursued by the City to repair and strengthen its sewer system. Recent rate increases have been
implemented in order to continue to upgrade the collection system and the treatment facilities
and process. System upgrades will improve the efficiency and capacity of the Sewerage Agency
of Southern Marin treatment plant. Collection system or treatment plant capacity has not been
identified as a constraint on future development consistent with the Housing Element or the
General Plan.
12.      Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Government Code Section 65583(a)(4) requires: “an analysis of potential and actual government
constraints upon the maintenance, improvement or development of housing… for persons with
disabilities as identified in the analysis pursuant to paragraph (4) of subdivision (a), including
land use controls, building codes and their enforcement, site improvements, fees and other
exactions required of developers, and local processing and permit procedures. The analysis shall
also demonstrate local efforts to remove governmental constraints that hinder the locality from
meeting … the need for housing for persons with disabilities.
Government Code Section 65583(c)(3) requires the housing element provide a program to
”address and where appropriate and legally possible, remove governmental constraints to the
maintenance, improvement, and development of housing for persons with disabilities. The
program shall remove constraints to and provide reasonable accommodations for housing
designed for, intended for occupancy by, or with supportive services for, persons with
disabilities.”
As discussed in Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment, Census data shows that 12% of Mill
Valley’s population, age 5 years and over, has a disability (i.e., sensory, physical, mental, and
self-care disabilities). Among the city’s senior citizens, 31% have disabilities. The analysis
acknowledges the wide range of housing needs due to the differing disabilities.
A goal of the Fair Housing Act is to ensure that a city’s development regulations and Zoning
Ordinance do not create barriers to housing for persons with disabilities. In Mill Valley, where
the majority of residential properties are developed, this means allowing for building
modifications that will adapt a home to meet the special housing needs of persons with
disabilities.
Given the steep topography of the community, access to homes can be difficult to those persons
with disabilities. Compounding the issue, it is often difficult for sites to be developed with a
single-level only residence due to the steep terrain. The Planning Commission has approved
hillevators in the past without counting the area for the elevator structures towards the
allowable floor area ratio. ADA compliant ramps are reviewed as part of Building Department
review and exceptions have been made for ramps to encroach into required setbacks.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                           Page B-33

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
As described in detail in Appendix A, Section E-2, the City does not restrict the siting of group
homes nor require a minimum distance between group homes. Group homes with six or fewer
residents are permitted by right in single-family zones, consistent with State requirements. New
or significantly remodeled group homes are required to go through the design review process,
as is any residential development, and obtain approval by the Planning Commission.
Administrative review of requirements for exceptions to zoning standards is provided. Mill
Valley allows displacement of required on-site parking if it is to accommodate ADA accessibility
facilities (ramps, etc.) and offers reduced parking standards for any development, including
housing for the disabled, wherever reduced need can be demonstrated. The Building
Department administers Title 24 provisions consistently for all disabilities-related construction
and responds to complaints regarding any violations. To go beyond minimum accessibility
requirements, the Housing Element sets forth Program #30, Universal Design/Visitability, to
develop and adopt guidelines encouraging the principles of universal design and visitability.
Mill Valley's Zoning Ordinance now specifies that small residential facilities (6 or fewer clients)
are permitted by right in the RS and RM zones, and conditionally permitted in the CG zone,
while large residential facilities (7 or more clients) are permitted as a conditional use within the
RM and CG zoning districts. The City has also added an inclusive definition of "family" to the
Zoning Ordinance that accommodates different household types and unrelated persons living
together.
In November 2005, the City adopted Chapter 20.85 of the Municipal Code, providing a formal
procedure for requesting a reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities. More
specifically, the Code states that any person may make a request on behalf of a disabled
individual for a “modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for siting,
development and use of housing or housing-related facilities to eliminate regulatory barriers
and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice.”
Furthermore, the Code includes the following broad definition of disability to include “a person
who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major
life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such an impairment, or anyone who has a
record of such an impairment.”              Reasonable accommodation requests are reviewed
ministerially and acted upon by the Zoning Administrator, unless such request is filed with an
application for another approval, in which case it is acted upon concurrently.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                            Page B-34

                                                                                                 May 4, 2015
C.       Non-Governmental Constraints
Government Code Section 65583(a)(6) requires “An analysis of potential and actual
nongovernmental constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing
for all income levels, including the availability of financing, the price of land, and the cost of
construction.”
Although nongovernmental constraints are primarily market-driven and generally outside direct
government control, localities can significantly influence and offset the negative impact of
nongovernmental constraints through responsive programs and policies. Analyzing specific
housing cost components including the cost of land, construction costs, and the availability of
financing assists the locality in developing and implementing housing and land-use programs
that respond to existing local or regional conditions. While the cost of new housing is influenced
by factors beyond a locality’s control, local governments can create essential preconditions
(favorable zoning and development standards, fast track permit processing, etc.) that encourage
and facilitate development of a variety of housing types and affordable levels.
State law requires an analysis of potential and actual non-governmental constraints to the
maintenance, improvement, and development of housing for all income levels. The Housing
Element must identify these constraints and ways, if any, to reduce or overcome these
constraints in order to meet the city’s housing needs.
1.       Market Constraints
Land and construction costs represent the most significant barrier to the construction of new
affordable housing. Construction costs vary widely according to the type of development, with
multi-family housing generally less expensive to construct than single-family homes. However,
there is wide variation within each construction type depending on the size of unit and the
number and quality of amenities provided. The major contributors to the cost of land are the
amount of land available, the density of residential use allowed, location, suitability of the land
for construction (aka “buildability”), availability of community services, and attractiveness of the
neighborhood. The upward pressures on land value are so strong that it more than off-sets the
extra costs involved in building on Mill Valley’s steep terrain.
Development costs in Mill Valley are higher than in comparable communities because most
remaining lots have problems with steep slopes, irregular topography, bay mud, or slide-prone
areas. The technical and engineering costs of mitigating these factors on remaining sites are
likely to be particularly high because those are the sites that have been skipped over in the past
precisely because of the difficulty and high cost of development. Vacant land within the city is
extremely limited2 and development costs can also vary based on factors such as the location
and the permitted density.
2
  According to the Marin Economic Commission’s Marin Profile 1999: A Survey of Economic, Social and
Environmental Indicators, 84 percent of land area in Marin is designated for agriculture, park lands and
open space and watershed. Of the remaining land, 11 percent is developed and five percent is listed as
potentially developable (Marin Countywide Housing Element Workbook).
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                                   Page B-35

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
The availability of financing in a community depends on a number of factors, including the type
of lending institutions active in the community, lending practices, rates and fees charged, and
equal access to financial institutions.
a.         Land Costs
An 8,308 square foot vacant parcel in Mill Valley in the RS-20 zoning district (Residential single
Family – 20,000 SF minimum lot size) recently sold for $280,000, or $33.70 per square foot. In
Marin County, land costs average around 15-20 percent of construction costs for multifamily
developments, and are generally high because the county is considered a desirable place to live
in. Vacant land is also in fairly limited supply in Mill Valley. Even though land costs for single
family homes vary widely throughout the county, the costs (as a percentage) are significantly
higher than for multifamily developments.
b.         Construction Costs
Construction factors such as the type of construction, custom versus tract development,
materials, site conditions, finishing details, amenities, square footage, and structural
configuration can increase the cost of housing. In general, multi-family housing is less expensive
to construct than single-family housing. However, construction costs vary significantly,
depending on the size of the unit and the number and quality of amenities offered. This can
includes items such as fountains, swimming pools, underground parking, gyms, and other less
obvious costs such as the quality of appliances and interior finishes (flooring, light fixtures, and
cabinetry).
Construction costs include both hard costs, such as labor and materials, and soft costs, such as
architectural and engineering services, development fees and insurance. For multifamily homes
in Marin County, hard costs account for 60-70 percent of the building cost and soft costs
average around 15-20 percent (the remaining 15-20 percent is land costs). Based on recent
multifamily developments in the county, hard costs are currently between $250 and $400 per
square foot for a multifamily unit (Marin Countywide Housing Element Workbook, EAH Housing
interview).
For single-family homes, hard costs often are roughly 40 percent of the total construction cost,
soft costs are 20 percent and land is the remainder. In the region, single family homes cost
roughly $125 per square foot for a two story house and $160 for a three story home.
With construction and land costs added together, total multifamily unit development costs rise
to $300 to $500 per square foot, or between $400,000 and $500,000 per unit. These high costs
reflect the high cost of land and the expensive finishes which are typical in Marin County (Marin
Countywide Housing Element Workbook).
One factor affecting costs is the use of prevailing wage labor. Construction costs for a typical
apartment complex in the region (45 units per acre, structure parking, 800 square units), are
around $200,000 a unit for prevailing wage labor and $175,000 a unit for non-prevailing wage
labor. Projects receiving public subsidies, such as affordable housing developments, often must
pay prevailing wages.
According to the Association of Bay Area Governments, wood frame construction at 20-30 units
per acre is generally the most cost efficient method of single family residential development.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                            Page B-36

                                                                                            May 4, 2015
However, local circumstances affecting land costs and market demand will impact the economic
feasibility of construction types.
Costs can change dramatically over time. From 2000-2007 construction costs were rising faster
than inflation. In late 2007 they leveled off and have since been declining (Marin Countywide
Housing Element Workbook, EAH Housing interview). In late 2008 and early 2009, construction
costs dropped roughly ten percent.
Though construction costs comprise a large portion of the total development cost of a project,
these costs are fairly consistent throughout the county and therefore would not constitute an
actual constraint on housing production in Mill Valley.
2.       Mortgage and Rehabilitation Financing
Historically, communities have experienced a pattern where households seeking to finance the
purchase of a home have had more difficulty in lower-income neighborhoods. The Community
Reinvestment Act was passed in 1977 in an effort to address this issue. In tandem with the
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending institutions are required to make annual public
disclosures of their home mortgage lending activity. This applies to all loan applications for
home purchases, improvements, and refinancing, whether financed at market rate or with
government assistance. The most current HMDA available data for Mill Valley is for 2011.
Affordable housing developments face additional constraints in financing. Though public funding
is available, it is allocated on a highly competitive basis and developments must meet multiple
qualifying criteria, often including the requirement to pay prevailing wages. Smaller
developments with higher per unit costs are among the hardest to make financially feasible. This
is because the higher costs result in a sale price that is above the affordability levels set for many
programs. Additionally, smaller projects often require significant inputs of time by developers,
but because the overall budget is smaller and fees are based on a percentage of total costs, the
projects are often not feasible (Marin Environmental Housing Collaborative).
a.       Mortgage Financing
Until mid-2008, home mortgage financing was readily available at attractive rates throughout
Marin County and California. Rates varies, but ranged from around 6.25 percent to seven
percent between 2006 and 2008 for a 30 year fixed rate loan. However, rates have been as high
as ten or 12 percent in the last decade.
The continued economic recession, combined with stagnant home prices and tighter lending
standards has resulted in a significant slowdown in mortgage lending activity. Beginning in late
2008, it became harder to get a home purchase loan, although at the same time mortgage
interest rates continued to drop, and are currently under four percent. In particular, people
with short credit history, lower incomes or self-employment incomes, or those with other
unusual circumstances, have had trouble qualifying for a loan in the current credit market.
The availability of mortgage financing in a community depends on a number of factors, including
the type of lending institutions active in the community, lending practices, rates and fees
charged, laws and regulations governing financial institutions, and equal access to those
institutions. Through analysis of Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data on the disposition
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                               Page B-37
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
of residential loan applications, an assessment can be made of the availability of residential
financing within a community.
Table B.15 summarizes Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data for both Mill Valley and the
greater San Francisco/San Mateo County Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA), providing
information on the approval status of all conventional home purchase and refinance loan
applications during 2011.
          Of the total 165 completed applications for home purchase loans in Mill Valley, 93
           percent were approved and just 7 percent were denied. This high loan approval rate
           exceeds that of the San Francisco/San Mateo MSA, which evidenced a loan approval
           rate of 88 percent.
          The volume of applications for refinance loans in Mill Valley was over five times that of
           home purchase loans, with 81 percent of the total 882 applications receiving approval
           and 19 percent denied, comparable to the regional average.
Table B.15: Status of Home Purchase and Refinance Loan Applications 2011
                                                     Loans Approved               Loans Denied
                                Completed                                                    San
 Loan Type                        Loan                      San Francisco/
                                                                                          Francisco/
                               Applications   Mill Valley     San Mateo    Mill Valley
                                                                                         San Mateo
                                                               Counties
                                                                                           Counties
 Conventional Home Purchase Loans
 No. of Applications               165             153                         12
 % Approval/Denial                                 93%            88%          7%            12%
 Refinancing Loans
 No. of Applications               882             715                        167
 % Approval/Denial                                 81%            81%         19%            19%
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Data, 2011. Compiled by Karen Warner Associates, Inc.
Note: Approved loans include: loans originated and applications approved but not accepted. Denial rate
based on applications that went through complete underwriting process, and exclude applications
withdrawn or files closed for incompleteness.
In summary, Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data would indicate that the availability of home
mortgage financing has not served as a constraint to home purchase or refinance in Mill Valley.
b.         Construction Financing
Construction loans for new housing are difficult to secure in the current market. In past years,
lenders would provide up to 80 percent of the cost of new construction (loan to value ratio). In
recent years, due to market conditions and government regulations, banks require larger
investments by the builder.
Many builders are finding it nearly impossible to get construction loans for residential property
at the current time. Complicated projects, like mixed use developments, are often the hardest to
finance. Non-profit developers may find it especially difficult to secure funding from the private
sector.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                              Page B-38

                                                                                          May 4, 2015
Affordable housing developments face additional constraints in financing. Though public funding
is available, it is allocated on a highly competitive basis and developments must meet multiple
qualifying criteria, often including the requirement to pay prevailing wages. Smaller
developments with higher per unit costs are among the hardest to make financially feasible.
3.       Community Resistance to New Housing
Another common constraint to housing production in Marin County is community resistance to
new developments. There are a number of concerns that are often expressed at meetings,
including: 1) new developments will cause increased traffic, 2) additional housing or density will
adversely affect the community character, 3) affordable housing will impact property values,
and 4) valuable open space will be lost.
Regardless of the concern, vociferous opposition can slow or stop development. Therefore, it is
important to identify sites for special needs and affordable housing that fit with community
character and have minimum impacts. Design plays a critical role in creating new developments
that blend into the existing neighborhood, especially in higher density developments that might
otherwise seem out of place. Good design can help ensure that high density developments are
not bulky or out-of-scale. Through sensitive design, a building’s perceived bulk can be
significantly reduced to create a development that blends with the existing character of the
neighborhood. Design strategies that minimize the perception of bulk and create a blending
with the community do not necessarily increase costs. These include:
       (1)    Minimize building heights;
       (2)    Break-up the building “mass” in its architecture and detailing (e.g., create several
              smaller buildings instead of one large building);
       (3)    Vary the roofline;
       (4)    Create a three-dimensional facade (rather than a massive, flat facade);
       (5)    Step-back the building height, with the lowest part of the building towards the
              street and adjacent properties, locating the highest part of the building towards the
              center of the property;
       (6)    Site the building appropriately in relation to surrounding buildings;
       (7)    Use architectural design, landscaping, materials and colors that fit with the area;
       (8)    Use landscaping to blend the buildings with the natural setting;
       (9)    Provide for open space and pathways throughout the development.
Additionally, at times there is a tension between the desire to provide certain individuals (such
as nurses, teachers, law enforcement, etc) preferential access to affordable housing, and Fair
Housing Law. In many cases, it is not possible to target housing to select groups. These concerns
are often expressed during project review processes and can present significant barriers to
development (Marin Countywide Housing Element Workbook).
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                            Page B-39

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
4.         Flooding, Subsidence and Seismic Hazards
Large areas of marshland or bay mud adjacent to Richardson Bay have been artificially filled with
an assortment of soil, sand and crushed rock materials and consequently have a high risk of
subsidence and liquefaction. Liquefaction occurs when water in ground soil – especially fill – is
agitated during the shaking of an earthquake. This water rises and literally makes the soil liquid.
Buildings built on liquefaction can literally shake apart because the soil cannot support their
structure. According to research conducted since the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS) and other scientists predict a 62% probability of at least one
magnitude 6.7 or greater quake, capable of causing widespread damage, striking the San
Francisco Bay region before 2032. The San Andreas Fault lies approximately 5 miles southwest
of Mill Valley and the Hayward fault lies approximately 12 miles northeast. Other faults near Mill
Valley include the Rodgers Creek fault and Calaveras fault.
A large portion of Mill Valley is subject to flooding due to a combination of factors including
periodic heavy winter rainfalls, tidal fluctuations, and potentials for tsunami and dam failure due
to seismic activity. Mill Valley drains into the Richardson Bay Drainage Basin mainly by way of
Arroyo Corte Madera Del Presidio stream. The stream gradients are exceptionally step in the
upper elevations and level out as the creek continues over alluvial plains and enters the tidal
marshlands along the periphery of Richardson Bay. Consequently, the creek often overflows its
banks in the lower reaches during periods of heavy rainfall, where significant urban
encroachment has occurred. The National Flood Insurance program indicates that the flooding
risk is high in this area. In addition, sea level rise, caused by melting land-based ice and the
expansion of seawater by thermal warming, is another environmental constraint for Mill Valley.
The Bay Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC) has determined that areas of Mill
Valley are expected to experience a 16 inch rise in sea level by 2050 and a 55 inch rise by the
end of the century.
5.         Geographical Constraints
Mill Valley is located between the upper end of Richardson Bay and the southeast face of Mt.
Tamalpais. The city is defined by several steep ridges that extend down toward the Bay from the
2,570 foot elevation of Mt. Tamalpais. Several streams which originate on the flanks of Mt.
Tamalpais descend through the city and drain into Richardson Bay. Much of the city is
characterized by steep topography with slopes of 50% or greater. The low-lying flat lands at the
tip of Richardson bay consist of artificial fill underlain by bay mud.
Slope stability is a recurrent problem and can result where excavations (cut slopes) are made
into hillsides, triggering instability. Underground springs, and seasonal and permanent streams
also limit the availability of developable land.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                           Page B-40

                                                                                       May 4, 2015
6.       Fire Hazards
Fire danger and magnitude in Mill Valley is very high, due to its location on the southern slopes
of Mount Tamalpais and the dense tree cover of its narrow wooded canyons, of mostly of
second growth redwoods. The Muir Woods National Monument is located just outside the city
limits.
Mount Tamalpais presents and enormous fire problem for the communities surrounding the
mountain. The potential magnitude of a fire affecting the surrounding communities has been
documented many times. The Fire Departments and Fire Districts that ring Mount Tamalpais,
and have Local Response Area (LRA) responsibility, have traditionally utilized and alarm matrix
system for the dispatch of resources. The Marin County Fire Department, as a Contract County
for Cal Fire responsible for the State Response Area (SRA), utilizes Type and Number dispatching
based on current and predicted fire danger. A fire in the Mount Tamalpais Mutual Threat Zone
would result in a deployment of resources of both LRA and SRA.
7.       Prehistoric Cultural Resources
Numerous archaeological resources of the Miwok Indians including remnants of cultural
activities, major villages, and seasonal encampments, are recorded in Mill Valley. They include; a
site at the base of Shelter Ridge adjacent to Goodman’s Marsh, two seasonal homes sites
located to the southeast of Alto Hill, three shell mound sites on Alto Hill and numerous other
sites in the Alto Hill area, two sites located to the southeast of Kite Hill, and numerous other
sites to the east of Kite Hill in the Scott Valley and Alto area.
Native American burial grounds are protected under the California environmental Quality Act,
and state-wide law protects these locations.
8.       Endangered and Threatened Species
The City of Mill Valley is 4.8 square miles total, of which approximately 0.1 square mile is water
(Source: Census Bureau). Mill Valley’s 4.7 square miles of land is bound by sensitive eco-habitat
for endangered and threatened species. Beyond the city limits are vast public lands including
Mount Tamalpais State Park, the Golden Gate National Recreation Area (GGNRA), the Marin
Municipal Water District watershed lands and the Point Reyes National Seashore. The city’s
small size and proximity to endangered and threatened species habitat is a constraint when
considering construction.
Mill Valley’s native biotic resources include redwood groves, mixed stands of broadleaf
evergreens (madrone and others), oak woodland (Coast live oak), chaparral, coastal scrub,
grasslands, marshes and mudflats. Natural resources along the community’s edges are
protected in a series of open space preserves: Blithedale Summit, Camino Alto, and Alto Bowl to
the north and Bothin Marsh to the southeast. Mill Valley is interwoven with a complex network
of six creeks (Arroyo Corte Madera del Presidio, Old Mill Creek, Cascade Creek, Warner Creek,
Ryan Creek, and Sutton Manor Creek) that drain the watershed into Richardson Bay. The
wetlands in Bothin Marsh Preserve, in the northwestern portion of Richardson Bay, along with
those in Corte Madera, represent the majority of the tidal marsh habitat of west-central San
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                          Page B-41

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Francisco Bay. Richardson Bay, one of 148 Important Bird Areas in California (Daniel s. Cooper,
2004), provides refuge for thousands of waterfowl during high tide and shorebirds during low
tide, including three sensitive species: Long-billed Curlew, San Pablo song Sparrow, and San
Francisco Clapper Rail (City of Mill Valley General Plan Workbook, May 2012).
Richardson’s Bay is a major sub-tidal spawning area for Pacific herring. The flora and fauna of
Richardson’s Bay waterfront includes Eelgrass, many bay fish and invertebrates, and bird species
such as the California least tern. Further degradation of eelgrass bed health will have a negative
impact on bay fish, invertebrates, and some bird species as well as potential financial impacts on
fisherman. The Richardson’s Bay is especially susceptible to water pollution due to its enclosed
shape, shallowness, and minimal tidal flushing action.
According to the California Department of Fish and Game’s Natural Diversity Data Base (NDDB)
list of rare species, five threatened or endangered plant species and six animal species are
located within the San Rafael Quadrangle encompassing the Mill Valley planning area. Plant
species include the Santa Cruz tarplant, white-rayed pentachaeta, showy Rancheria clover,
Marin western flax and North Coast semaphore grass. Animal species include the California
black rail, California Clapper rail, Coho salmon-central California coast ESU, tidewater goby, salt
marsh harvest mouse and San Bruno elfin butterfly.
9.         Impact of Environmental Constraints on Development
In summary, while Mill Valley is subject to the environmental constraints described above, the
City’s General Plan sets forth a series of actions to minimize these constraints. Mill Valley
incorporates this knowledge into its land use planning and development review processes.
The City will also consider using the area-wide Environmental Assessment or Program EIR for the
Miller Avenue Precise Plan for assessing area-wide infrastructure and other potential off-site
impacts to expedite the processing of subsequent development proposals. Program EIRs are
based on the concept of “tiering”, which means that as project proposals are made on specific
sites, the need for additional environmental analysis will be determined. If a proposed project
has the potential for impacts which exceed those discussed in the Program EIR, additional
environmental analysis is required.
10.        Impact of Sustainability Factors on Development
Boundary Solutions, Inc. of Mill Valley prepared four maps to reflect sustainability factors and
their potential relationships to housing in Mill Valley. The sustainability factors picked were
condensed and adapted from the “Six Livability Principles” developed by the Office of
Sustainable Housing and Communities, a Program Office for the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development. The Six Livability Principles broadly discuss the expansion of choices for
transportation and location, to reduce such costs on households and strengthen communities
economically. These factors include:
     1. the location of transit relative to housing,
     2. the location of amenities relative to housing, and
     3. the solar potential of housing sites (to promote energy-efficient housing choices).
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                           Page B-42

                                                                                       May 4, 2015
The four maps below illustrate how these sustainability factors could potentially affect the
provision of housing. As described in Program #32 in the Housing Element, should any
residential or mixed use projects compete for funding, these maps could help determine and
prioritize parcels that are more walkable. The solar map below supports Program #34 to
determine parcels that have higher solar potential.
Figure B.1: Destinations in Mill Valley and Relationship to City Parcels
   Legend
            Destinations
            Half-mile distance from every parcel in the city
Figure B.1 highlights the location of commercial and public facility parcels (C-G, C-F, C-R, C-N),
primarily along Miller Avenue, East Blithedale Avenue, and also certain open space amenities.
These locations are noted as “destinations” that residents would need to or wish to travel to on
a regular or frequent basis (for example, going to a supermarket for groceries). This map shows
that most of Mill Valley is within a half-mile distance from an amenity, but the central and
southeastern areas in particular are in closest proximity to such amenities.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                          Page B-43

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Figure B.2: Walkability in Mill Valley
   Legend
               Walkability: Total Destinations within half a mile
               1 - 30
               31 - 60
               61 - 90
               91 - 120
               121 - 145
Figure B.2 adds additional information to the relationship between destinations and parcels
within Mill Valley by showing how many destinations are within reach of each parcel in the city.
The parcels in darker colors have the most amenities within a half-mile distance, indicating a
higher “walkability”, or accessibility of amenities on foot due to their close proximity.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                           Page B-44

                                                                                    May 4, 2015
Figure B.3: Proximity to Transit in Mill Valley
   Legend
            Distance from Transit
            Less than a half mile from transit
            Less than a quarter mile from transit
            Not near transit
Figure B.3 shows the parcels in the city that are closest to transit (bus stops and lines). The
parcels that are best served by transit are concentrated in the downtown and commercial areas.
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                       Page B-45
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Figure B.4: Solar Energy Potential of parcels in Mill Valley
   Legend
                Solar Energy Potential
                Low
                Medium to High
Generally, south-facing parcels in California have a higher solar energy potential. Figure B.4 was
derived from the Relative Solar Energy Map, from MarinMap.
Sources:
          Mill Valley Municipal Code
          Mill Valley 2040 General Plan
          Mill Valley 2009-2014 Housing Element, October 2013
          Marin Countywide Housing Element Workbook
          Affordable Housing Finance Basics, Marin Environmental Housing Collaborative, November 2007.
          Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance In-lieu Fee Analysis, Submitted to Marin County, March 2008.
           Prepared by Vernazza Wolfe Associates, Inc.
          Ecumenical Association for Housing (EAH) interview
          Development Advisory Services, Inc. interview
          North Bay Family Homes interview
          Maps prepared by Boundary Solutions, Inc. of Mill Valley
          Relative Solar Energy Map from MarinMap
B. Housing Constraints Analysis                                                               Page B-46

                                                                                          May 4, 2015
Appendix C.               Housing Capacity Analysis
Background
The following analysis was conducted in order illustrate the City of Mill Valley’s realistic housing
capacity to meet the City’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) requirement, as
mandated by State law.
The analysis estimates the number of possible units that could be developed during a RHNA
cycle based on existing zoning. State Housing Element law requires jurisdictions to provide an
inventory of land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having
potential for redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and public facilities
and services to these sites.
Methodology
The capacity analysis aims to meet State mandates, achieve California Department of Housing
and Community Development (HCD) certification, and also reflect the values of the community.
Hence, the proposed methodology for the residential capacity analysis recognizes Mill Valley’s
current development patterns, existing zoning districts that allow residential development, the
city’s unique small-town character, and the desire to preserve and strengthen the community’s
history, character and overall sense of place.
“Default density” is a feature of state law and is a very important component of the
methodology for the capacity analysis. The RHNA is divided into different income levels, as a
jurisdiction needs to show its intent to provide housing for households of various income levels
(the Association of Bay Area Governments, or ABAG, determines the calculation methodology
and number of units per income category). In order to assess this from a planning perspective,
a “default density” is assigned to determine the number of units that could be counted in
individual income categories. Generally speaking, the higher the potential density of a site, the
lower the income level it will be assigned to. However, this does not mean that the site will
automatically be developed in the future at its assigned income level, or even at its projected
density.
For Mill Valley, sites with zoning designations that allow residential development at a density of
at least 20 dwelling units per acre (du/ac) are categorized as affordable to very low and low-
income households. Sites with unit potentials of at least 10 du/ac but less than 20 du/ac are
considered affordable to moderate income households, and sites with unit potentials lower than
10 du/ac are considered affordable to above-moderate income households only.
This analysis does not imply that any of the units would be built in the future, or that any of the
sites or units are “pre-approved” for development. All future projects must go through planning
and environmental review (California Environmental Quality Act) processes as established by the
City and the State. This capacity analysis is a strategy that looks at the community as it is today,
applies the existing development rules, and calculates the resultant number of housing units
that could reasonably be provided. While this analysis assumes no change in existing zoning
designations or standards, policies and programs included in the Housing Element could
potentially include changes in development standards.
C. Housing Capacity Analysis                                                                 Page C-1

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
A.         Capacity Analysis
Assumptions
All parcels in the city that allow residential development under current zoning were analyzed for
residential development capacity towards fulfilling the RHNA. In order to make this a meaningful
exercise for this Housing Element Update, several criteria were developed in order to rank and
identify properties that have realistic development potential in the near future (see list below).
This analysis yielded two groups of parcels: parcels that have a higher realistic residential
development potential in the future, and others that have lower potential. The term ‘realistic
potential in the near future’ applies to:
     a) Parcels with single-family residential zoning designations, that currently have no living
           units on site, meet all of the criteria below and could reasonably develop one living unit
           (Accessory Dwelling Units/Second Units are not counted under this capacity analysis,
           but are counted under a different option to fulfill the RHNA);
     b) Parcels with multi-family or commercial zoning designations (that allow residential
           development), that may have an existing use on the site, meet all of the criteria below,
           and could reasonably develop two or more additional residential units.
1.         Criteria for Realistic and Near-term Development Potential
The criteria applied to the parcels are listed below. Parcels that were determined to have
realistic potential in the near future:
     i.    Had an average slope of less than 50% in commercially zoned areas and less than 70%
           in residentially zoned areas. As several homes in the single-family districts are built on
           relatively steep slopes, the slope cut-off for single-family districts is higher than the
           slope cut-off for multi-family districts and all other districts, where a higher density
           would be more difficult to achieve with steeper slopes. A 100% slope refers to a 45
           degree slope, and a 50% slope is approximately a 27 degree slope;
     ii. Had ready access to roads and were not landlocked. Easements would need to be
           created for landlocked parcels and could therefore complicate development;
     iii. Had existing structures built 1982 and before (for single-family or multi-family
           residential parcels). Housing stock less than 30 years of age would have a lesser chance
           of redevelopment. As many Mill Valley properties have been well-maintained over the
           years, additional field inspections would help ascertain the visual quality of the buildings
           and redevelopment potential;
     iv. Had a parcel size of at least 3,000 square feet for commercial areas and at least 6,000
           square feet for residential areas. A study titled The Future of Infill Housing in California:
           Opportunities, Potential Feasibility and Demand, was written by the Institute of Urban
           and Regional Development at the University of California, Berkeley, and published by
           HCD in September 2005. The study supported the development of an inventory to
           facilitate and promote infill housing development in California, and discussed physical
           feasibility issues for infill housing production. Without looking at other physical
           constraints such as steep slopes and unstable soils, the study states that other factors
C. Housing Capacity Analysis                                                                   Page C-2

                                                                                             May 4, 2015
          being equal, typically parcels that are 2,000 – 2,500 square feet or less present
          increased challenges that could render a lot almost un-buildable. M-Group has used this
          guiding principle to exclude all parcels less than 3,000 square feet in zones that support
          residential       development          from      the       capacity      analysis.       (See
          http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/infill_parcel/). The minimum allowable lot size of 6,000
          square feet was used for residential areas (Municipal Code 20.16.040);
    v. Had not been listed in the City’s Historic Overlay Zone, which identifies 27 parcels, or
          in the Historic Society’s list of 93 sites designated as ‘Potentially Historic’. The City
          maintains a Historic Overlay Zone and a list of sites that have Potential Historic
          Designation;
    vi. Had not been listed on the City’s list of recently approved and constructed projects
          (which dates from 1999 to present). The City maintains a list of Approved and Built
          projects. The version used by M-Group dates from January 1, 1999 to October 1, 2012. If
          a project had received approval but was not yet built, it was included in the capacity
          analysis based on the unit count it was approved at;
    vii. Would yield one unit if in a single-family residential district, or at least three units if in
          a multi-family or commercial district. In districts that allow multi-family residential
          development, a two-unit yield is unlikely to result in redevelopment;
    viii. Were not publicly owned by agencies, districts, or groups (other than the City of Mill
          Valley), as there is insufficient knowledge whether the parcels are surplus, or are
          available for development;
    ix. Were not prioritized as open space by all or the majority of members of the Open
          Space Site Priority Committee in January 2002, to maintain their prioritization for open
          space;
    x. Did not have an improvement value of $200,000 or more based on assessor data, if in
          a residential district. Typically, vacant residential parcels have an improvement value of
          $0, and this criterion helps to ascertain whether they are actually vacant. The higher the
          improvement value, the higher the likelihood of the site with a functioning structure,
          and therefore less possibility of being redeveloped;
    xi. Had a ratio of improved value to total site value of less than 60% if in a commercial
          district. A higher ratio of improved value to total site value would indicate a functioning,
          valuable structure, and therefore less possibility of being redeveloped.
    xii. Were not commercial zoned parcels on East Blithedale from Park School up to
          Highway 101;
    xiii. Were not commercial zoned parcels adjacent to jurisdictional wetlands and Highway
          101;
    xiv. Were not commercial zoned parcels located within the Miller Avenue/ Montford/
          LaGoma intersection;
    xv. Had a "Walk Score" of 50 points or less. A parcel with a Walk Score of less than 50
          points is considered "car-dependent" wherein most errands require an automobile.
2.        Data Sources
Parcel data for the City of Mill Valley was retrieved from Marin Map, the Geographic
Information System (GIS) for Marin County, California. The parcel dataset is based on Assessor’s
data, and was published by the County of Marin Community Development Agency beginning in
1994. Attribute data (such as owner’s name, average slope, construction year for existing units,
parcel size, etc.) is updated on a weekly basis, and the geometry of parcels is updated on a
C. Housing Capacity Analysis                                                                   Page C-3

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
monthly basis, with new available data from the Marin County’s Assessor-Recorder’s office. The
data used for this analysis was retrieved in July 3, 2012.
3.         Analysis
Geographical Informational Systems (GIS) was used in conjunction with Excel to analyze
assessor’s data. The criteria listed in this document was applied to parcels in order to identify
the highest ranking parcels that could possibly redevelop based on current zoning regulations.
A visual check using Google Earth and Google Streetview was then performed to ascertain the
current build out and visual conditions of buildings. High-resolution satellite imagery was
updated for the Bay Area, including the entire City of Mill Valley, on May 31, 2011.
4.         Further Inputs and Assumptions
Based on past trends in Mill Valley, multi-family developments are typically approved at less-
than-maximum densities allowed by zoning regulations. As a result, this analysis assumes 75% of
the maximum number of potential residential units that would be allowed, under existing zoning
in multi-family residential districts.
A significant number of the multi-family sites within the sites inventory fall within Mill Valley’s
commercial zones. Commercial or mixed-use districts that allow residential development do not
currently have established residential densities, with densities determined by the Planning
Commission at the time a development proposal is submitted. In order to provide greater
certainty for development applicants, the updated Housing Element establishes Program #6
(Mixed Use Zoning in Commercial Districts) and Program #22 (Update Zoning Code consistent
with Land Use Element) to allow multi-family uses by right in commercial districts and to
establish minimum and maximum densities within the Zoning Ordinance consistent with the
General Plan. The adopted MV 2040 General Plan has established a residential density range
(17 to 29 units/acre, based on RM zoning standards) in the three identified commercial land use
designations: Downtown, Neighborhood and General. These designations and their respective
density ranges will guide development of proposed mixed use projects until the Zoning
Ordinance development standards can be made consistent with the MV 2040 General Plan.
Based on past trends, commercial sites were assumed to allow for 50% of the lot size to
accommodate an RM-1.5 density (i.e. maximum 1 dwelling unit per 1,500 s.f. of lot area or
approximately 29 units per acre, which is the maximum allowable density for such mixed-use
sites). This approach acknowledges that the primary intent of the commercial zoning and
General Plan designations is to allow for commercial development, which is factored into this
capacity analysis. For a few large commercial sites, which at 50% of lot area were still over a
quarter of an acre, a lower RM-2.0 density (maximum 1 dwelling unit per 2,000 s.f. of lot area)
was applied for consistency with actual development trends.
These conservative assumptions also serve to acknowledge several development constraints,
including height, setbacks, parking requirements, typical unit sizes and the number of
bedrooms, views, and the 30-foot creek setbacks required for parcels that are near creeks and
streams. Also, a significant number of sites zoned for mixed use and multi-family development
C. Housing Capacity Analysis                                                               Page C-4

                                                                                        May 4, 2015
are within 100-year or 500-year flood zones, which would trigger building restrictions such as
the elevation of structures above the base flood elevation.
Such constraints and restrictions are not easily quantifiable at this time, but the assumptions to
estimate development at densities lower than the maximum allowed serve to acknowledge
these constraints.
C. Housing Capacity Analysis                                                              Page C-5
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
5.          Parcels with Potential for Consolidation
Many of the individual parcels identified as suitable for development in the Capacity Analysis are
located adjacent to each other, and a handful share the same ownership. These parcels have
potential for assembly into larger sites, resulting in more viable housing developments based on
economies of scale, advantages in design, and in some cases, the ability to achieve a one to two-
unit increase in the number of units.
The Housing Element establishes a program to provide incentives to encourage lot
consolidation, including guidance for property owners through the lot consolidation (lot line
adjustment) application, waiving the fee for this particular entitlement, and assisting property
owners to identify and apply for financial resources.
Table C.1: Parcels with Potential for Consolidation
Group      Parcel No.   Parcel        Parcel Addresses        Potential      Combined       Potential Units
           in Site      APNS                                  Units per      Parcel Size if if parcels are
           Analysis                                           parcel (less   consolidated   consolidated
           Chart and                                          existing       (sq. ft.)      (less existing
           Maps                                               units)                        units)
A          1            028-061-25    38 MILLER AVE                11           59,225              19
           4            028-063-18    42 MILLER AVE                 8
B          2            028-034-34    238 E BLITHEDALE AVE          9           49,014              16
           7            028-034-35    230 E BLITHEDALE AVE          6
C          3            030-071-39    413 MILLER AVE                8           57,448              18
           13           030-081-35    433 MILLER AVE                4
           15           030-071-28    411 MILLER AVE                4
D          5            030-073-06    444 MILLER AVE                7           38,280              12
           11           030-073-08    458 MILLER AVE                5
E          10           028-211-14    10 WILLOW ST                  5           30,750              10
           12           028-211-13    333 MILLER AVE                5
F          14           048-134-52    546 MILLER AVE                4           27,560               8
           18           048-134-01    530 MILLER AVE                3
G          16           028-213-16    360 MILLER AVE                4           22,700               7
           23           028-213-35    352 MILLER AVE                3
                                                                      1
H          25           030-101-36    40 CAMINO ALTO              40            386,247             40
           26           030-101-37    40 CAMINO ALTO
1
  Based on number of independent living units being planned for parking lot area at The Redwoods.
C. Housing Capacity Analysis                                                                     Page C-6
                                                                                      May 4, 2015
6.        Examples of Multi-Family Infill Development
The flat, “valley” areas in Mill Valley are characterized by compact development on relatively
small sites. Table C.2 below provides examples of the diversity of higher density infill projects
supported under Mill Valley’s development standards, including mixed use, apartments and
condominiums. The development trends reflected in this table and the more detailed examples
which follow help to substantiate the feasibility of development on small parcels in Mill Valley,
and the ability to achieve maximum densities under Zoning.
Table C.2: Examples of Multi-family Infill Projects
   Project Name /            Zoning   Parcel Size  Housing Type   # of units  Density
   Address                   District
   420 Miller Ave              C-N     7,600 sq ft    Mixed Use        4       22 du/acre
   50 Corte Madera             C-N     0.34 acres    Apartments       10       29 du/acre
   505 Miller Ave              C-N     1.19 acres     Mixed Use       21       17 du/acre
   191 Throckmorton Ave      RM-1.5    0.34 acres    Apartments       10       29 du/acre
   258 Miller Ave            RM-3.5    0.24 acres    Apartments        6       25 du/acre
   216 Miller Ave            RM-3.5    0.63 acres   Condominiums      18       29 du/acre
   10 Park Ave               RM-3.5    0.64 acres    Apartments       19       30 du/acre
   237 East Blithedale       RM-2.5    0.45 acres   Condominiums       7       15 du/acre
   651 Miller Ave                                     Affordable
                             RM-2.0     2.4 acres                     32       17 du/acre
   (Pickleweed Apts)                                 Apartments
   8 Old Mill                RM-1.5    6,500 sq ft  Condominiums       4       27 du/acre
C. Housing Capacity Analysis                                                             Page C-7

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
420 Miller Ave. This Mixed Use development of 4 units is in the Commercial (C-N) Zoning District
on a narrow, 7,600 square foot lot in two buildings. The residential density is 22 du/ac. The lot
coverage is 20% with 0.65 Floor Area Ratio (FAR).
50 Corte Madera. This is a 10-unit multi-family housing development in a CN district. The parcel
size is 15,000 square feet, and the residential density is 29 du/ac. This site includes 16 parking
spaces. There are three buildings on the site, creating a courtyard in the center. It is surrounded
by other multi-family housing developments and single-family homes, and is well-screened by
mature vegetation.
                                                                         (close up of rear building)
C. Housing Capacity Analysis                                                                 Page C-8
                                                                                         May 4, 2015
505 Miller Ave. This is a 21-unit Mixed-Use development on a 51,827 square foot lot (1.19
acres) in the C-N district with a RM-2.0 overlay. There are 6 commercial spaces on site, totaling
about 5,200 square feet, and 21 residential units consisting of 12 single-family townhomes and 9
second-floor units above commercial. The residential density is 17 du/ac. There are 28 on-site
parking spaces and 6 on-street parking spaces. The project is GreenPoint Rated.
191A & 191B Throckmorton Ave. This is a 20-unit multi-family apartment complex on two
parcels totaling 0.68 acres in the RM-1.5 district. The residential density is 29 du/ac.
C. Housing Capacity Analysis                                                               Page C-9
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
258 Miller Ave. This is a 6-unit apartment complex on a 0.24 acre lot in the RM-3.5 district. The
residential density is 25 du/ac.
216 Miller Ave. This is an 18-unit multi-family development also known as the Carmelita
Apartments. The property is on a 27,500 square feet lot in the RM-3.5 district. It has 26 parking
spaces and the residential density is 28 du/ac. Parking is accessed by Una Way off Miller Ave.
The buildings are arranged in steps up the slope.
C. Housing Capacity Analysis                                                            Page C-10
                                                                                      May 4, 2015
10 Park Ave. This is a 19-unit multi-family apartment complex on two parcels totaling 0.64 acres
in the RM-3.5 Zoning District. The residential density is 29 du/ac.
237 East Blithedale. This is a 7-unit condominium development on 7 parcels totaling 0.45 acres
in the RM-2.5 Zoning District. The residential density is 15 du/ac.
C. Housing Capacity Analysis                                                           Page C-11
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
651 Miller Ave (Pickleweed Apartments). This is a 32-unit affordable apartment development
next to the Redwoods Senior Housing property, on a 1.88 acre lot in the RM-2.0 Zoning District,
with on-site carports. It is located next to the Redwood Retirement Homes property. The
residential density is 17 du/ac. The site is well-screened from Miller Ave by plantings and trees.
8 Old Mill. This multi-family residential development of four residential units is in the RM-1.5
Zoning District on a 6,500 square foot lot. The residential density is 27 du/ac.
C. Housing Capacity Analysis                                                              Page C-12
7.    Sites in the Capacity Analysis
 Site                                                                                                                                                                Parcel Size                Age of Existing Building (if                                 MinLandAreaPer  Max # of    75% of Max Allowed Max # of Units    Potential Number of Resulting Density    Income Category based on
       APN                   Status     Zoning Category   General Plan Land Use Development Assessment and Visual Condition     Walkscore Address or Nearest Address             Avg Slope                                   Existing Units Density applied
 No.                                                                                                                                                                 (sf)                       any)                                                         DU/SF           Units       (RM only)          RoundDown         Units                (du/acre)           default density
   1   028-061-25            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: Mill Creek                    95     38 MILLER AVE                   35,000           14.1                       1927                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500  11.66667                                     11                  11                 27.4 Very Low/Low
                                                                                Plaza/Balboa Café/Tea Garden Springs. 2
                                                                                story building in constructed in 1927. 2nd
                                                                                story is up for lease; rest of site is a double
                                                                                parking lot or heavily vegetated. The ratio
                                                                                of the improved value to the total value is
                                                                                fairly low at 51%. This property has a very
                                                                                high Walkscore of 95, which indicates its
                                                                                close proximity to several amenities.
   2   028-034-34            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: Tony Tutto Pizza/Mill         85     238 E BLITHEDALE AVE            29,565            8.4                         NA                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500       9.855                                    9                    9                26.5 Very Low/Low
                                                                                Valley Services (two different one-story
                                                                                buildings); the pizza place is renovated and
                                                                                the other building is a warehouse in fair
                                                                                condition; area surrounding buildings is
                                                                                parking lot; portion of site extends back in
                                                                                narrow, long area and is vegetated. The
                                                                                ratio of the improved value to the total
                                                                                value is fairly low at 41%, indicating that
                                                                                the site is underutilized. This property has
                                                                                a high Walkscore of 85 and is close to
                                                                                several amenities within short walking
                                                                                distance.
   3   030-071-39            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: Samurai/Swirl Frozen          72     413 MILLER AVE                  29,000            2.3                         NA                 1 1,500 sf per du            1500  9.666667                                      9                    8                27.0 Very Low/Low
                                                                                Yogurt/Trio Salon; good condition one-
                                                                                story retail building on one side of site with
                                                                                fair condition Samurai restaurant building
                                                                                separated by a driveway and parking lot;
                                                                                about half the site is either parking or a
                                                                                driveway. The ratio of the improved value
                                                                                to the total value is 50%.
   4   028-063-18            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: Chavez & Gertler              95     42 MILLER AVE                   24,225           25.3                       1903                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500       8.075                                    8                    8                28.8 Very Low/Low
                                                                                Attorneys at Law; site is heavily vegetated
                                                                                and appears to have a single building,
                                                                                constructed in 1903. The ratio of the
                                                                                improved value to the total value is low at
                                                                                44%, indicating underutilization. This
                                                                                property has a very high Walkscore of 95,
                                                                                indicative of its close proximity to several
                                                                                amenities.
   5   030-073-06            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: Dry Cleaners; 1 or 2-         72     444 MILLER AVE                  22,780            1.1                       1952                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500  7.593333                                      7                    7                26.8 Very Low/Low
                                                                                story buildings on-site, fair to good
                                                                                condition, constructed in 1952; the rest of
                                                                                the site is either parking or driveway. The
                                                                                ratio of the improved value to the total
                                                                                value is 56%.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C-13

7.    Sites in the Capacity Analysis
 Site                                                                                                                                                             Parcel Size                Age of Existing Building (if                                 MinLandAreaPer  Max # of     75% of Max Allowed  Max # of Units   Potential Number of Resulting Density    Income Category based on
       APN                   Status     Zoning Category   General Plan Land Use Development Assessment and Visual Condition  Walkscore Address or Nearest Address             Avg Slope                                   Existing Units Density applied
 No.                                                                                                                                                              (sf)                       any)                                                         DU/SF           Units        (RM only)           RoundDown        Units                (du/acre)           default density
   6   030-073-10            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Former one-story fast food restaurant with      72     430 MILLER AVE                  22,680            1.1                         NA                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500        7.56                                     7                    7                26.9 Very Low/Low
                                                                                U-shaped turn-around driveway and drive-
                                                                                through window, with surrounding parking.
                                                                                Over half the site is driveway or parking.
                                                                                The ratio of the improved value to the
                                                                                total value is very low at 20%, indicating
                                                                                site underutilization.
   7   028-034-35            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: Parmaca Integrative        85     230 E BLITHEDALE AVE            19,449           10.6                         NA                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500       6.483                                     6                    6                26.9 Very Low/Low
                                                                                Pharmacy/Cabana Home. 2-story building,
                                                                                a portion of the building façade is more
                                                                                contemporary than the other, the other
                                                                                portion is in fair condition and older. The
                                                                                remaining 25% of the site is parking. The
                                                                                ratio of the improved value to the total
                                                                                value is 51%. This property has a
                                                                                Walkscore of 85 and is close to several
                                                                                amenities within a short walking distance.
   8   030-081-51            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            One large rectangular commercial building       72     493 MILLER AVE                  17,400            2.0                         NA                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500          5.8                  61                5                    5                25.0 Very Low/Low
                                                                                with several tenants; more than 50% of
                                                                                the site is driveway and parking.
   9   028-066-14            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: WestAmerica Bank; 1-       97     64 E BLITHEDALE AVE             16,500            6.0                       1981                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500          5.5                                    5                    5                26.4 Very Low/Low
                                                                                story good condition but older building;
                                                                                50% of site is parking or driveway. The
                                                                                ratio of the improved value to the total
                                                                                value is 42%. This property has a
                                                                                Walkscore of 97 and is close to several
                                                                                amenities within a short walking distance.
   10  028-211-14            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            2-story building in good condition; with        66     10 WILLOW ST                    15,750            7.3                         NA                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500        5.25                                     5                    5                27.7 Very Low/Low
                                                                                medical office tenants. 50% of site is
                                                                                parking. The ratio of the improved value to
                                                                                the total value is low at 46%.
   11  030-073-08            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Chevron gas station and retail building for     77     458 MILLER AVE                  15,500            2.0                       1957                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500  5.166667                                       5                    5                28.1 Very Low/Low
                                                                                gas station, constructed in 1957; over 50%
                                                                                of site is driveway or parking. The ratio of
                                                                                the improved value to the total value is
                                                                                43%.
   12  028-211-13            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Appears to be a 2-story wood office             80     333 MILLER AVE                  15,000            1.1                       1975                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500            5                                    5                    5                29.0 Very Low/Low
                                                                                building in good condition; 50% of site is
                                                                                parking or driveway. The ratio of the
                                                                                improved value to the total value is 54%.
                                                                                This property has a high Walkscore of 80
                                                                                and is close to several amenities within a
                                                                                short walking distance.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C-14

7.    Sites in the Capacity Analysis
 Site                                                                                                                                                             Parcel Size                Age of Existing Building (if                                 MinLandAreaPer  Max # of    75% of Max Allowed Max # of Units   Potential Number of Resulting Density    Income Category based on
       APN                   Status     Zoning Category   General Plan Land Use Development Assessment and Visual Condition  Walkscore Address or Nearest Address             Avg Slope                                   Existing Units Density applied
 No.                                                                                                                                                              (sf)                       any)                                                         DU/SF           Units       (RM only)          RoundDown        Units                (du/acre)           default density
   13  030-081-35            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: Upper Cervical             85     433 MILLER AVE                  14,500            5.0                       1956                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500  4.833333                                     4                    4                24.0 Very Low/Low
                                                                                Chiropractic; 1-story good condition retail
                                                                                building and what looks to be two small 1-
                                                                                story accessory structures on site (one is
                                                                                detached.) Buildings were constructed in
                                                                                1956. 50% of site is driveway, parking or
                                                                                vegetation/stream. The ratio of the
                                                                                improved value to the total value is very
                                                                                low at 32%. This property has a high
                                                                                Walkscore of 85 and is close to several
                                                                                amenities within a short walking distance.
   14  048-134-52            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: Mill Valley Pet Clinic;    83     546 MILLER AVE                  14,228           43.3                         NA                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500  4.742667                                     4                    4                24.5 Very Low/Low
                                                                                older one-story building with mansard roof
                                                                                in front in good condition, and 2-3 story
                                                                                building (sloping site so probably 2-story)
                                                                                at the back; rest of site is vegetated or is
                                                                                paved off-street parking. The ratio of the
                                                                                improved value to the total value is low at
                                                                                45%. This property has a high Walkscore of
                                                                                83 and is close to several amenities within
                                                                                a short walking distance.
   15  030-071-28            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Site is a parking lot for a strip-mall. This    86     411 MILLER AVE                  13,948            1.8                         NA                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500  4.649333                                     4                    4                25.0 Very Low/Low
                                                                                property has a high Walkscore of 86 and is
                                                                                close to several amenities within a short
                                                                                walking distance.
   16  028-213-16            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            1-story retail building, constructed in 1946    80     360 MILLER AVE                  13,600            6.5                       1946                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500  4.533333                                     4                    4                25.6 Very Low/Low
                                                                                Mill Valley Auto Service, in fair condition
                                                                                with driveway and parking in back. The
                                                                                ratio of the improved value to the total
                                                                                value is low at 47%, showing site
                                                                                underutilization. This property has a high
                                                                                Walkscore of 80 and is close to several
                                                                                amenities.
   17  028-056-16            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Citibank; 1-story building, constructed in      95     124 THROCKMORTON AVE            13,000            8.5                       1953                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500  4.333333                                     4                    4                26.8 Very Low/Low
                                                                                1953, in good condition; 50% of site is
                                                                                parking or driveway. The ratio of the
                                                                                improved value to the total value is low at
                                                                                55%. This property has a very high
                                                                                Walkscore of 95 and is in close proximity
                                                                                to many amenities.
   18  048-134-01            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            2-story structure, constructed in 1948;         83     530 MILLER AVE                  13,332           49.6                       1948                 1 1,500 sf per du            1500       4.444                                   4                    3                26.1 Moderate
                                                                                good conversion candidate for living units.
                                                                                The ratio of the improved value to the
                                                                                total value is very low at 36%. This
                                                                                property has a high Walkscore of 83 and is
                                                                                close to several amenities within a short
                                                                                walking distance.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C-15
7.    Sites in the Capacity Analysis
 Site                                                                                                                                                              Parcel Size                 Age of Existing Building (if                                 MinLandAreaPer  Max # of  75% of Max Allowed Max # of Units   Potential Number of Resulting Density    Income Category based on
       APN                   Status     Zoning Category   General Plan Land Use Development Assessment and Visual Condition   Walkscore Address or Nearest Address              Avg Slope                                   Existing Units Density applied
 No.                                                                                                                                                               (sf)                        any)                                                         DU/SF           Units     (RM only)          RoundDown        Units                (du/acre)           default density
   19  048-134-06            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: Relim                       83     550 MILLER AVE                  12,556            24.7                       1928                 1 1,500 sf per du            1500  4.185333                                   4                    3                27.8 Very Low/Low
                                                                                Publishing/Breathe Somatic Therapies; 1-
                                                                                story structure near streetfront,
                                                                                constructed in 1928. There is one
                                                                                parking/shed structure in the middle of the
                                                                                site; one container structure at the back of
                                                                                the site on higher elevation. Could be
                                                                                redeveloped due to age, less likely to cause
                                                                                view impacts as the slope rises fairly
                                                                                sharply behind. The ratio of the improved
                                                                                value to the total value is low at 45%. This
                                                                                property has a Walkscore of 83 and is close
                                                                                to several amenities within a short walking
                                                                                distance.
   20  048-134-14            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: Balance Restored; 1-        80     600 MILLER AVE                  11,500            18.5                       1975                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500  3.833333                                   3                    3                22.7 Very Low/Low
                                                                                story structure in front and attached 2-
                                                                                story structure in back; older but fair/good
                                                                                condition; 25% of site is driveway/parking;
                                                                                good candidate for redevelopment or
                                                                                conversion. The ratio of the improved
                                                                                value to the total value is low at 47%. This
                                                                                property has a high Walkscore of 80 and is
                                                                                close to several amenities within a short
                                                                                walking distance.
   21  028-013-12            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Site has a bank building and parking lot.        95     19 SUNNYSIDE AVE                10,058             7.2                       1961                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500  3.352667                                   3                    3                26.0 Very Low/Low
                                                                                Building is 1-story and constructed in 1961;
                                                                                good candidate for redevelopment or
                                                                                conversion. The ratio of the improved
                                                                                value to the total value is very low at 37%.
                                                                                This property has a very high Walkscore of
                                                                                95 and is close to several amenities within
                                                                                a short walking distance.
   22  028-011-13            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: Illumigarden shop;          95     35 CORTE MADERA AVE               9,725           24.6                         NA                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500  3.241667                                   3                    3                26.9 Very Low/Low
                                                                                over 50% of site is parking; 1-story retail
                                                                                structure in excellent condition with
                                                                                landscaping. As most of the site is parking,
                                                                                there is still potential on this site for the
                                                                                addition of residential units. The ratio of
                                                                                the improved value to the total value is
                                                                                30%. This property has a very high
                                                                                Walkscore of 95 and is close to several
                                                                                amenities within a short walking distance.
   23  028-213-35            not vacant C-N    Commercial Commercial            Existing businesses: Once Around. 50% of         80     352 MILLER AVE                    9,100            4.9                       1955                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500  3.033333                                   3                    3                28.7 Very Low/Low
                                                                                site is driveway or parking; good condition
                                                                                1-story retail structure, constructed in
                                                                                1955. The ratio of the improved value to
                                                                                the total value is 54%. This property has a
                                                                                high Walkscore of 80 and is close to
                                                                                several amenities within a short walking
                                                                                distance.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C-16
7.    Sites in the Capacity Analysis
 Site                                                                                                                                                                     Parcel Size                 Age of Existing Building (if                                 MinLandAreaPer  Max # of     75% of Max Allowed Max # of Units   Potential Number of Resulting Density     Income Category based on
       APN                   Status     Zoning Category    General Plan Land Use Development Assessment and Visual Condition   Walkscore Address or Nearest Address                    Avg Slope                                   Existing Units Density applied
 No.                                                                                                                                                                      (sf)                        any)                                                         DU/SF           Units        (RM only)          RoundDown        Units                (du/acre)            default density
   24  028-222-71            not vacant P-A    Commercial  Commercial            Site has a 2-story office building,              80     319 MILLER AVE                         13,500            0.0                       1964                 0 1,500 sf per du            1500          4.5                                   4                    4                25.8 Very Low/Low
                                                                                 constructed in 1964, medical and law
                                                                                 offices near the street front. 50% of site is
                                                                                 parking or driveway; some parking may be
                                                                                 shared with the building on another parcel
                                                                                 behind the site. Part of the site could be
                                                                                 redeveloped for additional residential
                                                                                 units. This property has a high Walkscore
                                                                                 of 80 and is close to several amenities
                                                                                 within a short walking distance.
   25  030-101-36            not vacant RM-1.5 Residential Multi-Family          2 parcels, includes APN 030-101-37.              80     40 CAMINO ALTO                        212,094            3.0                         NA             150 1,500 sf per du           141.396         141                                                       40                 21.4 Very Low/Low
                                                           Residential           Redwoods Senior Housing with 150
                                                                                 existing apartment units (and additional
                                                                                 assisted living beds).
                                                                                 REDWOODS SENIOR HOUSING
   26  030-101-37            not vacant RM-1.5 Residential Multi-Family                                                                                                        174,153            3.0                                              1,500 sf per du
                                                                                 RENOVATION PROJECT
                                                           Residential
                                                                                 40 units based on number of independent
                                                                                 living units being planned for parking lot
                                                                                 area at The Redwoods.
   27  028-214-33            vacant     RS-6   Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          82     Nearest Address: NE of 443             17,575           57.6                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  2.5 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   MOLINO AVE
   28  028-132-25            vacant     RS-6   Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          83     9 CASCADE WAY                          13,500           51.2                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  3.2 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential
   29  030-062-39            vacant     RS-6   Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          77     52 VALLEY CIR                          11,700            4.2                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  3.7 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential
   30  028-124-19            vacant     RS-6   Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          75     Nearest Address: Between 114            9,144           46.8                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  4.8 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   HAZEL AVE and 284 MARION AVE
   31  029-043-58            vacant     RS-6   Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          72     Nearest Address: Across from 36         8,280           14.7                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  5.3 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   PORTOLA LN
   32  029-222-06            vacant     RS-6   Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          71     Nearest Address: South of 101 E         6,800           38.5                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  6.4 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   MANOR DR
   33  028-132-08            vacant     RS-6   Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          83     Nearest Address: East of 2              6,104           53.6                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  7.1 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   MOLINO AVE
   34  029-093-04            vacant     RS-7.5 Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          95     29 LOWER ALCATRAZ PL                   17,000           42.7                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  2.6 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential
   35  029-042-63            vacant     RS-7.5 Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          75     Nearest Address: North of 1            12,500           11.2                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  3.5 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   WINWOOD PL
   36  029-063-05            vacant     RS-7.5 Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          74     Nearest Address: North of 10           10,800           53.3                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  4.0 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   STETSON AVE on Greenwood Way
   37  028-172-02            vacant     RS-7.5 Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          82     Nearest Address: SE of 270              9,424           14.2                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  4.6 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   MOLINO AVE
   38  028-081-06            vacant     RS-7.5 Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          82     Nearest Address: Between 130            7,772           10.2                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  5.6 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   CASCADE DR and 431
                                                                                                                                         THROCKMORTON AVE on
                                                                                                                                         Josephine Street
   39  029-034-07            vacant     RS-7.5 Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          72     Nearest Address: South of 121           7,000           38.3                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  6.2 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   WOODBINE DR
   40  027-264-07            vacant     RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          58     Nearest Address: West of 374           25,842           55.5                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  1.7 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   EDGEWOOD AVE on Dots Lane
   41  046-061-52            vacant     RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          60     Nearest Address: East of 26            19,664           31.1                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  2.2 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   CYPRESS AVE
   42  027-265-06            vacant     RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          71     Nearest Address: North of 177          16,092           52.3                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  2.7 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   HAZEL AVE
   43  027-265-05            vacant     RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          58     Nearest Address: East of 3 ROSE        14,000           40.1                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  3.1 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   AVE
   44  029-222-19            vacant     RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          72     Nearest Address: West of 33            13,500           42.6                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  3.2 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   AVON AVE
   45  027-264-06            vacant     RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          58     Nearest Address: South of 9 DOTS       13,100           67.7                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  3.3 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   LN
   46  028-082-37            vacant     RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          85     201 MARION AVE                         10,295           34.9                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  4.2 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential
   47  027-191-53            vacant     RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          75     Nearest Address: NW of 321             10,027            NA                          NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  4.3 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   SUMMIT AVE
   48  027-242-15            vacant     RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                          57     Nearest Address: East of 41             9,932           30.4                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                                     1                  4.4 Above Moderate
                                                           Residential                                                                   EUGENE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C-17
7.    Sites in the Capacity Analysis
 Site                                                                                                                                                                 Parcel Size                 Age of Existing Building (if                                 MinLandAreaPer Max # of 75% of Max Allowed Max # of Units Potential Number of Resulting Density     Income Category based on
       APN                   Status  Zoning Category    General Plan Land Use Development Assessment and Visual Condition  Walkscore Address or Nearest Address                    Avg Slope                                   Existing Units Density applied
 No.                                                                                                                                                                  (sf)                        any)                                                         DU/SF          Units    (RM only)          RoundDown      Units                (du/acre)            default density
   49  045-232-02            vacant  RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                         54     Nearest Address: SW of 25               9,500           56.0                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                              1                  4.6 Above Moderate
                                                        Residential                                                                  SUNNYCREST AVE
   50  028-123-16            vacant  RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                         66     Nearest Address: West of 155            7,584           65.3                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                              1                  5.7 Above Moderate
                                                        Residential                                                                  HAZEL AVE
   51  027-264-05            vacant  RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                         58     Nearest Address: South of 9 DOTS        6,800           66.8                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                              1                  6.4 Above Moderate
                                                        Residential                                                                  LN
   52  027-265-03            vacant  RS-10  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                         58     Nearest Address: South of 3 ROSE        6,045           64.1                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                              1                  7.2 Above Moderate
                                                        Residential                                                                  AVE
   53  029-024-08            vacant  RS-20  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                         57     Nearest Address: NW of 99             34,000            51.5                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                              1                  1.3 Above Moderate
                                                        Residential                                                                  GREENWOOD WAY
   54  027-235-08            vacant  RS-20  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                         57     Nearest Address: South of 210         12,584            64.7                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                              1                  3.5 Above Moderate
                                                        Residential                                                                  MONTE VISTA AVE
   55  027-203-33            vacant  RS-43  Residential Single-Family         Vacant.                                         55     Nearest Address: North of 3           43,592            36.9                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                              1                  1.0 Above Moderate
                                                        Residential                                                                  WAINWRIGHT PL
   56  033-240-01            vacant  RSP-2A Residential Single-Family         Vacant, has a small stream running              52     Nearest Address: West of 35           21,344            20.0                         NA                 0 1 du per parcel                                                                              1                  2.0 Above Moderate
                                                        Residential           through the northwest side, land is flat and           VASCO CT
                                                                              partially clear of trees.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C-18
Detail 1
                                                                                                                             8.     Map of Parcels with the highest
                                                                                                                                    ranking in the Capacity Analysis
                                                   Detail 2
                                                                                                                             Please note:
                                                                                                                             This map illustrates that the current residential
                                                                                                                             capacity of the City of Mill Valley, to demonstrate
                                                                                                                             that it can meet the required RHNA for the
                                                                                                                             2015-2023 Housing Element planning period.
                                                                                                                             No development projects are being proposed.
                                                                                                                             All future projects must go through planning and
                                                                                                                             environmental review processes as established by
                                                                                                                             the City and the State.
                                                                                                                             LEGEND
                                                                                                                                     Capacity Analysis: Vacant sites
                                                                                                                                     Capacity Analysis: Non-vacant sites
           TH
                                                                                                                                     C-R, C-N, C-G districts
            R   O
                    CK
                         M
                             O
                                 RT
                                      O
                                          N AV E
                                                                                                                                     P-A district
                                                                           E
                                                                               BL
                                                                                    IT
                                                              M                          HE
                                                              IL                              DA
                                                                                                                                     Single-Family districts (RS, RSP, RP)
                                                                  LE                               LE
                                                                   R                                    AV
                                                                       A                                     E
                                                                       V
                                                                       E
                                                                                                                        TO
                                                                                                                        AL
                                                                                                                  NO
                                                                                                                 CAMI
Detail 3
                                                   Detail 4
                                                                                                                                                                     C‐19

Detail 1    8.   Map of Parcels (Detail 1)
            LEGEND
                 Capacity Analysis: Vacant sites
                 Capacity Analysis: Non-vacant sites
                 C-R, C-N, C-G districts
                 P-A district
                 Single-Family districts (RS, RSP, RP)
         35
                                              C‐20

                  8.   Map of Parcels (Detail 2)
Detail 2
                  LEGEND
                       Capacity Analysis: Vacant sites
                       Capacity Analysis: Non-vacant sites
                       C-R, C-N, C-G districts
                       P-A district
         53
   31    39            Single-Family districts (RS, RSP, RP)
            36
               56
34
   36
                                                    C‐21

Detail 3                                      8.    Map of Parcels (Detail 3)
                                     47
         55
                          48
                                              36
                                 38
            54
                                           30       35
                      43   42   46          25
                                                10
                                              LEGEND
             51                         33       14
                  45         50      28
                                                    Capacity Analysis: Vacant sites
                    40 52         30
               41
                                                    Capacity Analysis: Non-vacant sites
                                                    C-R, C-N, C-G districts
                49                                  P-A district
                                                    Single-Family districts (RS, RSP, RP)
                                                                                 C‐22

 34
Detail 4                                                   8.   Map of Parcels (Detail 4)
        22
                                                           LEGEND
    17     21
               9                                                Capacity Analysis: Vacant sites
        1
                                                                Capacity Analysis: Non-vacant sites
        4                                  32
                 7                            44
                   2                                            C-R, C-N, C-G districts
                                                                P-A district
              37
                                                                Single-Family districts (RS, RSP, RP)
                        24
                             10
                     27  12
                                                    29
                         23
                          16
                                  15
                                     3
                                        13
                                6                8
                                   5  11                        Parcels with Lot Consolidation Potential
                                                        25
                                              18 14             1, 4               10, 12
                                                        26      2, 7
                                                 19                                14, 18
                                                     20         3, 13, 15          16, 23
                                                                5, 11              25, 26
                                                                                                C‐23

                                                                                       May 4, 2015
Appendix D.
Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element
In order to develop an effective housing strategy for the 2015 to 2023 planning period, Mill
Valley needs to assess the achievements of its existing housing programs laid out in the adopted
2009-2014 Housing Element. This assessment will determine the effectiveness of the existing
programs, whether they are appropriate for continuation, and whether necessary adjustments
are needed for the next planning period.
Under State Housing Element law, communities are required to assess the achievements under
their adopted housing programs as part of the statutory update to their Housing Elements.
These results should be quantified where possible (for example, the number of units that were
rehabilitated), but may be qualitative where necessary (for example, the mitigation of
governmental constraints). The results are then compared with what was projected or planned
in the earlier Housing Element. Where significant shortfalls exist between what was planned and
what was achieved, the reasons for such differences must be documented.
The City of Mill Valley 2009-2014 Housing Element sets forth a series of programs to address the
following Housing Objectives:
        Housing Objective 1: Work Together to Achieve the City’s Housing Goals
        Housing Objective 2: Maintain and Enhance Existing Housing and Blend Well-Designed
         New Housing into Existing Neighborhoods
        Housing Objective 3: Use Land Efficiently to Meet Housing Needs and to Implement
         ‘Smart’ and Sustainable Development Principles
        Housing Objective 4: Provide Housing for Special Needs Populations that is Coordinated
         with Support Services
        Housing Objective 5: Build Local Government Institutional Capacity and Monitor
         Accomplishments to Respond Effectively to Housing Needs
Mill Valley adopted its 2009-2014 Housing Element in October 2013 in conjunction with a
comprehensive General Plan update. Due to the adoption towards the end of the planning
period, the Housing Element identified both short-term program objectives to be met during the
2009-2014 planning period, as well as longer term actions for the future 2015-2023 Housing
Element planning period. The following section reviews the City's progress in implementing its
housing programs since adoption of the Element in 2013, with the exception of the City's
progress in addressing its regional housing needs allocation (RHNA) which measures the entire
2007-2013 RHNA period.
Table D.1 that follows summarizes Mill Valley's program accomplishments, followed by a review
of its quantified objectives in Table D.2. The results of this analysis provide the basis for
development of the program strategy for Mill Valley's 2015-2023 Housing Element.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                           Page D-1

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
 Table D.1: 2009-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Review of 2009-2014 Mill Valley Housing Element Program Accomplishments
 Program                          Accomplishments
 1. Residential Design            Progress: The City has established a Zoning and Design
 Guidelines.                      Guidelines Advisory Committee (ZDAC) who have been providing
 Develop and adopt Multi-         input to staff and the consultants in the establishment of Multi-
 Family Design Guidelines         family Design Guidelines. The draft Guidelines are scheduled to
 which address development        be presented to the ZDAC at their October 21, 2014 meeting.
 compatibility and promote        Effectiveness: This program has been effective in more clearly
 sustainable site design and
                                  defining the community's desired character of development in
 building practices.
                                  Mill Valley, and will serve to provide better up-front direction to
                                  the development community upon adoption.
                                  Appropriateness for Housing Element update: Multi-family
                                  Design Guidelines remain appropriate for the Housing Element
                                  update, with adoption targeted for early 2015.
 2. Historic Preservation         Progress: The recently adopted MV2040 General Plan (October
 Guidelines and                   2013) includes Land Use Goal #2, Historic & Archaeological
 Incentives.                      Resources: Identify, preserve, and protect potential and listed
 Explore revising the H-O         historic and archeological resources citywide. Programs include
 Ordinance to clarify             creating a Historic Resource Inventory (LU.6-1) and adopting a
 demolition procedures and        historic and cultural preservation ordinance (LU.7-1) that could
 role of the Historical           include regulations and procedures to address:
 Society.
                                      • Standards and processes for review of proposed additions
                                        and/or deletions to potential or listed resources
                                      • Creation of a Historic Preservation Advisory Commission
                                      • Establishment of a process for consultation on and the
                                        recovery and treatment of cultural resources before
                                        commencing construction activities
                                      • Definition of owner responsibilities for care and
                                        maintenance of designated historic properties
                                  Effectiveness: The City has been effective through its General
                                  Plan in laying the foundation for furthering the identification and
                                  preservation of historic and cultural resources.
                                  Appropriateness for Housing Element update: Revisiting Historic
                                  Preservation guidelines remain appropriate for the Housing
                                  Element update, and are part of Planning Commission’s 2015
                                  Work Plan.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                                  Page D-2

                                                                                             May 4, 2015
 Table D.1: 2009-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Review of 2009-2014 Mill Valley Housing Element Program Accomplishments
 3. Housing Maintenance        Progress: Marin Housing reports that just one Residential
 and Public Information.       Rehabilitation loan has been made in Mill Valley during the 2013-
 Publicize rehabilitation      2014 period. The City recently established a Housing Resources
 assistance and energy         section on the City website that provides information and links to
 retrofit programs.            rehabilitation assistance available through Marin Housing, and
 Provide rehabilitation        energy efficient retrofits through PG&E.
 assistance to five lower
                               Effectiveness: The level of rehabilitation activity has been very
 income households.
                               limited in Mill Valley. While the majority of the community's
                               homeowners do not meet the low income qualification
                               requirements, this program could be particularly beneficial for
                               senior homeowners with limited financial resources. The City
                               may be better maximize the use of this program through
                               expanded local advertising targeted to the senior citizen
                               population.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: The
                               Rehabilitation Program remains an important resource for lower
                               income homeowners in Mill valley, the majority of which are
                               senior citizens who may benefit from improvements which allow
                               them to remain in their homes.
 4. Condominium                Progress: The City has updated its Condominium Conversion
 Conversion Regulations.       regulations consistent with current State statutes to provide
 Update current                greater tenant protections and notification. City Council adopted
 Condominium Conversion        the updated regulations on November 3, 2014.
 ordinance and specify         Effectiveness: The updated Condominium Conversion
 conversion limitations in     regulations will assist the City in its goal to preserve its multi-
 times of low rental vacancy
                               family housing supply.
 rates.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: Providing
                               information on the City's policy on condominium conversions
                               remains appropriate to the updated Housing Element.
 5. Preservation of            Progress: Affordability controls have been maintained on all 301
 Existing Affordable           rent-restricted units in Mill Valley.
 Rental Housing.               Effectiveness: Long-term rent restrictions, combined with
 Continue to contract with     monitoring by the Marin Housing Authority, has been effective in
 MHA to ensure compliance      maintaining the affordability in existing rent-restricted housing.
 with affordability            Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
 restrictions. Require long-   remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
 term affordability controls
 on future affordable
 housing units.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                                 Page D-3
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
 Table D.1: 2009-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Review of 2009-2014 Mill Valley Housing Element Program Accomplishments
 6. Mixed Use Zoning in           Progress: Modifications to development regulations for
 Commercial Districts.            residential use within commercial districts is being evaluated by
 Remove CUP for multi-            the Zoning and Design Guideline Advisory Committee (ZDAC).
 family and mixed uses for        Elimination of the CUP requirement for residential will be
 residential above ground         adopted concurrently with the new Multi-Family Design
 floor or off commercial          Guidelines.
 street frontage. Evaluate
                                  Effectiveness: This program has been effective in re-evaluating
 modifications to residential
 development regulations in
                                  development standards to better facilitate residential
 Commercial districts.            development within Mill Valley's commercial districts.
                                  Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                                  remains appropriate for the Housing Element update, with
                                  adoption targeted for early 2015.
 7. Micro-Apartment               Progress: The Zoning and Design Guidelines Advisory Committee
 Units.                           (ZDAC) has been evaluating multi-family development standards,
 2009-2014: Explore the           including the appropriateness of encouraging smaller unit sizes.
 feasibility of encouraging       Effectiveness: This program has been effective in evaluating
 and incentivizing micro-         options and standards for micro-apartment units.
 apartment units.                 Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                                  remains appropriate for the Housing Element update, with
                                  consideration of micro units as part of multi-family development
                                  standards targeted for adoption in early 2015, with additional
                                  design guidelines developed, as needed.
 8. Second Units.                 Progress: In October 2013, the City amended the second unit
 Conduct a survey of recently     ordinance to require deed restrictions for second units that are
 built second units, and          granted exceptions to maximum floor area standards to ensure
 adopt ordinance                  units are maintained as auxiliary second units. In September
 amendments to ensure             2014, the City mailed a postcard survey to 416 property owners
 maintenance of second
                                  with second units, and received responses from 117 households.
 units as per City approval.
 Seek to create an average of
                                  Between January 2009 and September 2014, the City approved a
 eight second units annually.     total of 62 second units, for an average of nine units annually.
                                  Effectiveness: The City was successful in maintaining second
                                  units that have been granted floor area exceptions as long term
                                  housing. The results of the second unit survey is providing the
                                  City with greater information on the current use of these units,
                                  rent levels and affordability. And with an average of nine second
                                  units approved annually, the City exceeded its goal for eight units
                                  per year.
                                  Appropriateness for Housing Element update: Second units
                                  remain an integral segment of Mill Valley's housing stock, and
                                  continuation of this program remains appropriate, including
                                  consideration of initiating another amnesty program.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                                Page D-4
                                                                                           May 4, 2015
 Table D.1: 2009-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Review of 2009-2014 Mill Valley Housing Element Program Accomplishments
 9. Affordable Housing         Progress: City staff and the consultants have been coordinating
 Overlay.                      the Redwoods, and in January 2014 met with the Redwoods'
 Adopt an Affordable           Director with the goal of defining specific incentives for inclusion
 Housing Overlay for the       in the Affordable Housing Overlay. The Redwoods will be
 Redwoods site, specifying     appointing a Task Force to work with staff in planning Phase 2 of
 development incentives        the project's $45 million renovation, which encompasses
 tailored to the site.
                               construction of the senior independent living units. As the Task
 Coordinate with property
 owners in facilitating public
                               Force will be addressing the project's design, density and
 review of development         affordability, the Redwood's Director felt it would be pre-mature
 proposals, and in application to establish the Overlay for the site prior to input from the Task
 for affordable housing        Force.
 funds.                        Effectiveness: Due to the importance of coordinating with the
                               Redwoods Phase 2 Task Force in the establishment of specific
                               incentives for the Overlay, this program has not yet been
                               implemented.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                               remains appropriate for the Housing Element update.
 10. Lot Consolidation         Progress: The Zoning and Design Guideline Advisory Committee
 Incentives.                   (ZDAC) has been evaluating incentives for consolidation of
 Adopt lot consolidation       smaller parcels to support multi-family development in
 incentives in coordination    conjunction with their work on establishing Multi-Family Design
 with Multi-family Design      Guidelines. Incentives have been integrated within draft
 Guidelines.                   Guidelines, scheduled to be presented to the ZDAC at their
                               October 21, 2014 meeting.
                               Effectiveness: This program has been effective in evaluating
                               various incentives to combine lots, and will provide tools to
                               create larger, more buildable lots for residential development
                               upon adoption.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: Lot consolidation
                               incentives remain appropriate for the updated Housing Element,
                               with adoption targeted for early 2015.
 11. Publicly-Owned Land Progress: Initial work established through the Zoning and Design
 for Affordable Housing.       Guideline Advisory Committee.
 Prepare inventory of          Effectiveness: This program has not yet been implemented, so
 publicly-owned land. Modify its effectiveness can not be measured.
 City’s zoning regulations to  Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
 allow residential uses in C-F remains appropriate for the Housing Element update, with
 zone.
                               further modifications/clarifications to the Zoning Code as part of
                               updating the Commercial Design Guidelines identified as part of
                               Planning Commission’s 2015 Work Plan.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                               Page D-5

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
 Table D.1: 2009-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Review of 2009-2014 Mill Valley Housing Element Program Accomplishments
 12. Non-Traditional              Progress: This was identified as a longer term program in the
 Housing Types.                   Housing Element and has not yet been implemented.
 Modify Zoning Ordinance to                        This program was not implemented and therefore
 develop standards for new
                                  effectiveness cannot be measured
 housing typologies.
                                  Appropriateness: Adopting provisions for a variety of housing
                                  types which cater to all economic segments remains appropriate
                                  to the updated Housing Element.
 13. Inclusionary Housing Progress: Staff has conducted two public meetings (one before
 Regulations.                     ZDAC and a joint study session with Planning Commission/City
 Amend Ordinance to               Council) to confirm the policy direction established in the
 strengthen and enhance the Housing Element for strengthening the City's inclusionary
 program’s effectiveness in       regulations. The feedback from these meetings is being folded
 providing affordable             into a comprehensive Affordable Housing Ordinance which will
 housing.
                                  undergo public review.
                                  Effectiveness: The City has been effective is soliciting input from
                                  the public and City decision-makers to establish a strong policy
                                  foundation for refinement of its inclusionary regulations.
                                  Adoption of the complete Affordable Housing Ordinance is
                                  targeted for 2015.
                                  Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                                  remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
 14. Single-Family Housing Progress: The City has been working with a consultant in
 Impact Fee.                      preparation of a nexus study and establishing affordable housing
 Conduct nexus study to           impact fees on market rate residential development. The single-
 assess impact of single-         family impact fee will undergo public review in conjunction with
 family construction on           proposed modifications to the City's inclusionary regulations.
 affordable housing demand. Effectiveness: The City has been effective in completion of the
 Evaluate establishment of a
                                  nexus study and researching impact fees in other Bay Area
 fee or provision of new
 second unit to offset
                                  jurisdictions, laying the groundwork for adoption of local
 identified impact.               affordable housing impact fees.
                                  Appropriateness for Housing Element update: Single-family
                                  impact fees remain appropriate, and will be integrated within the
                                  City's inclusionary housing/affordable housing impact fee
                                  program within the updated Housing Element.
 15. Local Affordable             Progress: The City has reviewed the implementing regulations
 Housing Fund.                    for Marin County's Affordable Housing Fund, and will develop a
 Establish a dedicated            local Fund and regulations upon adoption of the amended
 Affordable Housing Fund          inclusionary housing ordinance/affordable housing impact fees.
 with implementing                Effectiveness: This program has not yet been implemented.
 regulations for deposit of in- Appropriateness for Housing Element update: A program to
 lieu fee revenues.
                                  establish a local affordable housing fund remains appropriate for
                                  the Housing Element update.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                                 Page D-6

                                                                                          May 4, 2015
 Table D.1: 2009-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Review of 2009-2014 Mill Valley Housing Element Program Accomplishments
 16. Affordable Housing        Progress: Beyond the affordable units required under Mill
 Development Assistance.       Valley's inclusionary housing regulations, the City has not had any
 Provide financial and         development applications for affordable housing in recent years.
 regulatory incentives to      However, the City has adopted a local density bonus ordinance
 private developers for        which specifies development concessions and incentives for the
 affordable housing.           provision of affordable units.
                               Effectiveness: While Mill Valley does not currently have the
                               financial resources to support in the development of affordable
                               housing, it now has regulatory mechanisms in place to facilitate
                               affordable units, with future funding anticipated through
                               implementation of an affordable housing impact fee.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: Continuation of
                               this program in the updated Element remains appropriate.
 17. Partnerships for          Progress: In the one year since Mill Valley adopted its 2009-2014
 Affordable Housing.           Housing Element in October 2013, the City has focused on the
 Work through Nonprofit        implementation of near term programs necessary to provide
 Housing Association of        zoning for a variety of housing types for special needs
 Northern California to        populations. Exploring affordable housing partnerships did not
 identify and explore          occur during this short time frame.
 partnerships with affordable
                               Effectiveness: This program has not been implemented and
 housing providers.
                               therefore effectiveness cannot be measured.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: Partnerships with
                               affordable housing providers remains an appropriate program
                               over the longer term, 2015-2023 planning period.
 18. Homebuyer                 Progress: The City continues to participate in the County first-
 Assistance.                   time homebuyer programs, and has created a Housing Resource
 Continue participation with   page on the City's website which provides information on the
 Marin Housing to administer   County's MCC and BMR programs.
 BMR and MCC programs.         Effectiveness: The City has been effective in providing
                               information about available first-time homebuyer assistance.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                               remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
 19. Section 8 Rental          Progress: Staff refers tenants to Marin Housing for information
 Assistance.                   on rental assistance, and includes a page on the City’s website
 Continue to offer tenants     dedicated to housing resources and links, including rental
 information regarding         assistance and the affordable housing first home buyer program.
 Section 8 and encourage       As of October 2014, there were 96 Mill Valley residents receiving
 landlords to register units   Section 8 rental vouchers, and another 135 residents on the
 with the program.
                               waiting list for assistance.
                                                The City has been effective in providing
                               information about rental assistance available through Marin
                               Housing for very low income households.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                               remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                              Page D-7

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
 Table D.1: 2009-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Review of 2009-2014 Mill Valley Housing Element Program Accomplishments
 20. Update Land Use              Progress: In October 2013, the MV2040 General Plan was
 Map and Zoning Code.             adopted, which includes a Land Use Map with minimum and
 Establish minimum and            maximum densities. The Housing Element further discusses the
 maximum residential              need to update the Zoning Code in relation to the Land Use Map.
 densities for residential        For instance, in order to ensure the efficient use of multi-family
 districts, and maximum           properties, development of new single-family residential will be
 densities and development
                                  prohibited in multi-family and commercial zoning districts.
 standards for residential
 uses in commercial districts.
                                  Effectiveness: The City was effective in establishing densities,
 Monitor to ensure adequate       and thus providing for a more transparent and efficient
 sites to address RHNA.           development review process.
                                  Appropriateness for Housing Element update: The Land Use Map
                                  was implemented with the adoption of the MV2040 General
                                  Plan. Modifications to the Zoning Code to address the Land Use
                                  Map and Land Use Element Goals, Policies and Programs will be
                                  made in 2015.
 21. Update Parking               Progress: The Zoning and Design Guidelines Advisory Committee
 Standards.                       (ZDAC) has been evaluating multi-family development standards,
 Evaluate and establish           including modifications to parking standards.
 modified parking standards       Effectiveness: This program has been effective in evaluating
 in the Zoning Ordinance to       modifications to parking standards to facilitate residential and
 facilitate specific types of     mixed use within commercial districts, and to better facilitate
 housing.
                                  smaller unit sizes.
                                  Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                                  remains appropriate for the Housing Element update, with
                                  adoption targeted for early 2015. Further modifications to
                                  parking standards for commercial use will occur thereafter.
 22. Fee Deferrals and/or         Progress: This was identified as a longer term program in the
 Waivers for Affordable           Housing Element and has not yet been implemented.
 Housing.                         Effectiveness: This program was not implemented and therefore
 Provide information to           effectiveness cannot be measured.
 affordable housing               Appropriateness: Adopting provisions to waive application fees
 community on fee deferrals,      for projects with extremely low income units remains
 reductions and waivers.          appropriate to the updated Housing Element.
 Amend Code to waive of
 100% of application
 processing fees for projects
 with 10% ELI units.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                                  Page D-8
                                                                                          May 4, 2015
 Table D.1: 2009-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Review of 2009-2014 Mill Valley Housing Element Program Accomplishments
 23. Density Bonus and         Progress: The City has developed a local density bonus
 Other incentives for          ordinance consistent with State law, and has conducted public
 Affordable Housing.           hearings on the ordinance before the Planning Commission and
 Adopt a local density bonus   City Council. The Ordinance is scheduled for first reading bedore
 ordinance, and clarify        the City Council on November 17th, with second reading and
 relationship with City’s      adoption on December 1st.
 inclusionary housing          Effectiveness: The City's density bonus ordinance is effective in
 ordinance.
                               providing zoning incentives for the provisions of affordable
                               housing.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: Providing
                               information on regulatory incentives and concessions to facilitate
                               affordable housing remains appropriate to the updated Housing
                               Element.
 24. CEQA Exemptions for       Progress: Mill Valley has continued to utilize categorical
 Infill Projects.              exemptions under CEQA for infill projects, such as for the 65
 Continue to utilize           Throckmorton/Aloha Lofts mixed use and Laurelwood townhome
 categorical CEQA              projects.
 exemptions where              Effectiveness: The City has been effective in reducing project
 appropriate, on a case-by-    processing times and associated costs through use of CEQA
 case basis.
                               exemptions for qualified urban infill projects where site
                               characteristics and an absence of potentially significant
                               environmental impacts allow.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                               remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
 25. Zoning Text               Progress: The City has conducted several public hearings before
 Amendments for Special        the Planning Commission and City Council on Zoning Text
 Needs Housing.                amendments for Special Needs Housing, including zoning to
 Adopt zoning text             encourage and facilitate the creation of Emergency Shelters,
 amendments to specify         Transitional and Supportive Housing, SROs, and Group Housing
 provisions for a variety of   for persons with disabilities. City Council adopted these Zoning
 special needs housing,        Text Amendments on November 3, 2014.
 including requirements
                               Effectiveness: The City was effective in providing zoning
 under SB 2.
                               appropriate to accommodate a variety of special needs housing.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program has
                               been implemented and is no longer necessary in the updated
                               Housing Element.
 26. Fair Housing              Progress: City staff has meet with County representatives to
 Program.                      discuss working jointly to address fair housing policies and
 Publicize the fair housing    outreach. The recently created housing resource page on the
 program through brochures     City’s website also provides referral s to Fair Housing of Marin.
 and on the City’s website.    Effectiveness: The City has been effective in providing
                               information on fair housing.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                               remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                              Page D-9

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
 Table D.1: 2009-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Review of 2009-2014 Mill Valley Housing Element Program Accomplishments
 27. Senior Support               Progress: Mill Valley's Parks & Recreation Department has
 Services.                        continued to provide a wide variety of services to senior citizens
 Continue to support the          at the Mill Valley Community Center. Mill Valley Seniors' Club,
 provision of senior services     under the sponsorship of the City and support by City's Senior
 in Mill Valley.                  Services Coordinator, meets weekly at the Center and provides
                                  input on senior programming.
                                  Effectiveness: The City has been effective in providing an array
                                  of services to seniors to support their well-being and
                                  independence.
                                  Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                                  remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
 28. Home Sharing and             Progress: The City's Senior Services Coordinator provides
 Tenant Matching                  information to residents on an ongoing basis regarding home
 Opportunities.                   sharing services. Home Connection of Marin has recently been
 Support organizations that       discontinued by the County due to lack of funding, with the only
 facilitate housing sharing;      home sharing program currently available in Marin offered
 actively promote through         through Episcopal Senior Communities (ESC) in San Rafael.
 senior citizen organizations.    Effectiveness: The City was effective in providing information
                                  about available home sharing services.
                                  Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                  updated Housing Element.
 29. Universal Design/            Progress: This was identified as a longer-term program in the
 Visitability.                    Housing Element and has not yet been implemented.
 Develop and promote                               This program was not implemented and therefore
 guidelines encouraging
                                  effectiveness cannot be measured
 principles of universal
 design and visitability.         Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                                  remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                               Page D-10
                                                                                           May 4, 2015
 Table D.1: 2009-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Review of 2009-2014 Mill Valley Housing Element Program Accomplishments
 30. Homeless Assistance.      Progress: Mill Valley is participating in a countywide effort to
 Support implementation of     seek permanent and temporary housing opportunities for
 the Homeless Countywide       homeless. Currently the City is involved in an Ad-Hoc Committee
 Continuum of Care,            of the Marin County Council of Mayors and Councilmembers to
 publicize the Marin           discuss resources available for homeless in Marin County. .Mill
 Community Resource Guide
                               Valley is also participating in a countywide effort to seek
 and emergency 211 call
 system.
                               permanent and temporary housing opportunities for homeless.
                               The City has provided information on its website about the
                               emergency 211 toll-free call system for information and referral.
                               In October 2014, City Council adopted zoning provisions to: 1)
                               permit emergency shelters by right within the CG (General
                               Commercial) zoning district; 2) specify that transitional and
                               supportive housing are to be considered a residential use of
                               property; and 3) provide for SROs as a conditional use within the
                               CG (General Commercial) and RM (Multi-Family Residential)
                               Zoning Districts.
                               Effectiveness: The City has been effective in publicizing the
                               availability of emergency services and providing zoning to
                               accommodate a continuum of care of persons and families
                               experiencing homelessness.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                               remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
 31. Prioritization of         Progress: Boundary Solutions, Inc. of Mill Valley prepared a series
 Sustainable Housing           of maps to reflect sustainability factors (walkability, proximity to
 Projects.                     transit, solar energy potential) and their potential relationships to
 Prioritize projects in        housing in Mill Valley. These maps will continue to be included in
 sustainable locations         the Housing Element Appendix, and consulted should any future
 competing for funds and       projects compete for funding.
 grants.                       Effectiveness: The City has an excellent resource to utilize in
                               evaluating the relative sustainability of projects from a
                               geographic, locational perspective.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                               remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
 32. Green Building.           Progress: The City has a website dedicated to Green Building,
 Provide outreach and          including an information guide that can be downloaded. Building
 education to developers       representatives are also available to answer questions on a daily
 regarding CALGREEN and        basis at the building counter, as are planners.
 the Green Building            Effectiveness: The City’s Green Building ordinance has been a
 Ordinance. Evaluate
                               successful tool in reducing emissions and preserving resources.
 incentives for Green
 Building Ordinance for
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: The program
 higher energy efficiency.     remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element, with
                               coordination scheduled with other Marin County jurisdictions in
                               association with Climate Action Plan Updates.
 33. Energy Conservation.      Progress: The Mill Valley 2040 General Plan also serves as the
 Implement actions for
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                              Page D-11

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
 Table D.1: 2009-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Review of 2009-2014 Mill Valley Housing Element Program Accomplishments
 energy efficiency identified     City’s Climate Action Plan, and highlights various emission
 in the 2040 General Plan.        reduction and energy conservation measures. Most recently, the
                                  City has contracted with PG&E to replace the City’s streetlights
                                  with LED street lights. There is also a proposal to install solar
                                  panels in the Community Center’s parking lot. Sustainable design
                                  will also be addressed through the Zoning & Design Guideline
                                  Advisory Committee (ZDAC) work on multi-family/commercial
                                  design guidelines and development standards.
                                  Effectiveness: Energy conservation has been a successful tool in
                                  reducing emissions and conserving resources within the
                                  community.
                                  Appropriateness for Housing Element update: The program
                                  remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element. Some
                                  sustainability measures will be addressed in early 2015 as part of
                                  the update to the multi-family/commercial design guidelines.
 34. Addressing Natural           Progress: The City of Mill Valley recently updated its Floodplain
 Hazards.                         Management Ordinance (2013) as well as the FEMA Floodmap.
 Incorporate references to        However, additional interest and studies are currently underway
 the Floodplain Management        to address sea level rise. The City is currently a member of the
 Ordinance in the 2040            Marin County Climate and Energy Partnership (MCEP) to address
 General Plan as required by      the issue of climate change, sea level rise and related hazards.
 AB 162. Review Housing
 Element whenever General
 Plan amendments are made
                                  Effectiveness: The City has been effective in working with state
 to ensure consistency.           and federal agencies to address the FEMA floodplain. More
                                  recently, the City has been effective in working jointly with other
                                  Marin County jurisdictions to address sea level rise, and the
                                  potential hazards that may arise with such a condition.
                                  Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                                  remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element as large
                                  portion of the City’s homes are located within the FEMA
                                  Floodplain and Floodway, and current studies and coordination
                                  are underway to address the potential impacts associated with
                                  Sea Level Rise. The City will continue its ongoing coordination
                                  efforts through MCEP, and will work to implement General Plan
                                  programs aimed at addressing natural hazards.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                                 Page D-12

                                                                                           May 4, 2015
 Table D.1: 2009-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
 Review of 2009-2014 Mill Valley Housing Element Program Accomplishments
 35. Community                 Progress: Mill Valley has a robust communications / outreach
 Education and Outreach.       program for various interests within the Community. News items
 Provide education and         are posted on the website, and e-mail notifications are sent out
 outreach on housing issues,   on various topics to members of the community on a regular
 assist prospective            basis. Social media is also utilized by the City to connect with its
 applicants, and coordinate    residents, including Facebook, NextDoor and Twitter. Notices are
 with interested groups.
                               sent to property owners within 300-500 feet about the proposed
                               development and hearing process. Most recently, the City has
                               also advertised on its notices about the upcoming Housing
                               Element available online. Finally, the City is in the process of
                               providing public access to building permit and planning projects
                               that are in progress.
                               Effectiveness: The City has been very effective in keeping the
                               citizenry informed about the Housing Element update and
                               associated zoning implementation.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                               remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element. Public
                               access to building permit and planning projects is expected in
                               2015.
 36. Housing Element           Progress: The City has been monitoring its progress in
 Monitoring/Annual             implementing the Housing Element, and submitted its most
 Report.                       recent Annual Progress Report to State HCD in 2014.
 Submit an annual report to    Effectiveness: The City has been effective in monitoring
 HCD by April 1 of each year,  implementation of the Housing Element, documenting new
 with the first annual report  housing units created on an annual basis and providing
 due April 1, 2014.            opportunities for public review.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                               remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
 37. Mill Valley Housing       Progress: The Housing Advisory Committee is intended to
 Advisory Committee.           monitor and assist with the implementation of the Housing
 Establish Mill Valley Housing Element programs. The Housing Advisory Committee will be
 Advisory Committee and        established based on the development of bylaws, roles and
 define roles and              responsibilities.
 responsibilities.             Effectiveness: Creating a Housing Committee is an effective way
                               to monitor progress and assist with implementation of Housing
                               Element programs.
                               Appropriateness for Housing Element update: This program
                               remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element. The
                               Housing Committee will be convened in 2015.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                              Page D-13
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
 Summary of Quantified Objectives: 2009-2014
The following table summarizes the quantified objectives contained in Mill Valley's 2009-2014
Housing Element, and compares the City’s progress in fulfilling these objectives.
 Table D.2: Quantified Objectives for Mill Valley's 2009-2014 Housing Element planning period
                                 New Construction          Rehabilitation              Conservation
  Income Level                       Objectives                Objectives                Objectives
                                  Goal      Progress      Goal        Progress       Goal        Progress
  Extremely Low*
                                   37           --          2             --
  (0-30% AMI)
                                                                                     177            177
  Very Low
                                   37          31           3             1
  (31-50% AMI)
  Low
                                   54          38           --            --         127            127
  (51-80% AMI)
  Moderate
                                   68          26           --            --          4               4
  (81-120% AMI)
  Above Moderate
                                   96          49           --            --
  (>120% AMI)
  Totals                          292         144           5             1          308            308
     New Construction: Goal reflects 2007-2014 RHNA. Progress reflects: 1) residential building permits
     issued between 1/2007-12/2013: 23 single-family units (above moderate income); 33 multi-family
     units, including 3 moderate and 4 low income restricted units provided through the City's
     inclusionary program (505 Miller, 211 Miller, 8 Old Mill), and 4 market rate rentals affordable to
                                                                               1
     moderate income (65 Throckmorton); and 88 new second dwelling units .
     Rehabilitation: Goal and progress reflects Marin Housing’s Rehabilitation Loan Program.
     Conservation: Goal and progress reflects conserving existing rent-restricted units in publicly-assisted
     projects owned by non-profits or the Marin Housing Authority, and affordable rental units provided
     through the City's inclusionary program.
As illustrated in Table D.2, based on building permits issued between January 2007 and
December 2013, Mill Valley fulfilled approximately half of its total regional housing construction
needs, or "RHNA" for 292 new units. The collapse of the real estate market in 2007 and
prolonged economic recession significantly impacted the level of development activity
throughout the State, with housing production in the majority of jurisdictions falling well below
RHNA targets. Through the inclusionary ordinance, the City achieved the development of seven
deed restricted units for low and moderate income families, including both rental and
ownership units. Throckmorton Village will provide two additional moderate income ownership
units, though as this eleven unit project replaces eleven apartment units on the site, no net
increase in units is credited towards the RHNA in Table D.2. The City also approved a 16 unit
project at 542 Miller with three inclusionary units, and a nine unit market rate project at 500
Miller, both of which will be credited towards the future 2014-2022 RHNA once building permits
are issued.
1
  Income distribution of second units based on Mill Valley's 2014 survey of existing second units: 35% very
low income, 39% low income, 22% moderate income, and 4% above moderate income.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                                     Page D-14

                                                                                       May 4, 2015
In cooperation with Marin Housing Authority, Mill Valley monitored all deed restricted rental
and ownership housing to ensure compliance with affordability restrictions. The City met its
conservation goal as no deed restricted units converted to market rate. In 2009, affordability
controls were extended on Shelter Hill Apartments through transfer of ownership to EAH and
tax credit financing which also funded extensive rehabilitation improvements to the property.
Marin Housing reported that just one Residential Rehabilitation loan was made in Mill Valley
during the 2013-2014 period. The level of rehabilitation activity has been very limited in Mill
Valley. While the majority of the community's homeowners do not meet the low income
qualification requirements, this program could be particularly beneficial for senior homeowners
with limited financial resources. The City may be better maximize the use of this program
through expanded local advertising targeted to the senior citizen population.
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element                          Page D-15
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
D. Evaluation of Accomplishments under Adopted Housing Element Page D-16
                                                                  May 4, 2015
Appendix E.              Summary Report: Second Unit Survey Results
SUMMARY OF RESULTS:                                 SECOND UNIT SURVEY
                                City of Mill Valley
                                 September 2014
Appendix E: Second Unit Survey                                      Page E-1
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY                    A survey was distributed to 416 properties that have been identified over the
                           course of the years of potentially having legal second units on the property. The
                           survey has confirmed that second units are a valuable source of affordable
                           housing for one to two person households, including family members.
SURVEY                     The purpose of the survey was to determine the use and affordability ranges of
PURPOSE                    second units. The survey was mailed in August 2014 to 416 properties with
                           potential legal second units based on planning department records. Responses
                           were accepted until October 1, 2014. The survey was anonymous but numbered
                           in order to identify and note those parcels responding that do not have a second
                           units.
SURVEY                     Survey Responses: 126 responses were received from a total of 416 surveys sent
RESPONSE
                           out (30% response rate)
                           Those Without 2nd units on site: 9 properties
                           Remaining Responses Analyzed as part this Report: 117
Appendix E: Second Unit Survey                                                               Page E-2
                                                                                         May 4, 2015
SURVEY                  The survey consisted of seven questions in total. See illustration of post card
QUESTIONS &
                        below.
RESULTS
                        Year Constructed
                        Construction year ranges in date, see table below.
                           before       1960-     1970-        1980-      1990-      2000-        2010-
                            1960        1969      1979         1989       1999        2010        2014
                             31           1         5           21          9          16            6
                        Approximate Size of Units (Square Feet)
                        The majority (87%) of 2nd units are less than 800 square feet.
                                 100 - 200                       1
                                 201 - 400                     27
                                 401 - 600                     26
                                 601 - 800                     37
                               801 - 1,000                     13
                             1,001 - 1,200                       1
                              Grand Total                     105
Appendix E: Second Unit Survey                                                             Page E-3
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
                           Number of Bedrooms
                           67% of survey responses indicated they have a 1 bedroom 2nd units; 23% studios
                           and 10% 2-bedrooms
                             Studio            25
                             1 bedroom         73
                             2 bedroom         11
                             Grand Total       109
                           Occupied Units
                           Of the 117 survey responses, 75% (88 respondents) indicated that the 2nd unit
                           was occupied.
                           Occupied Units (Rent)
                           The survey revealed that a large
                                                                  $0/No rent charged                   28
                           portion of second units are being
                                                                  $1,001-$1,300                        14
                           rented for $0 (28%). These units are $1,301-$1,500                           9
                           typically being occupied by the owner $1,501-$1,800                         12
                           (in which they are renting out their $400-$700                               6
                           primary residence); family member $701-$1,000                               15
                           and/or nanny/au pair. Rents range in $701-$1,001                             1
                           price and do not correlate to the size Over  $1,800                         14
                           or number of bedrooms of the units Utilities only                            1
                           or age of construction.        (As an Grand Total                          100
                           example, of the 14 survey responses indicating that they charge $1,800 or more,
                           4 are 2-bedroom; 8 are 1 bedroom, 2 are studios).
                           Occupied Units (Person(s) Occupying the Unit)
                             Caretaker or other household employee              1
                             House guest                                        6
                             Nanny/Au-pair                                      3
                             Occupied by Owner                                  6
                             Relative/family member                            26
                             Tenant                                            54
                             Grand Total                                       96
Appendix E: Second Unit Survey                                                             Page E-4
                                                                                  May 4, 2015
                        Increases in Rent
                        Most respondents indicated that rents have remained the same, since January
                        2014.
                         No                    82
                         Yes                   13
                                     $50        2
                                     $75        1
                                    $100        3
                                    $150        1
                                    $200        1
                                    $500        2
                         Grand Total           95
                        Household size
                        Of 89 respondents, 69 (78%) indicated that the 2nd Units are occupied by 1
                        person; 17 by 2 persons (19%).
                          1 Adult                      50
                          1 Child                       3
                          1 Senior                     16
                          2 Adults                     10
                          1 Adult, 1 Child              3
                          2 Seniors                     3
                          1 Senior, 1 Adult             1
                          1 Adult, 2 Children           1
                          3 Adults                      1
                          2 Adults, 2 Children          1
                          Grand Total                  89
Appendix E: Second Unit Survey                                                      Page E-5
Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
ADDITIONAL                 Based on responses, the average size of second units are 601-800 square feet.
SURVEY
                           Based on this square footage rage and the 89 survey responses in which over 97%
ANALYSIS
                           of the responses indicated that 2nd units are occupied by 1-2 persons, it can be
                           assumed that the average household size of these second units would be for one
                           to two person.
                           Qualifying affordable income levels are below.
                                                            1 person household       2 person household
                             Very low income
                             Annual Income                                 38,750                     44,300
                             Monthly income                                  3,229                     3,692
                             Max rent                                         $969                    $1,108
                             Low income
                             Annual Income                                 62,050                     70,900
                             Monthly income                                  5,171                     5,908
                             Max Rent                                      $1,551                     $1,773
                             Moderate income
                             Annual Income                                 81,600                     93,200
                             Monthly Income                                  6,800                     7,767
                             Max rent                                      $2,040                     $2,330
                           Maximum rents are based on Marin Housing 2014 Schedule, Divided by 12 (months) and
                           Multiplied by 30% of the monthly Household Income.
Appendix E: Second Unit Survey                                                                 Page E-6
                                                                                         May 4, 2015
                        Based on 100 survey results of those 2nd units that are currently being rented and
                        the affordable rental table above, the following assumptions can be made about
                        the ratio of affordable housing produced by 2nd units in Mill Valley. (These
                        assumptions are based on a 2-person household, which is conservative since a
                        large portion of 2nd units (78%) are being occupied by one person. In addition the
                        four 2-bedroom units have been assigned to above moderate income as a
                        conservative measure).
                                                                              %             Qualifying
                              Rents                         Responses              Affordability Level
                              Utilities only                          1     35%      Very Low Income
                              $0/No rent charged                    28
                              $400-$700                               6
                              $701-$1,000                           16      39%           Low Income
                              $1,001-$1,300                         14
                              $1,301-$1,500                           9
                              $1,501-$1,800                         12      22%     Moderate Income
                              Over $1,800                           14
                              Over $1,800 (2-bedroom)                 4      4%      Above Moderate
                              Grand Total                          100    100%
                        Mill Valley’s survey results and assumptions related to affordability allocations are
                        similar to the City of Sausalito, in which a similar second unit survey was
                        conducted in 2011 and is also based on approximately 100 survey participants.
                        The results from the 2008 Marin County Survey are also listed in the table below.
                                Affordability Level       Mill Valley      Sausalito    Marin County
                                   Very Low Income              35%             28%                50%
                                         Low Income             39%             57%                20%
                                 Moderate Income                26%             15%                30%
                                   Above Moderate                 4%             0%                 0%
Appendix E: Second Unit Survey                                                              Page E-7

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Appendix E: Second Unit Survey        Page E-8
                                                                                       May 4, 2015
Appendix F.                       Glossary
Excerpted from:
Mill Valley’s Zoning Ordinance, and;
A Citizen’s Guide to Planning, A Glossary of Planning Terms, http://ceres.ca.gov/
This glossary is for ease of use of the Housing Element Document only; for full definitions
describing uses and regulations related to land use entitlements please see Title 20 – Zoning, of
the City of Mill Valley Municipal Code.
A.       Abbreviations
ABAG:    Association of Bay Area Governments
ADA:     Americans with Disabilities Act
AMI:     Area Median (Household) Income
APN:     Assessors Parcel Number
BIG:     Build it Green
BMR:     Below-market-rate dwelling unit
CCRC:    Continuing Care Retirement Community
CDBG:    Community Development Block Grant
CEQA:    California Environmental Quality Act
CHAS:    Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy
CHFA:    California Housing Finance Agency
CUP:     Conditional Use Permit
EAH:     Ecumenical Association for Housing
EIR:     Environmental Impact Report
ELI:     extremely low income
FAR:     Floor Area Ratio
FROM:    Fair Housing of Marin
GGRC:    Golden Gate Regional Center
GMI:     Gross Monthly Income
HCD:     Housing and Community Development Department of the State of California
HUD:     U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development
HVAC:    Heating, Ventilation, and air conditioning
LEED:    Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
LOS:     Traffic Level of Service
MCC:     Mortgage Credit Certificate
PUD:     Planned Unit Development
RHNA:    Regional Housing Needs Allocation
SCS:     Sustainable Communities Strategy
SRO:     Single Room Occupancy
UBC:     Uniform Building Code
UHC:     Uniform Housing Code
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                     Page F-1

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
B.         Definitions
Accessory Dwelling Unit: (see Residential Second Unit)
Accessory Structure or Building: Accessory buildings or structures are functional, manmade
features, enclosures, covers or buildings which are subordinate to the main building, the use of
which is incidental to the permissible use of the main building on the same lot.
Acreage: Gross acreage refers to the entire acreage of a site. Most communities calculate gross
acreage to the centerline of proposed bounding streets and to the edge of the right-of-way of
existing or dedicated streets. Net acreage refers to the portion of a site that can actually be built
upon. Public or private road right-of-way, public open space, and flood ways are not included in
the net acreage of a site.
Affordability Requirements: Provisions established by a public agency to require that a specific
percentage of housing units in a project or development remain affordable to very low- and low-
income households for a specified period.
Affordable Housing: Housing capable of being purchased or rented by a household with very low,
low, or moderate income, based on a household’s ability to make monthly payments necessary to
obtain housing. Housing is considered affordable when a household pays less than 30 percent of
its gross monthly income (GMI) for housing, including utilities.
Agency: The governmental entity, department, office, or administrative unit responsible for
carrying out regulations.
Apartment: (1) One or more rooms of a building used as a place to live, in a building containing at
least one other unit used for the same purpose. (2) A separate suite, not owner occupied, which
includes kitchen facilities and is designed for and rented as the home, residence, or sleeping place
of one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit.
Area; Area Median Income: As used in State of California housing law with respect to income
eligibility limits established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD),
“Area” means metropolitan area or non-metropolitan county. In non-metropolitan areas, the
“Area Median Income” is the higher of the county median family income or the statewide
non-metropolitan median family income. The Area Median Income referred to in this Housing
Element is that of Marin County.
Assisted Housing: Generally multi-family rental housing, but sometimes single-family ownership
units, whose construction, financing, sales prices, or rents have been subsidized by federal,
state, or local housing programs including, but not limited to Federal Section 8 (new
construction, substantial rehabilitation, and loan management set-asides), Federal Sections 213,
236, and 202, Federal Section 221(d)(3) (below-market interest rate program), Federal Section
101 (rent supplement assistance), CDBG, FmHA Section 515, multifamily mortgage revenue
bond programs, local redevelopment and in lieu fee programs, and units developed pursuant to
local inclusionary housing and density bonus programs. All California Housing elements are
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                         Page F-2

                                                                                             May 4, 2015
required to address the preservation or replacement of assisted housing that is eligible to
change to market rate housing within 10 years.
San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC): is a California State
commission dedicated to the protection, enhancement and responsible use of the San Francisco
Bay. The Planning Unit is responsible for conducting major planning studies, specialized research
and policy development, and developing amendments to the San Francisco Bay Plan.
Below-market-rate (BMR) Housing Unit: (1) Any housing unit specifically priced to be sold or
rented to low- or moderate-income households for an amount less than the fair-market value of
the unit. Both the State of California and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
set standards for determining which households qualify as “low income” or “moderate income.”
(2) The financing of housing at less than prevailing interest rates.
Building: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Building Code: The national, standard building code that sets forth minimum standards for
construction is known as the Uniform Building Code (UBC). State housing regulations governing
the condition of habitable structures with regard to health and safety standards, and which
provide for the conservation and rehabilitation of housing in accordance with the UBC, are known
as the Uniform Housing Code (UHC).
Building Footprint: The outline of a building at all of those points where it meets the ground.
Building Height: The vertical distance from the average contact ground level of a building to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the mean
height level between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. The exact definition varies
by community. For example, in some communities building height is measured to the highest
point of the roof, not including elevator and cooling towers.
Build-out: Development of land to its full potential or theoretical capacity as permitted under
current or proposed planning or zoning designations.
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA): A State law requiring State and local agencies to
regulate activities with consideration for environmental protection. If a proposed activity has the
potential for a significant adverse environmental impact, an Environmental Impact Report (EIR)
must be prepared and certified as to its adequacy before taking action on the proposed project.
An Environmental Assessment may be prepared for housing elements, leading to a Declaration of
No Environmental Impact, Negative Declaration, or Mitigated Negative Declaration. When a
project is not exempt from CEQA and will not have a significant adverse effect upon the
environment a negative declaration is prepared, describing the reasons why the project will not
have a significant effect and proposes measures to completely mitigate or avoid any possible
effects. (Significant Effects refer to a beneficial or detrimental impact on the environment. May
include, but is not limited to, significant changes in an area’s air, water, and land resources.)
Census: The official decennial enumeration of the population conducted by the federal
government.
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                            Page F-3

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Character: Special physical characteristics of a structure or area that set it apart from its
surroundings and contribute to its individuality.
City: City with a capital “C” generally refers to the government or administration of a city. City with
a lower case “c” may mean any city or may refer to the geographical area of a city (e.g., the
properties in the city.)
Co-housing: Co-housing is an innovative type of collaborative housing that originated in
Denmark in the 1960s. Co-housing communities consist of individually owned, private homes
clustered around common facilities and amenities in a walkable, sustainable environment.
Common features may include a community garden, recreational areas, and a common house
where day care and meals can be shared. The communities are managed by the residents who
have chosen to live in a close-knit neighborhood. Hundreds of co-housing communities currently
exist throughout the country in a variety of settings, including communities in Berkeley,
Oakland, Pleasant Hill, Cotati, Grass Valley, Davis and Santa Barbara.
Commercial: Commercial Zoning Districts in Mill Valley include Professional Administrative (P-A),
General Commercial (C-G), Commercial-Recreation (C-R), Community Facilities (C-F), and
Neighborhood Commercial (C-N) Districts. These districts permit different uses that engage in
commerce. The uses vary from district to district, and include commercial and retail uses such as
offices, banks, hotels/motels, recreation facilities, public utility structures, shops, stores,
restaurants, and certain light industrial uses. Some commercial districts also permit residential
uses.
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG): A grant program administered by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) on a formula basis for entitlement
communities, and by the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) for
non-entitled jurisdictions. This grant allots money to cities and counties for housing rehabilitation
and community development, including public facilities and economic development.
Compatible: Capable of existing together without conflict or ill effects.
Conditional Use Permit (CUP): The Conditional Use Permit process in Mill Valley allows Planning
Commission level of review for selected land use proposals. Conditional Use Permits are required
for uses which may be suitable only in specific locations in a zoning district, or which require
special consideration in their design, operation or layout to ensure compatibility with surrounding
uses.
Condominium: A condominium consists of an undivided interest in common in a portion of real
property coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are
described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan in sufficient detail to
locate all boundaries thereof.
Condominium conversion: The conversion of existing real estate and/or structures to separate,
salable condominium units, regardless of present or prior use and whether substantial
improvements have been made to such structures.
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                           Page F-4

                                                                                           May 4, 2015
Consistent: Free from variation or contradiction. Programs in the General Plan are to be
consistent, not contradictory or preferential. State law requires consistency between a general
plan and implementation measures such as the zoning code.
County: County with a capital “C” generally refers to the government or administration of a county
(e.g., Marin County). County with a lower case “c” may mean any county or may refer to the
geographical area of a county (e.g., the county’s 15 cities).
Density: The measure of the ratio of population to the area of land occupied by that population,
which is expressed as dwelling units per acre. “Gross density” is the number of lots derived from
dividing the area of a site by the area required for each lot or dwelling unit. “Net density” is the
number of lots resulting from subtracting the area required for streets (in the case of a
subdivision) from the total area of the undivided site, and then dividing the remaining area by the
area required for each lot. Density control indicates a limitation on the occupancy of land. Density
can be controlled through zoning in the following ways: use restrictions, minimum lot-size
requirements, floor area ratios, land use-intensity ratios, setback and yard requirements,
minimum house-size requirements, ratios comparing number and types of housing units to land
area, limits on units per acre, and other means. Allowable density often serves as the major
distinction between residential districts.
Density Bonus: An increase in the density (number of dwelling units allowed per acre or parcel),
above that normally allowed by the applicable zoning district, in exchange for a public benefit (e.g.,
provision of affordable housing or senior housing).
Under California law, projects with at least 5 units may request a density bonus. Depending on
the level of affordability, the bonus may be between 5% and 35% of the base density (California
Government Code Section 65915 – 65918).
Design Review: The comprehensive evaluation of a development and its impact on neighboring
properties and the community as a whole, from the standpoint of site and landscape design,
architecture, materials, colors, lighting, and signs, in accordance with a set of adopted criteria and
standards.
In Mill Valley, all new structures or changes in use of an existing structure of 150 square feet or
more of gross floor area in any zoning district, physical improvements and all additions,
extensions, changes in color, and other exterior changes of or to existing buildings, structures
and physical improvements shall be subject to Design Review, whether or not a building permit
is required. Exemptions include certain types of modifications to existing single-family dwellings,
certain signage, and certain modifications to accessory structures.
Developable Land: Land that is suitable as a location for structures and that can be developed free
of hazards to, and without disruption of, or significant impact on, natural resource areas. “Net
developable acres” refers to the portion of a site that can be used for density calculations. Some
communities calculate density based on gross acreage. Public or private road rights-of-way are not
included in the net developable acreage of a site.
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                          Page F-5

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Developer: An individual who or business that prepares raw land for the construction of buildings
or causes to be built physical building space for use primarily by others, and in which the
preparation of the land or the creation of the building space is in itself a business and is not
incidental to another business or activity.
Development: The physical extension and/or construction of urban land uses. Development
activities include subdivision of land; construction or alteration of structures, roads, utilities, and
other facilities; installation of septic systems; grading; deposit of refuse, debris, or fill materials;
and clearing of natural vegetative cover (with the exception of agricultural activities). Routine
repair and maintenance activities are exempted.
Development Fees: Also known as impact fees, these are fees charged to developers or builders
as a prerequisite to construction or development approval. The most common are: (1) impact
fees (such as parkland acquisition fees, school facilities fees, or street construction fees) related
to funding public improvements which are necessitated in part or in whole by the development;
(2) connection fees (such as water and sewer connection fees) to cover the cost of installing
public services to the development; (3) permit fees (such as building permits, grading permits,
sign permits) for the administrative costs of processing development plans; and, (4) application
fees (rezoning, CUP, variance, etc.) for the administrative costs of reviewing and hearing
development proposals.
As Proposition 13 put a cap on property taxes, limiting the main source of funding for new
school facilities, California law allows school districts to impose school impact fees on new
developments to offset their impacts on area schools.
District: (1) An area of a city or county that has a unique character identifiable as different from
surrounding areas because of distinctive architecture, streets, geographic features, culture,
landmarks, activities, or land uses. (2) A portion of the territory of a city or county within which
uniform zoning regulations and requirements apply (aka, a zoning district).
Mill Valley’s Zoning Districts include residential, commercial, planned development, open area,
historic overlay, and unclassified for newly annexed areas.
Diversity: Differences among otherwise similar elements that give them unique forms and
qualities. E.g., housing diversity can be achieved by differences in unit size, tenure, or cost.
Duet: A single residential building containing two attached dwelling units. Duets are sold and
owned separately, and typically remain owner-occupied.
Duplex: A single residential building containing two dwelling units. Duplexes are different from
duets in that the units are sold together as a single building and typically rented out.
Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms (including sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation
facilities, but not more than one kitchen), which constitutes an independent housekeeping unit,
occupied or intended for occupancy by one household on a long-term basis. In Mill Valley, multi-
family refers to two or more dwelling units on one lot, and single-family refers to one dwelling unit
on one lot.
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                             Page F-6

                                                                                             May 4, 2015
Emergency Shelter: A facility that provides immediate and short-term housing and supplemental
services for the homeless. Shelters come in many sizes, but an optimum size is considered to be 20
to 40 beds. Supplemental services may include food, counseling, and access to other social
programs. (See “Homeless” and “Transitional Housing.”)
Environmental Impact Report (EIR): A report required of general plans by the California
Environmental Quality Act and which assesses all the environmental characteristics of an area and
determines what effects or impacts will result if the area is altered or disturbed by a proposed
action. (See “California Environmental Quality Act.”)
Exaction: A contribution or payment required as an authorized precondition for receiving a
development permit; usually refers to mandatory dedication (or fee in lieu of dedication)
requirements found in many subdivision regulations.
Fair Market Rent: The rent, including utility allowances, determined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for purposes of administering the Section 8
Existing Housing Program.
Family: (1) Two or more persons related by birth, marriage, or adoption [U.S. Bureau of the
Census]. (2) An individual or a group of persons living together who constitute a bona fide
single-family housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, not including a fraternity, sorority, club, or other
group of persons occupying a hotel, lodging house or institution of any kind [California].
Feasible: Capable of being done, executed, or managed successfully from the standpoint of the
physical and/or financial abilities of the implementer(s). “Technically feasible” means an action is
capable of being implemented because the industrial, mechanical, or application technology
exists.
Finding(s): The result(s) of an investigation and the basis upon which decisions are made. Findings
are used by government agents and bodies to justify action taken by the entity.
Flag Lot: A lot which does not have direct frontage on a road or street, and which is connected to a
road or street by a narrow fee ownership appendage that is primarily used to provide access to the
building site on the lot.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): Abbreviated as FAR, the City of Mill Valley limits the maximum size of
single-family homes using a FAR. The maximum Adjusted Floor Area that is permitted for a site is
calculated using the “Effective Lot Area.” For instance,
     •   Site area less than 8,000 sq.ft., FAR = 35% of effective lot area
     •   Site area 8,000 to 20,000 sq.ft., FAR = 10% of effective lot area + 2,000 sq.ft.
     •   Site area over 20,000 sq.ft. , FAR = 5% of effective lot area + 3.000 sq.ft. up to a 7,000
         sq.ft. maximum
Garage or Carport: A garage is a structure dedicated for the parking of vehicles that is enclosed on
at least three sides; a carport is enclosed on no more than two sides.
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                            Page F-7

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
General Plan: A statement of policies, including text and diagrams setting forth objectives,
principles, standards, and plan proposals, for the future physical development of the city or
county (see Government Code Sections 65300 et seq.). California State law requires that a
General Plan include elements dealing with seven subjects—circulation, conservation, housing,
land use, noise, open space and safety—and specifies to various degrees the information to be
incorporated in each element.
Granny Unit: (see Residential Second Unit)
Guidelines: General statements of policy direction around which specific details may be later
established.
Handicapped: A person determined to have a physical impairment or mental disorder expected to
be of long or indefinite duration. Many such impairments or disorders are of such a nature that a
person’s ability to live independently can be improved by appropriate housing conditions.
Historic; Historical: A historic building or site is one that is noteworthy for its significance in local,
state, or national history or culture, its architecture or design, or its works of art, memorabilia, or
artifacts.
Historic Preservation: The preservation of historically significant structures and neighborhoods
until such time as, and in order to facilitate, restoration and rehabilitation of the building(s) to a
former condition.
Homeless: Persons and families who lack a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence.
Includes those staying in temporary or emergency shelters or who are accommodated with friends
or others with the understanding that shelter is being provided as a last resort. California Housing
element law, Section 65583(c)(1), requires all cities and counties to address the housing needs of
the homeless. (See “Emergency Shelter” and “Transitional Housing.”)
Household: A single individual, doing his own cooking, and living upon the premises as a separate
housekeeping unit, or a collective body of persons, with a legally responsible head of household,
doing their own cooking and living together upon the premises as a separate housekeeping unit as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, club, fraternity, sorority or
hotel.
Householder: The head of a household.
Households, Number of: The count of all year-round housing units occupied by one or more
persons. The concept of household is important because the formation of new households
generates the demand for housing. Each new household formed creates the need for one
additional housing unit or requires that one existing housing unit be shared by two households.
Thus, household formation can continue to take place even without an increase in population,
thereby increasing the demand for housing.
Housing and Community Development Department of the State of California (HCD): The State
agency that has principal responsibility for assessing, planning for, and assisting communities to
meet the needs of low- and moderate-income households.
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                             Page F-8

                                                                                             May 4, 2015
Housing Authority: A housing agency established in State law, subject to local activation and
operation. Originally intended to manage certain federal subsidies, but vested with broad powers
to develop and manage other forms of affordable housing. In Mill Valley, the housing authority is
the Housing Authority of Marin County (or Marin Housing).
Housing Element: One of the seven State-mandated elements of a local general plan, it assesses
the existing and projected housing needs of all economic segments of the community, identifies
potential sites adequate to provide the amount and kind of housing needed, and contains adopted
goals, policies, and implementation programs for the preservation, improvement, and
development of housing. Under State law, Housing elements must be updated every five years.
Housing and Urban Development, U.S. Department of (HUD): A cabinet-level department of the
federal government that administers housing and community development programs.
Housing Unit: The place of permanent or customary abode of a person or family. A housing unit
may be a single-family dwelling, a multifamily dwelling, a condominium, a modular home, a mobile
home, a cooperative, or any other residential unit considered real property under State law. A
housing unit has, at least, cooking facilities, a bathroom, and a place to sleep. It also is a dwelling
that cannot be moved without substantial damage or unreasonable cost. (See “Dwelling Unit,”
“Family,” and “Household.”)
Impact: The effect of any direct man-made actions or indirect repercussions of man-made actions
on existing physical, social, or economic conditions.
Implementation: Actions, procedures, programs, or techniques that carry out policies.
Improvement: The addition of one or more structures or utilities on a parcel of land.
Infill Development: Development of vacant land (usually individual lots or left-over properties)
within areas that are already largely developed.
Infrastructure: Public services and facilities, such as sewage-disposal systems, water-supply
systems, other utility systems, and roads.
In Lieu Fee: Cash payments that may be required of an owner or developer as a substitute for a
dedication of land or construction of below-market-rate housing, and referred to as in lieu fees or
in lieu contributions.
Institutional Use: (1) Publicly or privately owned and operated activities that are institutional in
nature, such as hospitals, museums, and schools; (2) churches and other religious organizations;
and (3) other nonprofit activities of a welfare, educational, or philanthropic nature that cannot be
considered a residential, commercial, or industrial activity.
Jobs/Housing Balance; Jobs/Housing Ratio: The availability of affordable housing for employees.
The jobs/housing ratio divides the number of jobs in an area by the number of employed
residents. A ratio of 1.0 indicates a balance. A ratio greater than 1.0 indicates a net in-commute;
less than 1.0 indicates a net out-commute.
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                           Page F-9

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Land Use Regulation: A term encompassing the regulation of land in general and often used to
mean those regulations incorporated in the General Plan, as distinct from zoning regulations
(which are more specific).
Lease: A contractual agreement by which an owner of real property (the lessor) gives the right of
possession to another (a lessee) for a specified period of time (term) and for a specified
consideration (rent).
Lot or Parcel: A portion of land shown as a unit on a recorded subdivision map or an approved
minor subdivision map, parcel map or otherwise existing as of record with the Office of the
Recorder of the County of Marin.
Low-income Household: A household earning less than 80% of the Marin County median income
based on information provided by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
Manufactured Housing: Residential structures that are constructed entirely in the factory, and
that since June 15, 1976, have been regulated by the federal Manufactured Home Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974 under the administration of the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD). (See “Mobile Home.”)
Ministerial (Administrative) Decision: An action taken by a governmental agency that follows
established procedures and rules and does not call for the exercise of judgment in deciding
whether to approve a project.
Mitigate, v : To ameliorate, alleviate, or avoid to the extent reasonably feasible.
Mitigation Measure: The California Environmental Quality Act requires that when an adverse
environmental impact or potential impact is identified, measures must be proposed that will
eliminate, avoid, rectify, compensate for or reduce those environmental effects.
Mixed-use: The combination of various uses, such as office, commercial, institutional, and
residential, in a single building or on a single site in an integrated development project with
significant functional interrelationships and a coherent physical design. Mixed use projects which
combine residential, commercial and/or business and professional office uses are permitted in
Mill Valley subject to the securing of a conditional use permit (CUP).
Mobile Homes: A manufactured housing structure transportable in one or more sections,
designed and equipped to contain not more than two dwelling units to be used with or without a
foundation system. Mill Valley’s Zoning Ordinance Section 20.08.040 includes “mobile home” in
the definition of “building”.
Moderate-income Household: A household earning 80% to 120% of the Marin County median
income based on information provided by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                     Page F-10

                                                                                            May 4, 2015
Mortgage Credit Certificate: Under a County-operated program, gives a first-time homebuyer a
federal income tax credit of up to 20 percent of the mortgage interest paid on the first mortgage
loan, for each year the buyer keeps the same mortgage loan and lives in the same house.
Maximum initial household income limits and maximum initial home purchase prices apply and
are adjusted annually. The Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program administered by Marin
Housing provides qualified first time homebuyers with a federal income tax credit of up to 15%
of the annual interest paid on the homebuyer’s mortgage.
Multifamily Building: A detached building designed and used exclusively as a dwelling by three or
more families occupying separate suites.
Municipal Code: The Municipal Code of the City of Mill valley including Title 20, the Zoning
Ordinance.
Need: A condition requiring supply or relief. The City or County may act upon findings of need
within or on behalf of the community.
Non-conforming Use: The lawful use of land and structures which existed at the time of the
adoption of Title 20 - Zoning, on December 19, 1956, although such uses do not conform to the
regulations herein specified for the district in which the land or structure is located, may be
continued provided that such use shall not be enlarged nor increased nor extended to occupy a
greater area than that occupied by such use at the time of the adoption of this Title and further
provided that such use is not conducted in a manner constituting a public nuisance. Any single-
family residence which is non-conforming as to required yards only may be enlarged or modified
provided the non-conformity is not increased.
Notice (of Hearing): A legal document announcing the opportunity for the public to present their
views to an official representative or board of a public agency concerning an official action pending
before the agency.
Objective: A specific statement of desired future condition toward which the City or County will
expend effort in the context of striving to achieve a broader goal. An objective should be
achievable and, where possible, should be measurable and time-specific. The State Government
Code (Section 65302) requires that general plans spell out the “objectives,” principles, standards,
and proposals of the general plan. “The addition of 100 units of affordable housing by 2005” is an
example of an objective.
Ordinance: A law or regulation set forth and adopted by a governmental authority, usually a city
or county.
Overlay: A land use designation on the Land Use Map, or a zoning designation on a zoning map,
that modifies the basic underlying designation in some specific manner.
Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E): is the utility that provides natural gas and electricity to
most of the northern two-thirds of California, from Bakersfield almost to the Oregon border.
Parcel: see “Lot”.
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                         Page F-11

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Parking, Shared: A public or private parking area used jointly by two or more uses (i.e. Retail and
Residential).
Planned Residential: Planned residential communities are generally large-scale developments
whose essential features are a definable boundary; a consistent, but not necessarily uniform,
character; overall control during the development process by a single development entity; private
ownership of recreation amenities; and enforcement of covenants, conditions, and restrictions by
a master community association. In Mill Valley, planned communities are regulated by the Planned
Residential Zoning District.
Planning Area: The Planning Area is the land area addressed by the General Plan (and hence, by
the Housing element). For a city, the Planning Area boundary typically coincides with the Sphere of
Influence that encompasses land both within the city limits and potentially annexable land.
Planning Commission: A commission appointed by the City Council or Board of Supervisors to
consider land use planning matters. The commission's duties and powers are established by the
local legislative body and might include hearing proposals to amend the general plan or rezone
land, initiating planning studies (road alignments, identification of seismic hazards, etc.), and
taking action on proposed subdivisions.
Policy: A specific statement of principle or of guiding actions that implies clear commitment but is
not mandatory. A general direction that a governmental agency sets to follow, in order to meet its
goals and objectives before undertaking an action program. (See “Action Statement.”)
Poverty Level: As used by the U.S. Census, families and unrelated individuals are classified as being
above or below the poverty level based on a poverty index that provides a range of income cutoffs
or “poverty thresholds” varying by size of family, number of children, and age of householder. The
income cutoffs are updated each year to reflect the change in the Consumer Price Index.
Principle: An assumption, fundamental rule, or doctrine that will guide general plan policies,
proposals, standards, and implementation measures. The State Government Code (Section 65302)
requires that general plans spell out the objectives, “principles,” standards, and proposals of the
general plan. “Adjacent land uses should be compatible with one another” is an example of a
principle.
Quarters: Quarters generally refer to housing for living in, i.e. living quarters. Group quarters refer
to residential living arrangements, other than the usual house, apartment, or mobile home, in
which two or more unrelated persons share living quarters and cooking facilities. Institutional
group quarters include nursing homes, orphanages, and prisons. Non-institutional group quarters
include dormitories, shelters, and large boarding houses.
Redevelop, v: To demolish existing buildings; or to increase the overall floor area existing on a
property; or both; irrespective of whether a change occurs in land use.
Redevelopment Agency: A local agency created under California Redevelopment Law, or a local
legislative body that has elected to exercise the powers granted to such an agency, for the purpose
of planning, developing, re-planning, redesigning, clearing, reconstructing, and/or rehabilitating all
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                         Page F-12

                                                                                           May 4, 2015
or part of a specified area with residential, commercial, industrial, and/or public (including
recreational) structures and facilities. The redevelopment agency’s plans must be compatible with
the adopted community general plan, including the housing element. Also sometimes known as a
Community Redevelopment Agency.
Regional: Pertaining to activities or economies at a scale greater than that of a single jurisdiction,
and affecting a broad geographic area.
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RNHA): A quantification by a Council of Government or by
the Housing and Community Development Department of the State of California, of existing and
projected housing need, by household income group, for all localities within a region. The Council
of Government in the Bay Area is the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG), which
determines the regional housing needs allocation pertaining to Mill Valley.
Regulation: A rule or order prescribed for managing government or the use of land.
Rehabilitation: The repair, preservation, and/or improvement of substandard housing.
Residential: Mill Valley has several residential Zoning Districts designated for buildings consisting
only of dwelling units. These districts include single-family and multi-family residential uses, (See
“Planned Residential”, “Residential, Multi-family”, and “Residential, Single-family”.)
Residential Accessory Uses: In Mill Valley, residential accessory uses means a use incidental and
subordinate to the principal use.
Residential Care Homes: Facilities providing residential social and personal care for children, the
elderly, and people with some limits on their ability for self-care, but where medical care is not a
major element. Residential care homes include: children’s homes, halfway houses, orphanages,
rehabilitation centers, self-help group homes.
Residential Second Unit: An attached or detached dwelling unit in addition to the primary unit
allowed in all residential zoning districts and provides complete independent living facilities for
one or more persons and which may include a kitchen or cooking area, sleeping area or sanitation
facilities on the same parcel as the primary unit. A residential second unit may not be less than 150
square feet, nor more than a maximum of 1,000 square feet. (20.08.160)
Residential, Multi-family: Usually two or more dwelling units on a single site, which may be in the
same or separate buildings.
Residential, Single-family: A single dwelling unit on a building site.
Rezoning: An amendment to the map and/or text of a zoning ordinance to effect a change in the
nature, density, or intensity of uses allowed in a zoning district and/or on a designated parcel or
land area.
Second Mortgage Program: The lending by a public or private agency of a portion of a required
down payment to a developer or first-time homebuyer, usually with restrictions requiring that the
units assisted through the program remain affordable to very low- and low-income households.
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                         Page F-13

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Secondary Dwellings: (see Accessory Dwelling Units)
Section 8 Rental Assistance Program: A federal (HUD) rent-subsidy program that is one of the
main sources of federal housing assistance for low-income households. The program operates by
providing “housing assistance payments” to owners, developers, and public housing agencies to
make up the difference between the “Fair Market Rent” of a unit (set by HUD) and the
household’s contribution toward the rent, which is calculated at 30 percent of the household’s
adjusted gross monthly income (GMI). “Section 8” includes programs for new construction,
existing housing, and substantial or moderate housing rehabilitation.
Senior Housing Projects: Defined by California Housing Element law as projects developed for,
and put to use as, housing for senior citizens. Senior citizens are defined as persons at least 62
years of age.
Setback: An area on a lot where no buildings, structures, or additions may be located, and which
thereby becomes a yard area.
Shared Living: The occupancy of a dwelling unit by persons of more than one family in order to
reduce housing expenses and provide social contact, mutual support, and assistance. Shared living
facilities serving six or fewer persons are permitted in all residential districts by Section 1566.3 of
the California Health and Safety Code.
Single Room Occupancy (SRO): A single room, typically 80 - 250 square feet, with a sink and closet,
but that requires the occupant to share a communal bathroom, shower, and kitchen.
Site: A parcel of land used or intended for one use or a group of uses and having frontage on a
public or an approved private street.
Specific Plan: A plan addressing land use distribution, open space availability, infrastructure, and
infrastructure financing for a portion of the community. Specific plans put the provisions of the
local general plan into action.
Sphere of Influence: The probable ultimate physical boundaries and service area of a local agency
(city or district) as determined by the Local Agency Formation Commission of the County.
Standards: (1) A rule or measure establishing a level of quality or quantity that must be complied
with or satisfied. The State Government Code (Section 65302) requires that general plans spell out
the objectives, principles, “standards,” and proposals of the general plan. Examples include the
number of acres of park land per 1,000 residents that a community will attempt to acquire and
improve, or the “traffic Level of Service” (LOS) that the plan aims to attain. (2) Development
Standards refer to requirements in a zoning code that govern building and development as
distinguished from use restrictions—for example, site-design regulations such as lot area, height
limit, frontage, landscaping, and floor area ratio.
Street: Right-of-way, easement, or prescriptive right-of-way dedicated to, and under the authority
of, the City of Mill Valley; a state highway; a private road, easement, or prescriptive right-of-way;
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                          Page F-14

                                                                                            May 4, 2015
and which is customarily used for automobile travel and for providing vehicular access to abutting
property.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected on the ground, the use of which requires attachment
to the ground, or over 120 square feet in area or over six feet in height, or any structure that
requires a building permit, including any building, but not including fences or walls six feet or less
in height, or concrete flat work such as driveways, patios, or planters less than 12 inches in height.
Subdivision: The division of a tract of land into defined lots, either improved or unimproved, which
can be separately conveyed by sale or lease, and which can be altered or developed. “Subdivision”
includes a condominium project as defined in Section 1350 of the California Civil Code and a
community apartment project as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code.
The Subdivision Map Act is Division 2 (Sections 66410 et seq.) of the California Government code,
which vests in local legislative bodies the regulation and control of the design and improvement of
subdivisions, including the requirements for tentative and final maps.
Subsidize: To assist by payment of a sum of money or by the granting of terms or favors that
reduce the need for monetary expenditures. Housing subsidies may take the forms of mortgage
interest deductions or tax credits from federal and/or state income taxes, sale or lease at less than
market value of land to be used for the construction of housing, payments to supplement a
minimum affordable rent, and the like.
Substandard Housing: Residential dwellings that, because of their physical condition, do not
provide safe and sanitary housing.
Tax Credit: A dollar amount that may be subtracted from the amount of taxes owed.
Transitional Housing: Shelter provided to the homeless for an extended period, often as long as 18
months, and generally integrated with other social services and counseling programs to assist in
the transition to self-sufficiency through the acquisition of a stable income and permanent
housing. (Also see “Homeless” and “Emergency Shelter.”)
Urban Services: Utilities (such as water, gas, electricity, and sewer) and public services (such as
police, fire, schools, parks, and recreation) provided to an urbanized or urbanizing area.
Use: The purpose for which land or a structure is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which
either land or a structure is or may be occupied or maintained. A conditional use is a land use that
is identified as allowed, subject to minor use or conditional use permit approval in a particular
zoning district. A non-conforming use refers to the use of land that was lawfully established, but
that is no longer identified as an allowable use by the Mill Valley Zoning Ordinance, and which
does not conform to the regulation for the zoning district in which it is located.
Use Permit: The discretionary and conditional review of an activity or function or operation on a
site or in a building or facility.
Vacant: Lands or buildings that are not actively used for any purpose.
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                         Page F-15

Mill Valley 2015-2023 Housing Element
Very Low-income Household: A household with an annual income usually no greater than 50
percent of the area median family income, based on the latest available eligibility limits
established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the Section 8
Housing Program.
Zoning: The division of a city or county by legislative regulations into areas, or zones, which specify
allowable uses for real property and size restrictions for buildings within these areas; a program
that implements policies of the General Plan.
Zoning Ordinance: Regulations adopted by a local jurisdiction which govern the use and
development of land within the jurisdictions boundaries.
Zoning District: A designated section of a city or county for which prescribed land use
requirements and building and development standards are uniform.
Zoning, Incentive: The awarding of bonus credits to a development in the form of allowing more
intensive use of land if public benefits—such as preservation of greater than the minimum
required open space, provision for low- and moderate-income housing, or plans for public plazas
and courts at ground level—are included in a project. (Also see “Density Bonus”.)
Zoning, Inclusionary: Regulations that increase housing choice by providing the opportunity to
construct more diverse and economical housing to meet the needs of low- and moderate-income
families. Often such regulations require a minimum percentage of housing for low- and
moderate-income households in new housing developments and in conversions of apartments to
condominiums.
Zoning Map: The map adopted by the City Council of Mill Valley as part of the Zoning Ordinance
which identifies the zoning districts within the City.
Appendix F: Glossary                                                                          Page F-16

