                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
CHAPTER 5
AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The Air Quality Element is not required by State law, but has been included in the General Plan
because of the detrimental effect poor air quality has on public health and welfare. The Air Quality
Element is intended to protect the public’s health by implementing measures that assist the South
Coast Air Basin in meeting Federal and State air quality standards. To achieve this, the Element sets
forth a number of programs to reduce current pollution emissions, to require new development to
include measures to comply with air quality standards, and contains provisions to address new air
quality requirements.
2.0 AUTHORITY FOR THE ELEMENT
California Government Code Sections 65302(d) and 65303 provide the statutory authority that allows
cities to include any other element or address any other subjects that may relate to the physical
development of the city, including Air Quality. Further guidance is provided in the 2003 General Plan
Guidelines regarding the assessment of air quality impacts in General Plans.1
3.0 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Regulatory oversight for air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (Basin) rests with the South Coast
Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) at the regional level, the California Air Resources Board
(CARB) at the State level, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region IX office at
the Federal level.
3.1 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is responsible for implementing the Federal Clean
Air Act, which was first enacted in 1955 and amended numerous times after. The Federal Clean Air
Act established Federal air Quality standards known as the National Ambient Air Quality Standards.
These standards identify levels of air quality for “criteria” pollutants that are considered the maximum
levels of ambient (background) air pollutants considered safe, with an adequate margin of safety, to
protect the public health and welfare. The criteria pollutants are ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO),
nitrogen dioxide (NO2, which is a form of nitrogen oxides [NOX]), sulfur dioxide (SO2, which is a form
of sulfur oxides [SOX]), particulate matter less than 10 and 2.5 microns in diameter (PM 10 and PM2.5,
respectively) and lead (Pb); refer to Table AQ-1, Ambient Air Quality Standards and Attainment Status.
1. Source: State of California, Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, 2003 General Plan Guidelines, October 2003,
page 102.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                              ▸1◂                                      Air Quality Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
EPA designates areas within the nation as either attainment or nonattainment for each criteria
pollutant based on whether the National Ambient Air Quality Standards have been achieved. An area
is designated as nonattainment for a pollutant if air quality data show that the National Ambient Air
Quality Standards for the pollutant was violated at least once during the previous three calendar years.
Exceedances affected by highly irregular or infrequent events are not considered violations of a federal
standard, and are not used as a basis for designating areas as nonattainment. The Basin is designated
as a Federal nonattainment area for O3, CO, PM10, and PM2.5. Ozone is designated as severe for the 8-
hour average while CO and PM10 are designated as serious nonattainment. PM2.5 is simply
nonattainment. The air Basin is also designated as an attainment area for NO2, SO2, and Pb; refer to
Table AQ-1 for Federal attainment status.
The Federal Clean Air Act also specifies future dates for achieving compliance with the National
Ambient Air Quality Standards and mandates that states develop State Implementation Plans to
manage the attainment, maintenance, and enforcement of the National Ambient Air Quality
Standards. State Implementation Plans provide detailed descriptions of the programs a state will use
to carry out its responsibilities under the Federal Clean Air Act. State Implementation Plans are
collections of the regulations used by a state to reduce air pollution. A State Implementation Plan
shows how a state would meet the National Ambient Air Quality Standards by its attainment dates.
The Federal Clean Air Act requires that EPA approve each State Implementation Plan.
3.2      California Air Resources Board
The 1988 California Clean Air Act requires that all air districts in the State endeavor to achieve and
maintain California Ambient Air Quality Standards for ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO), sulfur
oxides (SO2), and nitrogen oxides (NO2) by the earliest practical date. The California Clean Air Act
specifies that districts focus particular attention on reducing the emissions from transportation and
area-wide emission sources. The Act also gives districts new authority to regulate indirect sources.
Each district plan is to achieve a five-percent annual reduction (averaged over consecutive three-year
periods) in district-wide emissions of each non-attainment pollutant or its precursors. Any additional
development within the region would impede the “no net” increase prohibition, in that further
emissions reductions must be affected from all other airshed sources to fit any project development
mobile source emissions increase.
A strict interpretation of the “no net” increase prohibition suggests that any general development
within the region, no matter how large or small, would have a significant, project-specific air quality
impact unless the development-related emissions are offset by concurrent emissions reduction
elsewhere within the airshed. Any planning effort for air quality attainment would thus need to
consider both State and Federal planning requirements.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸2◂                                Air Quality Element

                                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                                                             Table AQ-1
                                         Ambient Air Quality Standards and Attainment Status
                                                                          California1                                                      Federal2
     Pollutant              Averaging Time
                                                             Standard3               Attainment Status                 Standards4                   Attainment Status
                                                                                           Extreme
                                  1 Hour              0.09 ppm (180 g/m3)                                                   NA5                            NA5
    Ozone (O3)                                                                         Nonattainment
                                  8 Hours             0.07 ppm (137 g/m3)               Unclassified             0.08 ppm (157 g/m3)            Severe Nonattainment
                                 24 Hours                    50 g/m3                  Nonattainment                    150 g/m3                Serious Nonattainment
Particulate Matter
       (PM10)              Annual Arithmetic
                                                             20 g/m3                  Nonattainment                     50 g/m3                Serious Nonattainment
                                   Mean
  Fine Particulate               24 Hours                        No Separate State Standard                              35  g/m3                    Nonattainment
       Matter              Annual Arithmetic
       (PM2.5)                                               12  g/m3                 Nonattainment                     15  g/m3                    Nonattainment
                                   Mean
Carbon Monoxide                   8 Hours              9.0 ppm (10 g/m3)                 Attainment                9 ppm (10 g/m3)                 Nonattainment6
         (CO)                     1 Hour               20 ppm (23 g/m3)                  Attainment               35 ppm (40 g/m3)                 Nonattainment6
                           Annual Arithmetic
Nitrogen Dioxide7                                               N/A                           N/A                0.053 ppm (100 g/m3)                  Attainment
                                   Mean
        (NO2)
                                  1 Hour              0.18 ppm (338 g/m3)                Attainment                         N/A                            N/A
                            30 days average                  1.5 g/m3                    Attainment                         N/A                            N/A
 Lead (Pb)
                            Calendar Quarter                    N/A                           N/A                       1.5 g/m3                       Attainment
                           Annual Arithmetic
                                                                N/A                           N/A                 0.030 ppm (80 g/m3)                  Attainment
                                   Mean
   Sulfur Dioxide
                                 24 Hours             0.04 ppm (105   g/m3)              Attainment              0.14 ppm (365     g/m3)              Attainment
        (SO2)
                                  3 Hours                       N/A                           NA                             N/A                        Attainment
                                  1 Hour              0.25 ppm (655 g/m3)                Attainment                         N/A                            N/A
Visibility-Reducing         8 Hours (10 a.m.         Extinction coefficient =
                                                                                         Unclassified                                         No
      Particles              to 6 p.m., PST)           0.23 km@<70% RH
                                                                                                                                            Federal
      Sulfates                    24 Hour                    25 g/m3                     Attainment
                                                                                                                                          Standards
 Hydrogen Sulfide                 1 Hour              0.03 ppm (42 g/ m3)               Unclassified
g/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter; ppm = parts per million; km = kilometer(s); RH = relative humidity; PST = Pacific Standard Time; N/A = Not Applicable.
1. California standards for ozone, carbon monoxide (except Lake Tahoe), sulfur dioxide (1- and 24-hour), nitrogen dioxide, suspended particulate matter-PM10 and
   visibility-reducing particles, are values that are not to be exceeded. All others are not to be equaled or exceeded. California ambient air quality standards are listed
   in the Table of Standards in Section 70200 of Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations. In 1990, California Air Res ources Board identified vinyl chloride as a
   toxic air contaminant, but determined that there was not sufficient available scientific evidence to support the identification of a threshold exposure level. This action
   allows the implementation of health-protective control measures at levels below the 0.010 ppm ambient concentration specified in the 1978 standard.
2. National standards (other than ozone, particulate matter and those based on annual averages or annual arithmetic mean) are not to be exceeded more than once a
   year. The Environmental Protection Agency also may designate an area as attainment/unclassifiable, if: (1) it has monitored air quality data that show that the area
   has not violated the ozone standard over a three-year period; or (2) there is not enough information to determine the air quality in the area. For PM 10, the 24-hour
   standard is attained when 99 percent of the daily concentrations, averaged over the three years, are equal to or less than the standard. For PM 2.5, the 24-hour
   standard is attained when 98 percent of the daily concentrations, averaged over three years, are equal to or less than the standard.
3. Concentration is expressed first in units in which it was promulgated. Equivalent units given in parentheses are based upon a reference temperature of 25°C and a
   reference pressure of 760 mm of mercury. Most measurements of air quality are to be corrected to a reference temperature of 25°C and a reference pressure of 760
   mm of mercury (1,013.2 millibar); ppm in this table refers to ppm by volume, or micromoles of pollutant per mole of gas.
4. National Primary Standards: The levels of air quality necessary, with an adequate margin of safety, to protect the public health.
5. The Federal 1- hour ozone standard was revoked on June 15, 2005.
6. Technically, the Basin is in attainment for CO, but has not been redesignated by the Environmental Protection Agency.
7. The NO2 ambient air quality standard was amended on February 22, 2007, to lower the 1-hour standard to 0.18 ppm and establish a new annual standard of 0.030
    ppm. These changes become effective after regulatory changes are submitted and approved by the Office of Administrative Law, expected later this year.
Source: California Air Resources Board and Environmental Protection Agency, February 22, 2007.
    Glendora Community Plan 2025                                                   ▸3◂                                                        Air Quality Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
The CARB administers the air quality policy in California. The California Ambient Air Quality
Standards were established in 1969 pursuant to the Mulford-Carrell Act. These standards, included
with the National Ambient Air Quality Standards in Table AQ-1, are generally more stringent and
apply to more pollutants than the National Ambient Air Quality Standards. In addition to the
criteria pollutants, the California Ambient Air Quality Standards have been established for visibility
reducing particulates, hydrogen sulfide, and sulfates. The California Clean Air Act requires that each
local air district prepare and maintain an air quality management plan to achieve compliance with the
California Ambient Air Quality Standards. These air quality management plans also serve as the basis
for preparation of the State Implementation Plan for the State of California.
State Air Toxics Program
Toxic air contaminants are another group of pollutants of concern in Southern California. There are
hundreds of different types of toxic air contaminants, with varying degrees of toxicity. Sources of toxic
air contaminants include industrial processes such as petroleum refining and chrome plating
operations, commercial operations such as gasoline stations and dry cleaners, and motor vehicle engine
exhaust. Public exposure to toxic air contaminants can result from emissions from normal operations,
as well as accidental releases of hazardous materials during upset spill conditions. Health effects of
toxic air contaminants include cancer, birth defects, neurological damage and death.
California regulates toxic air contaminants through its air toxics program, mandated in Chapter 3.5
(Toxic Air Contaminants) of the Health and Safety Code (H&SC Section 39660 et. seq.) and Part 6
(Air Toxics “Hot Spots” Information and Assessment) (H&SC Section 44300 et. seq.). The CARB,
working in conjunction with the State Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment, identifies
toxic air contaminants. Air toxic control measures may then be adopted to reduce ambient
concentrations of the identified toxic air contaminant to below a specific threshold, based on its effects
on health, or to the lowest concentration achievable through use of best available control technology
for toxics. The program is administered by the CARB. Air quality control agencies, including the
SCAQMD, must incorporate air toxic control measures into their regulatory programs or adopt
equally stringent control measures as rules within six months of adoption by the CARB.
3.3 South Coast Air Quality Management District
Glendora is located in the South Coast Air Basin, which is under the jurisdiction of the SCAQMD.
The SCAQMD has jurisdiction of 10,743 square miles, which includes counties of Orange, Riverside,
San Bernardino, the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, and portions of the Salton Sea Air Basin and
Mojave Desert Air Basin. The SCAQMD is one out of 35 air quality management districts that have
prepared air quality management plans to accomplish a five-percent annual reduction in emissions.
The most recent air quality management plan was adopted in 2003.
The 2003 Air Quality Management Plan for the South Coast Air Basin (2003 Air Quality Management Plan)
proposes policies and measures to achieve Federal and State standards for improved air quality in the
Basin and those portions of the Salton Sea Air Basin (formerly named the Southeast Desert Air Basin)
that are under SCAQMD jurisdiction. The 2003 Air Quality Management Plan requires:
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸4◂                                 Air Quality Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
      Emissions-reducing activities, control technology for existing sources;
      Control programs for area sources and indirect sources; a SCAQMD permitting system
        designed to allow no net increase in emissions from any new or modified permitted sources of
        emissions;
      Transportation control measures; and
      Demonstration of compliance with the CARB’s established reporting periods of compliance
        with air quality goals.
The 2003 Air Quality Management Plan is consistent with and builds upon the approaches taken in the
1997 Air Quality Management Plan and the 1999 Amendments to the Ozone State Implementation Plan for
the Basin for the attainment of the Federal ozone air quality standard. However, the 2003 Air Quality
Management Plan points to the urgent need for additional emission reductions (beyond those
incorporated in the 1997/99 Plan) to offset increased emission estimates from mobile sources and to
meet all Federal criteria pollutant standards within the time frames allowed under the Federal Clean
Air Act.
The SCAQMD also adopts rules to implement portions of the 2003 Air Quality Management Plan.
Several of these rules may apply to construction or operation of a project. For example, Rule 403
require that projects implement best available fugitive dust control measures during active
construction operations.        Rule 401 provides rules during onsite earth-moving activities,
construction/demolition activities, and construction equipment travel on paved and unpaved roads.
Rules and regulations are also provided for long-term operation of a project. Some of these rules
include Rules 201, 202, and 203 which requires permits for certain stationary sources that may be
part of a project (e.g., heaters and generators). Other rules such as Regulations XIII or Regulation
XXX, which, among other things requires that Best Available Control Technology (BACT) is utilized
to reduce pollutants and ensure that any increases of criteria air pollutants be offset by achieving
equivalent emission reductions at a facility within the Basin.
Currently the SCAQMD is in the process of developing the 2007 Air Quality Management Plan. The
2007 Air Quality Management Plan incorporates significant new scientific data, primarily in the form of
updated emissions inventories, ambient measurements, new meteorological episodes and new air
quality modeling tools. The 2007 Air Quality Management Plan includes new information on key
elements such as:
          Current air quality;
          Improved emission inventories, especially significant increase in mobile source emissions;
         An overall control strategy comprised of: Stationary and Mobile Source Control Measures,
            SCAQMD, and State, and Federal Stationary and Mobile Source Control Measures; and
            the Southern California Association of Governments Regional Transportation Strategy and
            Control Measures;
         New attainment demonstration for PM2.5 and ozone;
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸5◂                                 Air Quality Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
            Milestones to the federal Reasonable Further Progress (RFP) Plan; and
            Preliminary motor vehicle emission budgets for transportation conformity purposes.
A draft of the 2007 Air Quality Management Plan is now available at the SCAQMD website. As of
May 2007, it is not yet known when the latest Air Quality Management Plan would be adopted.
In addition to the 2003 Air Quality Management Plan and its rules and regulations, the SCAQMD
published the CEQA Air Quality Handbook (Handbook). The Handbook provides guidance to assist local
government agencies and consultants in developing the environmental documents required by the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). With the help of the Handbook, local land use
planners and other consultants are able to analyze and document how proposed and existing projects
affect air quality and should be able to fulfill the requirements of the CEQA review process. The
SCAQMD is in the process of developing the Air Quality Analysis Guidance Handbook to replace the
Handbook approved by the Air Quality Management District Governing Board in 1993.
In 2003, the SCAQMD developed localized significance threshold methodology that can be used to
determine whether or not a project may generate significant adverse localized air quality impacts.
Localized significance thresholds represent the maximum emissions from a project that would not
cause or contribute to an exceedance of the most stringent applicable Federal or State ambient air
quality standards and are developed based on the ambient concentrations of that pollutant for each
Source Receptor Area. For the localized significance threshold, the City of Glendora is located in
Source Receptor Area 9 (East San Gabriel Valley). The SCAQMD’s Final Localized Significance
Threshold Methodology guidance document provides mass rate look-up tables in Appendix C, which
allows a user to determine if the daily emissions for proposed construction could result in significant
localized air quality impacts.
Environmental Justice
California state law defines environmental justice as the fair treatment of people of all races, cultures,
and incomes with respect to the development, adoption, implementation, and enforcement of
environmental laws, regulations, and policies.2 The SCAQMD’s environmental justice program is
comprised of ten environmental justice initiatives designed to protect district residents’ right to live
and work in an environment of clean air that is free of airborne health threats. The program also
includes 23 enhancements that serve to further outreach and problem-solving activities regarding
environmental justice issues. The SCAQMD’s Guidance Document for Addressing Air Quality Issues in
General Plans and Local Planning, which has been used as a guide for preparing this Air Quality
Element, is one of the 23 program enhancements and is intended to help reduce health risks associated
with exposure to air pollution.
2. California Government Code Section 65040.12.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸6◂                                 Air Quality Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
3.4     Southern California Association Of Governments
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) is the regional planning agency for Los
Angeles, Orange, Ventura, Riverside, San Bernardino and Imperial Counties and serves as a forum for
regional issues relating to transportation the economy, community development and the environment.
SCAG serves as the Federally designated metropolitan planning organization (MPO) for the southern
California region and is the largest MPO in the United States. With respect to air quality planning,
SCAG has prepared the Regional Comprehensive Plan and Guide (RCPG) for the region, which
includes Growth Management and Regional Mobility chapters that form the basis for the land use and
transportation control portions of the 2003 Air Quality Management Plan. SCAG is responsible under
the Federal Clean Air Act for determining conformity of projects, plans, and programs with the
SCAQMD 2003 Air Quality Management Plan. As indicated in the SCAQMD Handbook, there are two
main indicators of consistency:
      The project would not increase the frequency or severity of existing air quality violations, or
        cause or contribute to new violations, or delay timely attainment of air quality standards or
        the interim emission reductions specified in the 2003 Air Quality Management Plan; and
      The project would not exceed the 2003 Air Quality Management Plan’s assumptions for 2020 or
        increments based on the year of project buildout and phase.
Regional Transportation Plan
Destination 2030 is the 2004 Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) (adopted in April 2004) for the six
county region in Southern California including Los Angeles, Orange, San Bernardino, Riverside,
Ventura and Imperial counties. The RTP is the culmination of a three-year effort with a focus on
improving the balance between land use and the current as well as future transportation systems.
SCAG is required to develop, maintain and update the RTP on a three-year cycle. The RTP provides
the basic policy and program framework for long-term investment in our vast regional transportation
system in a coordinated, cooperative and continuous manner. The RTP identifies major challenges,
such as declining air quality due to increases in vehicle miles traveled and congestion, as well as
potential opportunities associated with growth, transportation finances, the future of airports in the
region, and impending transportation system deficiencies that could result from unprecedented
growth anticipated in the region.
Regional Transportation Improvement Program
Transportation investments in the SCAG Region that receive State or Federal transportation funds
must be consistent with the RTP and must be included in the Regional Transportation Improvement
Program when ready for funding. The 2006 Final Regional Transportation Improvement Program (RTIP)
is a capital listing of all transportation projects proposed over a six-year period for the SCAG. The
projects include highway improvements, transit, rail and bus facilities, high occupancy vehicle lanes,
signal synchronization, intersection improvements, freeway ramps, etc. These projects constitute a
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸7◂                                 Air Quality Element

                  GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
large investment of public funds. As Southern California’s air quality problems are tied to the region’s
transportation systems, many of these projects are directly related to improving regional air quality.
SCAG develops the RTIP based on consistency with the current RTP, inter-county connectivity,
financial constraints, and conformity satisfaction using lists of projects submitted by each county.
Under State law, County Transportation Commissions have the responsibility of proposing and
prioritizing county projects, using the current RTP's policies, programs, and projects as a guide, from
among submittals by cities and local agencies.
3.5 Global Climate Change Regulatory Programs
Kyoto Protocol
The original Kyoto Protocol was negotiated in December 1997 and came into effect on February 16,
2005. As of December 2006, 169 countries have ratified the agreement with the exception of the
United States and Australia. Participating nations are separated into Annex 1 (i.e., industrialized
countries) and Non-Annex 1 (i.e., developing countries) countries that have different requirements for
greenhouse gas reductions. The goal of the Protocol is to achieve overall emissions reduction targets
for six greenhouse gases by the period of 2008 to 2012. The six greenhouse gases regulated under the
Protocol are carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, sulfur hexafluoride, Hydrofluorocarbons, and
Perfluorocarbons. Each nation has an emissions reduction target for which they must reduce
greenhouse gas emissions a certain percentage below 1990 levels (e.g., 8 percent reduction for the
European Union, 6 percent reduction for Japan). The average reduction target for nations
participating in the Kyoto Protocol is approximately 5 percent below 1990 levels. Although the
United States has not ratified the Protocol, it has established an 18 percent reduction in greenhouse
gas emissions intensity by 2012. Greenhouse gas intensity is the ratio of greenhouse gas emissions to
economic output (i.e., gross domestic product).
AB 1493
In a response to the transportation sector accounting for more than half of California’s carbon dioxide
(CO2) emissions, Assembly Bill 1493 (AB 1493, Pavley) was enacted on July 22, 2002. AB 1493
required the CARB to set greenhouse gas emission standards for passenger vehicles, light duty trucks,
and other vehicles determined to be vehicles whose primary use is noncommercial personal
transportation in the state. The bill required that the CARB set the greenhouse gas emission
standards for motor vehicles manufactured in 2009 and all subsequent model years. In setting these
standards, the CARB must consider cost effectiveness, technological feasibility, economic impacts, and
provide maximum flexibility to manufacturers. The CARB adopted the standards in September 2004.
These standards are intended to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases (e.g.,
nitrous oxide, methane). The new standards would phase in during the 2009 through 2016 model
years. When fully phased in, the near term (2009 to 2012) standards will result in about a 22 percent
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions compared to the emissions from the 2002 fleet, while the
midterm (2013 to 2016) standards will result in a reduction of about 30 percent. Some currently used
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸8◂                                  Air Quality Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
technologies that achieve greenhouse gas reductions include small engines with superchargers,
continuously variable transmissions, and hybrid electric drive.
Executive Order S-3-05
In June 2005, Governor Schwarzenegger established California’s greenhouse gas emissions reduction
targets in Executive Order S-3-05. The Executive Order established the following goals: Greenhouse
gas emissions should be reduced to 2000 levels by 2010; greenhouse gas emissions should be reduced
to 1990 levels by 2020; and greenhouse gas emissions should be reduced to 80 percent below 1990
levels by 2050. The Secretary of the California Environmental Protection Agency (the Secretary) is
required to coordinate efforts of various agencies in order to collectively and efficiently reduce
greenhouse gases. Some of the agencies involved in the greenhouse gas reduction plan include
Secretary of Business, Transportation and Housing Agency, Secretary of Department of Food and
Agriculture, Secretary of Resources Agency, Chairperson of CARB, Chairperson of the Energy
Commission, and the President of the Public Utilities Commission. The Secretary is required to submit
a biannual progress report to the Governor and State Legislature disclosing the progress made toward
greenhouse gas emission reduction targets. In addition, another biannual report must be submitted
illustrating the impacts of global warming on California’s water supply, public health, agriculture, the
coastline, and forestry and report possible mitigation and adaptation plans to combat these impacts.
Assembly Bill 32
The Legislature enacted Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32, Nunez), the California Global Warming Solutions
Act of 2006, which Governor Schwarzenegger signed on September 27, 2006 to further the goals of
Executive Order S-3-05. AB 32 represents the first enforceable statewide program to limit
greenhouse gas emissions from all major industries with penalties for noncompliance. The CARB has
been assigned to carry out and develop the programs and requirements necessary to achieve the goals
of AB 32. The foremost objective of the CARB is to adopt regulations that require the reporting and
verification of statewide greenhouse gas emissions. This program will be used to monitor and enforce
compliance with the established standards. The first greenhouse gas emissions limit is equivalent to
the 1990 levels, which are to be achieved by 2020. The CARB is also required to adopt rules and
regulations to achieve the maximum technologically feasible and cost effective greenhouse gas
emission reductions.
AB 32 allows the CARB to adopt market based compliance mechanisms to meet the specified
requirements. Finally, the CARB is ultimately responsible for monitoring compliance and enforcing
any rule, regulation, order, emission limitation, emission reduction measure, or market based
compliance mechanism adopted. In order to advise the CARB, it must convene an Environmental
Justice Advisory Committee and an Economic and Technology Advancement Advisory Committee.
By January 2008, the first deadline for AB 32, a statewide cap for 2020 emissions based on 1990
levels must be adopted. The following year (January 2009), the CARB must adopt mandatory
reporting rules for significant sources of greenhouse gases and also a plan indicating how reductions in
significant greenhouse gas sources will be achieved through regulations, market mechanisms, and
other actions.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸9◂                                  Air Quality Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Executive Order S-1-07
On January 18, 2007, California further solidified its dedication to reducing greenhouse gases by
setting a new Low Carbon Fuel Standard for transportation fuels sold within the state. Executive
Order S-1-07 sets a declining standard for greenhouse gas emissions measured in carbon dioxide
equivalent gram per unit of fuel energy sold in California. The target of the Low Carbon Fuel Standard
is to reduce the carbon intensity of California passenger vehicle fuels by at least 10 percent by 2020.
The Low Carbon Fuel Standard applies to refiners, blenders, producers, and importers of
transportation fuels and will use market-based mechanisms to allow these providers to choose how
they reduce emissions during the ”fuel cycle” using the most economically feasible methods. The
Executive Order requires the Secretary of the California Environmental Protection Agency to
coordinate with actions of the California Energy Commission, the CARB, the University of California,
and other agencies to develop a protocol to measure the “life cycle carbon intensity” of transportation
fuels. The CARB is anticipated to complete its review of the Low Carbon Fuel Standard protocols no
later than June 2007 and implement the regulatory process for the new standard by December 2008.
4.0 SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
Air quality conditions in Glendora are influenced by many factors, including the topography, climate
and pollution sources. This section examines these issues and historical pollution levels in the
community, as compared to State and Federal air quality standards.
4.1 Climate
Glendora is located within the South Coast Air Basin (Basin). This Basin is a 6,600 square mile area
that includes all of Orange County and the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, Riverside and San
Bernardino counties. The Basin is topographically bounded by the Pacific Ocean to the west with the
San Gabriel, San Bernardino and San Jacinto mountains to the north and east.
The topography and climate of southern California combine to make the Basin an area predisposed to
air pollution problems. During the summer months, a warm air mass frequently descends over the
cool, moist marine layer produced by the interaction between the ocean's surface and the lowest layer
of the atmosphere. The warm upper layer forms a cap over the cool marine layer and prevents
pollutants from dispersing upward and allows pollutants to accumulate within the lower layer. This
situation is called a temporary inversion. In addition, light winds during the summer further limit
ventilation. Because of the low average wind speeds in the summer and a persistent daytime
temperature inversion, emissions of hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen have an opportunity to
combine with sunlight in a complex series of reactions producing photochemical oxidant (smog). The
smog potential is increased in the basin, because the South Coast region experiences more days of
sunlight than any other major urban area except Phoenix, Arizona.
Glendora has a Mediterranean climate, with cool wet winters and hot dry weathers. The ocean plays
an important role in affecting local temperatures. As a result of the fairly narrow spread between the
warmest and coldest monthly mean sea surface temperature in southern California coastal waters, the
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸ 10 ◂                                Air Quality Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
relatively warm ocean modifies the climate in Glendora in winter and provides cooling sea breezes in
summer. Temperatures range from 60 degrees Fahrenheit during the winter months, to over 90
degrees during the summer, and days over 100 degrees are not uncommon. Average annual
precipitation is approximately 22 inches, with the majority of the rain falling in the winter months.
The dominant daily wind pattern within the project area is characterized by a daytime sea breeze and
a nighttime land breeze. During the day, wind direction is from the northeast and the coast to the
southwest. As night approaches, the wind generally slows and reverses direction, blowing to the
northeast towards the coast. Occasional winter storms and the Santa Ana winds (strong northeasterly
winds that blow from the mountains and deserts north of the Basin to the coast) breaks the dominant
wind patterns. Further, during the transition period from one wind pattern to another, the dominant
wind direction rotates into the south and causes a minor wind direction change. Calm winds of less
than two miles per hour occur less than 10 percent of the time and, as a result, there is little
stagnation in the Glendora area, especially during daily peak traffic.
4.2 Local Ambient Air Quality
Local air quality in Glendora is influenced by the presence of the Foothill Freeway (I-210) that
traverses the City. The freeway carries a large amount of regional traffic, and thus, generates large
amounts of vehicular emissions from both automobiles and trucks.
The SCAQMD operates several air quality monitoring stations within the Air Basin. The City of
Glendora is located within Source Receptor Area (SRA) 9. The communities within an SRA are
expected to have similar climatology and subsequently, similar ambient air pollutant concentrations.
The Glendora-Laurel Monitoring Station is the nearest air monitoring station to the project site. The
data collected at this station is considered to be representative of the air quality experienced in the
project vicinity. Air quality data from 2002 to 2006 for the Glendora-Laurel Monitoring Station is
provided in Table AQ-2, Local Air Quality Levels. The Glendora-Laurel Monitoring Station does not
monitor all criteria pollutants, and therefore it was necessary to obtain data regarding CO, PM10, and
PM2.5 at the Azusa Monitoring Station.
Air Pollution Constituents
Air pollution is anything that pollutes the atmosphere and consists of various components from
numerous sources.
Ozone (O3)
Ozone occurs in two layers of the atmosphere. The layer surrounding the earth's surface is the
troposphere. The troposphere extends approximately 10 miles above ground level, where it meets the
second layer, the stratosphere. The stratospheric (the "good" ozone layer) extends upward from about
10 to 30 miles and protects life on earth from the sun's harmful ultraviolet rays.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸ 11 ◂                               Air Quality Element

                           GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                                                 Table AQ-2
                                                       Local Air Quality Levels
                                                                                                                          Days (Samples)
                                                   Federal Primary                                     Maximum3
       Pollutant          California Standard                                    Year                                      State/Federal3
                                                       Standard                                     Concentration
                                                                                                                           Std. Exceeded
                                                                                 2002                   0.152 ppm               45/12
                                                                                 2003                     0.162                 61/22
        Ozone   1               0.09 ppm
                                                           NA                    2004                     0.134                  42/5
        (1-hour)                for 1 hour
                                                                                 2005                     0.160                  31/8
                                                                                 2006                     0.175                 37/11
                                                                                 2002                   0.114 ppm               NA/21
                                                                                 2003                     0.134                 NA/40
       Ozone  1, 6              0.07 ppm               0.08 ppm
                                                                                 2004                     0.107                 NA/16
        (8-hour)               for 8 hours            for 8 hours
                                                                                 2005                     0.130                 NA/11
                                                                                 2006                     0.127                 NA/15
                                                                                 2002                   2.39 ppm                  0/0
                                                                                 2003                      2.54                   0/0
  Carbon Monoxide   2            9.0 ppm                9.0 ppm
                                                                                 2004                      1.95                   0/0
        (8-hour)                for 8 hour             for 8 hour
                                                                                 2005                      1.51                   0/0
                                                                                 2006                      1.70                   0/0
                                                                                 2002                   0.102 ppm               0/NA
                                                                                 2003                     0.119                 0/NA
                                0.18 ppm              0.030 ppm
  Nitrogen Dioxide1                                                              2004                     0.117                 0/NA
                                for 1 hour          annual average
        (1-hour)                                                                 2005                     0.087                 0/NA
                                                                                 2006                     0.099                 0/NA
                                                                                 2002                   89.0 g/m                22/0
                                                                                 2003                     117.0                  20/0
       PM10  2,4,5              50 µg/m  3            150 µg/m   3
                                                                                 2004                      82.0                   7/0
                              for 24 hours           for 24 hours
                                                                                 2005                      76.0                  10/0
                                                                                 2006                      81.0                   7/0
                                                                                 2002                   53.4 g/m               NA/1
                                                                                 2003                      58.5                 NA/3
       PM2.5 2,5                                       35 µg/m3
                        No Separate Standard                                     2004                      50.6                 NA/1
                                                     for 24 hours
                                                                                 2005                      49.4                 NA/1
                                                                                 2006                      52.7                 NA/0
Source: Aerometric Data Analysis and Measurement System (ADAM), summaries from 2002 to 2006, http://www.arb.ca.gov/adam.
ppm = parts per million                         PM10 = particulate matter 10 microns in diameter or less
g/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter              PM2.5 = particulate matter 2.5 microns in diameter or less
NA = not applicable, due to the absence of an applicable threshold
Notes:
 1. Data is based on measurements taken at the Glendora-Laurel monitoring station located at 840 Laurel Avenue, Glendora California, 91741.
 2. Data is based on measurements taken at the Azusa monitoring station located at 803 North Loren Avenue, Azusa California, 91702.
 3. Maximum concentration is measured over the same period as the California Standard.
 4. PM10 exceedances are based on state thresholds established prior to amendments adopted on June 20, 2002.
 5. PM10 and PM2.5 exceedances are derived from the number of samples exceeded, not days.
 6. The 8-hour standards were not established until April 28, 2005; therefore no state exceedances were recorded.
 “Bad” ozone is a photochemical pollutant, and needs volatile organic compounds (VOCs), NO X, and
 sunlight to form; therefore, VOCs and NOX are ozone precursors. VOCs and NOX are emitted from
 various sources throughout the City. To reduce ozone concentrations, it is necessary to control the
 emissions of these ozone precursors. Significant ozone formation generally requires an adequate
 Glendora Community Plan 2025                                         ▸ 12 ◂                                        Air Quality Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
amount of precursors in the atmosphere and a period of several hours in a stable atmosphere with
strong sunlight. High ozone concentrations can form over large regions when emissions from motor
vehicles and stationary sources are carried hundreds of miles from their origins.
While ozone in the upper atmosphere (stratosphere) protects the earth from harmful ultraviolet
radiation, high concentrations of ground-level ozone (in the troposphere) can adversely affect the
human respiratory system and other tissues. Many respiratory ailments, as well as cardiovascular
disease, are aggravated by exposure to high ozone levels. Ozone also damages natural ecosystems
(such as forests and foothill plant communities), agricultural crops, and some man-made materials
(such as rubber, paint and plastics). Societal costs from ozone damage include increased healthcare
costs, the loss of human and animal life, accelerated replacement of industrial equipment, and reduced
crop yields.
The 1-hour O3 levels ranged from 0.134 parts per million (ppm) to 0.175 ppm from 2002 to 2006 at
the Glendora-Laurel Monitoring Station. The 8-hour O3 levels between 2002 and 2006 averaged
0.122 ppm. The State 8-hour standard for O3 is 0.07, and was approved by the CARB on April 28,
2005. The exceedances for the State standards have not yet been provided by the CARB. The Federal
standard for O3 is 0.12 ppm, averaged over one hour, and was exceeded 103 times between 2002 and
2006.
Carbon Monoxide (CO)
Carbon monoxide (CO) is an odorless, colorless toxic gas that is emitted by mobile and stationary
sources as a result of incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons or other carbon-based fuels. In cities,
automobile exhaust can cause as much as 95 percent of all CO emissions. At high concentrations, CO
can reduce the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood and cause headaches, dizziness, unconsciousness,
and death. The Basin is designated as a non-attainment area for State CO standards (within Los
Angeles County), but is designated as an attainment area for Federal CO standards.
Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2)
Nitrogen oxides (NOX) are a family of highly reactive gases that are a primary precursor to the
formation of ground-level ozone, and react in the atmosphere to form acid rain. NO2 (often used
interchangeably with NOX) is a reddish-brown gas that can cause breathing difficulties at high levels.
Peak readings of NO2 occur in areas that have a high concentration of combustion sources (e.g., motor
vehicle engines, power plants, refineries, and other industrial operations).
NOX can irritate and damage the lungs, and lower resistance to respiratory infections such as
influenza. The health effects of short-term exposure are still unclear. However, continued or frequent
exposure to NOX concentrations that are typically much higher than those normally found in the
ambient air, may increase acute respiratory illnesses in children and increase the incidence of chronic
bronchitis and lung irritation. Chronic exposure to NO2 may aggravate eyes and mucus membranes
and cause pulmonary dysfunction. The NO2 ambient air quality standard was amended on February
22, 2007 to lower the State 1-hour standard to 0.18 ppm and establish a new Federal annual standard
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸ 13 ◂                              Air Quality Element

                  GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
of 0.030 ppm. These changes become effective after regulatory changes are submitted and approved
by the Office of Administrative Law, expected later this year. The entire Basin is designated as an
attainment area for State and Federal NO2 standards.
Coarse Particulate Matter (PM10)
Particulate matter pollution consists of very small liquid and solid particles floating in the air, and is a
mixture of materials that can include smoke, soot, dust, salt, acids, and metals. Particulate matter
also forms when gases emitted from motor vehicles and industrial sources undergo chemical reactions
in the atmosphere. Some particles are large or dark enough to be seen as soot or smoke; others are so
small that they can be detected only with an electron microscope. PM 10 particles are less than or equal
to 10 microns in aerodynamic diameter.
In the western United States, there are sources of PM10 in both urban and rural areas. PM10 is
typically emitted from stationary and mobile sources, including diesel trucks and other motor vehicles,
power plants, industrial processing, wood- burning stoves and fireplaces, wildfires, dust from roads,
construction, landfills, agriculture, and fugitive windblown dust.
PM10 particles are small enough to be inhaled into, and lodge in, the deepest parts of the lung. Health
problems begin as the body reacts to these foreign particles. Acute and chronic health effects
associated with high particulate levels include the aggravation of chronic respiratory diseases, heart
and lung disease, coughing, bronchitis, and respiratory illnesses in children. Recent mortality studies
have shown a statistically significant direct association between mortality and daily concentrations of
particulate matter in the air. Non-health-related effects include reduced visibility and soiling of
buildings.
The State standard for PM10 is 50 micrograms per cubic meter (µg/m3) averaged over 24 hours; this
standard was exceeded 66 days at the Azusa Monitoring Station between 2002 and 2006. The
Federal standard for PM10 is 150 µg/m3 averaged over 24 hours; this standard was not exceeded
between 2002 and 2006.
Fine Particulate Matter (PM2.5)
PM2.5 particles are less than or equal to 2.5 microns in aerodynamic diameter, and are a subset
(portion) of PM10. On January 5, 2005, the EPA published a Final Rule, in the Federal Register that
designates the Basin as a nonattainment area for Federal PM2.5 standards. On June 20, 2002, the
CARB adopted amendments for statewide annual ambient particulate matter air quality standards.
These standards were revised/established due to increasing concerns by the CARB that previous
standards were inadequate, as almost everyone in California is exposed to levels at or above the current
State standards during some parts of the year, and the statewide potential for significant health
impacts associated with particulate matter exposure was determined to be large and wide-ranging.
At the Azusa Monitoring Station, there were six exceedances between 2002 and 2006. For PM2.5, the
Federal standard is 35 µg/m3 over 24 hours. There is no separate State standard for PM2.5.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸ 14 ◂                                Air Quality Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Sulfur Dioxide and Lead
Sulfur Dioxide (SO2) is a colorless, irritating gas with a “rotten egg” smell formed primarily by the
combustion of sulfur-containing fossil fuels. Lead is a metal that is a natural constituent of air, water
and the biosphere. Lead is neither created nor destroyed in the environment. SO2 is often used
interchangeably with sulfur oxides (SOX) and lead (Pb). Sulfur dioxide levels in all areas of the Basin
do not exceed Federal or State standards. The Basin is designated as attainment for both State and
Federal SO2 standards. Since ambient concentrations of lead have decreased in the Basin, the
SCAQMD no longer monitors the presence of lead in ambient air.
Reactive Organic Gases and Volatile Organic Compounds
Hydrocarbons are organic gases that are formed solely of hydrogen and carbon. There are several
subsets of organic gases including reactive organic gases (ROGs) and volatile organic compounds
(VOCs). ROGs comprise all hydrocarbons except those exempted by the CARB. Therefore, ROGs
are a set of organic gases based on State rules and regulations. VOCs are similar to ROGs in that they
comprise all organic gases except those exempted by federal law. VOCs are therefore a set of organic
gases based on federal rules and regulations. Both ROGs and VOCs are emitted from the incomplete
combustion of hydrocarbons or other carbon-based fuels. The major sources of hydrocarbons are
combustion engine exhaust, oil refineries, and oil-fueled power plants; other common sources are
petroleum fuels, solvents, dry cleaning solutions and paint (via evaporation).
Global Climate Change Gases
The natural process through which heat is retained in the troposphere is called the “greenhouse
effect.”3 The greenhouse effect traps heat in the troposphere through a three fold process as follows:
Short wave radiation emitted by the Sun is absorbed by the Earth; the Earth emits a portion of this
energy in the form of long wave radiation; and greenhouse gases in the upper atmosphere absorb this
long wave radiation and emit this long wave radiation into space and toward the Earth. This
”trapping” of the long wave (thermal) radiation emitted back toward the Earth is the underlying
process of the greenhouse effect.
Without the greenhouse effect, the Earth’s average temperature would be approximately negative 18
degrees Celsius (°C) (0° Fahrenheit [°F]) instead of its present 14°C (57°F). The most abundant
greenhouse gases are water vapor and carbon dioxide. Many other trace gases have greater ability to
absorb and re radiate long wave radiation; however, these gases are not as plentiful. For this reason,
and to gauge the potency of greenhouse gases, scientists have established a Global Warming Potential
for each greenhouse gas based on its ability to absorb and re radiate long wave radiation. The Global
Warming Potential of a gas is determined using carbon dioxide as the reference gas with a Global
Warming Potential of 1.
3. The troposphere is the bottom layer of the atmosphere, which varies in height from the Earth’s surface to 10 to 12
kilometers.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                          ▸ 15 ◂                                     Air Quality Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Greenhouse gases include, but are not limited to, the following:4
Water Vapor (H2O). Although water vapor has not received the scrutiny of other greenhouse gases, it is
the primary contributor to the greenhouse effect. Natural processes, such as evaporation from oceans
and rivers and transpiration from plants, contribute 90 percent and 10 percent of the water vapor in
our atmosphere, respectively. The primary human related source of water vapor comes from fuel
combustion in motor vehicles; however, this is not believed to contribute a significant amount (less
than 1 percent) to atmospheric concentrations of water vapor. The Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change has not determined a Global Warming Potential for water vapor.
Carbon Dioxide (CO2). Carbon dioxide is primarily generated by fossil fuel combustion in stationary and
mobile sources. Due to the emergence of industrial facilities and mobile sources in the past 250 years,
the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has increased 35 percent. 5 Carbon dioxide is
the most widely emitted greenhouse gas and is the reference gas (Global Warming Potential of 1) for
determining Global Warming Potentials for other greenhouse gases. In 2004, 83.8 percent of
California’s greenhouse gas emissions were carbon dioxide.6
Methane (CH4). Methane is emitted from biogenic sources, incomplete combustion in forest fires,
landfills, manure management, and leaks in natural gas pipelines. In the United States, the top three
sources of methane come from landfills, natural gas systems, and enteric fermentation. Methane is the
primary component of natural gas, which is used for space and water heating, steam production, and
power generation. The Global Warming Potential of methane is 21.
Nitrous Oxide (N2O). Nitrous oxide is produced by both natural and human related sources. Primary
human related sources include agricultural soil management, animal manure management, sewage
treatment, mobile and stationary combustion of fossil fuel, adipic acid production, and nitric acid
production. The Global Warming Potential of nitrous oxide is 310.
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). HFCs are typically used as refrigerants for both stationary refrigeration and
mobile air conditioning. The use of HFCs for cooling and foam blowing is growing as the continued
phase out of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) gains momentum.
The Global Warming Potential of HFCs range from 140 for HFC-152a to 6,300 for HFC-236fa.
Perfluorocarbons (PFCs). Perfluorocarbons are compounds consisting of carbon and fluorine. They are
primarily created as a byproduct of aluminum production and semi conductor manufacturing.
Perfluorocarbons are potent greenhouse gases with a Global Warming Potential several thousand
times that of carbon dioxide, depending on the specific PFC. Another area of concern regarding PFCs
4. All Global Warming Potentials are given as 100 year GWP. Unless noted otherwise, all Global Warming Potentials
were obtained from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Climate Change (Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, Climate Change, The Science of Climate Change – Contribution of Working Group I to the Second Assessment Report
of the IPCC, 1996).
5. United States Environmental Protection Agency, Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks 1990 to 2004, April
2006. <http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/usinventoryreport.html>
6. California Energy Commission, Inventory of California Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks 1990 to 2004, December 2006.
<http://www.energy.ca.gov/2006publications/CEC 600 2006 013/CEC 600 2006 013 SF.PDF>
Glendora Community Plan 2025                              ▸ 16 ◂                                         Air Quality Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
is their long atmospheric lifetime (up to 50,000 years).7 The Global Warming Potential of PFCs
range from 5,700 to 11,900.
Sulfur Hexafluoride (SF6). Sulfur hexafluoride is a colorless, odorless, nontoxic, nonflammable gas. It is
most commonly used as an electrical insulator in high voltage equipment that transmits and
distributes electricity. Sulfur hexafluoride is the most potent greenhouse gas that has been evaluated
by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change with a Global Warming Potential of 23,900.
However, its global warming contribution is not as high as the Global Warming Potential would
indicate due to its low mixing ratio compared to carbon dioxide (4 parts per trillion [ppt] in 1990
versus 365 parts per million [ppm]).8
In addition to the six major greenhouse gases discussed above (excluding water vapor), many other
compounds have the potential to contribute to the greenhouse effect. Some of these substances were
previously identified as stratospheric ozone depletors; therefore, their gradual phase out is currently in
effect. The following is a listing of these compounds:
Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs). HCFCs are solvents, similar in use and chemical composition to
CFCs. The main uses of HCFCs are for refrigerant products and air conditioning systems. As part of
the Montreal Protocol, all developed countries that adhere to the Montreal Protocol are subject to a
consumption cap and gradual phase out of HCFCs. The United States is scheduled to achieve a 100
percent reduction to the cap by 2030. The Global Warming Potentials of HCFCs range from 93 for
HCFC-123 to 2,000 for HCFC-142b.9
1,1,1Trichloroethane. 1,1,1 trichloroethane or methyl chloroform is a solvent and degreasing agent
commonly used by manufacturers. In 1992, the Environmental Protection Agency issued a Final Rule
(57 FR 33754) scheduling the phase out of methyl chloroform by 2002. Therefore, the threat posed
by methyl chloroform as a greenhouse gas will diminish. However, the Global Warming Potential of
methyl chloroform is 110 times that of carbon dioxide.10
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). CFCs are used as refrigerants, cleaning solvents, and aerosols spray
propellants. CFCs were also part of the Environmental Protection Agency’s Final Rule (57 FR 3374)
for the phase out of ozone depleting substances. Currently, CFCs have been replaced by HFCs in
cooling systems and a variety of alternatives for cleaning solvents. Nevertheless, CFCs remain
7. Energy Information Administration, Other Gases: Hydrofluorocarbons, Perfluorocarbons, and Sulfur Hexafluoride, October 29,
2001. <http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/1605/gg00rpt/other_gases.html>
8. United States Environmental Protection Agency, High GWP Gases and Climate Change, October 19, 2006.
<http://www.epa.gov/highgwp/scientific.html#sf6>
9. United States Environmental Protection Agency, Protection of Stratospheric Ozone: Listing of Global Warming Potential for
Ozone Depleting Substances, November 7, 2006. <http://www.epa.gov/fedrgstr/EPA AIR/1996/January/Day 19/pr
372.html>
10. United States Environmental Protection Agency, Protection of Stratospheric Ozone: Listing of Global Warming Potential for
Ozone Depleting Substances, November 7, 2006. <http://www.epa.gov/fedrgstr/EPA AIR/1996/ January/Day 19/pr
372.html>
Glendora Community Plan 2025                           ▸ 17 ◂                                           Air Quality Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
suspended in the atmosphere contributing to the greenhouse effect. CFCs are potent GHGs with
Global Warming Potentials ranging from 4,600 for CFC 11 to 14,000 for CFC 13. 11
Ozone. Ozone occurs naturally in the stratosphere where it is largely responsible for filtering harmful
ultraviolet (UV) radiation. In the troposphere, ozone acts as a greenhouse gas by absorbing and re-
radiating the infrared energy emitted by the Earth. As a result of the industrial revolution and rising
emissions of oxides of nitrogen (NOX) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) (ozone precursors), the
concentrations of ozone in the troposphere have increased. Due to the short life span of ozone in the
troposphere, its concentration and contribution as a greenhouse is not well established. However, the
greenhouse effect of tropospheric ozone is considered small, as the radiative forcing of ozone is 25
percent of that of carbon dioxide.12
4.3 Sensitive Receptors
Sensitive populations are more susceptible to the effects of air pollution than are the general
population. Sensitive populations (sensitive receptors) who are in proximity to localized sources of
toxins and carbon monoxide are of particular concern. Land uses that are considered sensitive
receptors include residences, schools, playgrounds, childcare centers, athletic facilities, long-term
health care facilities, rehabilitation centers, convalescent centers and retirement homes. Sensitive
receptors within the City of Glendora have been listed in Table AQ-3, Sensitive Receptors.
                                                   Table AQ-3
                                               Sensitive Receptors
                                RECEPTOR                                    LOCATION
            Institutional:
            Hope Lutheran Church                                1041 E. Foothill Blvd
            Mar Thoma Church of Los Angeles                     134 S. Vista Bonita Avenue
            Grace Episcopal Church                              555 E. Mountain View Avenue
            Church of the Brethren                              150 S. Vermont Avenue
            Glendora Grace Lutheran Church                      804 E. Foothill Blvd.
            United Methodist Church                             201 E. Bennett Avenue
            Church of the Open Door                             701 W. Sierra Madre Avenue
            Reason to Believe                                   731 E. Arrow Highway
            First Christian Church                              300 N. Glendora Avenue
            Cornerstone Bible Church                            400 N. Glendora Avenue
            Glendora Alliance Church                            116 E. Carroll Avenue
            The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints     955 W. Foothill Blvd.
            Christian Science Church                            151 N. Glendora Avenue
11. United States Environmental Protection Agency, Class I Ozone Depleting Substances, March 7, 2006.
<http://www.epa.gov/ozone/ods.html>
12. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis, Summary for
Policymakers, February 2007.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                           ▸ 18 ◂                               Air Quality Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                                  Table AQ-3
                                      Sensitive Receptors (Continued)
                               RECEPTOR                                  LOCATION
           Grace Church of Glendora Preschool                1515 S. Glendora Avenue
           Cullen Elementary School                          440 N. Live Oak
           La Fetra Elementary School                        547 W. Bennett
           Sellers Elementary School                         500 N. Loraine Avenue
           Stanton Elementary School                         725 S. Vecino Avenue
           Sutherland Elementary School                      1330 N. Amelia
           Williams Elementary School                        301 S. Loraine Avenue
           Goddard Middle School                             859 E. Sierra Madre
           Sandburg Middle School                            819 W. Bennett
           Glendora High School                              1600 E. Foothill Blvd.
           Whitcomb High School                              350 W. Mauna Loa
           Arrow High School                                 1505 S. Sunflower
           Washington Elementary                             325 W. Gladstone
           Willow Elementary                                 1427 S. Willow
           Citrus Community College                          1000 West Foothill Boulevard
           Glendora Public Library                           140 S. Glendora Avenue
           Foothill Presbyterian Hospital                    250 S. Grand Avenue
           Huntington East Valley Hospital                   150 W. Route 66
           Arbor Glen Care Center                            1033 E. Arrow Highway
           Emmanuel health Care & Rehabilitation Center      805 W. Arrow Highway
           Foothill Nursing and Rehabilitation Center        401 W. Ada Avenue
           YMCA: Glendora                                    505 N. Grand Avenue
           PARKS:
           Dawson Avenue Park (5.44 acres)                   201 Dawson Avenue
           Sandburg School Park (12.19 acres)                Leadora Avenue & Wildwood Avenue
           Big Tree Park (0.34 acres)                        665 S. Santa Fe Avenue
           Gladstone Park (8.37 acres)                       600 E. Gladstone Avenue
           Ole Hammer Park (1.74 acres)                      362 N. Live Oak Avenue
           Finkbiner Park                                    160 N. Wabash Avenue
           George Manooshian School Park                     E. Palm Drive & N. Loraine Avenue
           Willow Springs Park (1.21 acres)                  515 N. Willow springs Lane
           South Hills Park (3.00 acres)                     701 E. Mauna Loa Avenue
           Rainbird Park (4.66 acres)
           C.E. Equestrian Park (2.11 acres)                 1000 N. Glendora Mountain Road
           Centennial Park (0.90 acres)                      725 E. Mauna Loa Avenue
Glendora Community Plan 2025                          ▸ 19 ◂                              Air Quality Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
5.0 PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS, GOALS,
         AND POLICIES
Air quality is a regional issue affecting the entire Basin, which includes the City of Glendora. The
Basin has been in violation with state and federal air quality standards for the past several years. In an
effort to attain air quality standards, this section of the Glendora Air Quality Element identifies goals
and policies to reduce the generation of pollutants. Specifically, this section focuses on improving air
quality through the reduction of total air emissions, education of the public on pollution control
measures and encouraging the best use of available technologies.
REGIONAL COORDINATION
Planning Consideration: For all air quality planning issues, the City of Glendora is under the
jurisdiction of the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) and the California Air
Resources Board (CARB). The City of Glendora understands that local air quality issues must be
coordinated with regional planning to ensure the implementation of regional and state air quality
mandates.
Goal             AQ-1             Coordination with Regional, State and Federal Agencies.
Policies         AQ-1.1           Encourage the construction of regional transportation facilities such as
                                  HOV lanes, Metrolink, bus routes, and pedestrian and bicycle
                                  facilities.
                 AQ-1.2           Support SCAG’s Regional Growth Management Plan by developing
                                  intergovernmental agreements with appropriate governmental entities
                                  and those sub-regional entities identified in the Regional Growth
                                  Management Plan.
                 AQ-1.3           Develop and adopt a policy to utilize federal Congestion Mitigation
                                  and Air Quality Improvement funds in coordination with regional
                                  agencies in a manner consistent with projects approved in the Air
                                  Quality Management Plan.
TRANSPORTATION, LAND USE AND AIR QUALITY
Planning Consideration: Automobile use in Southern California is a necessity for most residents.
This reliance on the automobile for transportation impacts air quality. Glendora understands
reductions in automobile demand through trip reduction and alternative transportation can provide a
significant reduction in air quality impacts. Planning decisions contribute to air quality by influencing
the distribution, density and location of housing, employment, transportation facilities and other land
uses within the City of Glendora. Consideration of air quality impacts should be a consideration in all
land use planning and transportation decisions in Glendora.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                        ▸ 20 ◂                               Air Quality Element

                  GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Goal           AQ-2          Reduction of vehicular trips.
Policies       AQ-2.1        Reduce mobile source emissions by encouraging a reduction in project-
                             related vehicle trips and vehicle miles traveled (VMT).
               AQ-2.2        Reduce mobile source emissions by increasing population densities
                             within one-half mile of transit nodes.
               AQ-2.3        Encourage “walkable” neighborhoods with pedestrian walkways and
                             bicycle paths in residential and other types of developments to
                             encourage pedestrian rather than vehicular travel.
               AQ-2.4        Promote and encourage ride-sharing activities throughout the
                             community.
Goal           AQ-3          Integrated land use and transportation planning.
Policies       AQ-3.1        Promote mixed use development that allows the integration of
                             residential, retail, office and/or institutional uses for the purpose of
                             maximizing the use of land.
               AQ-3.2        Avoid placing residential and other sensitive receptors in close
                             proximity to businesses (commercial or industrial) that emit toxic or
                             harmful air contaminants to the greatest extent possible.
               AQ-3.3        Encourage future commercial areas to foster pedestrian circulation
                             through the land use entitlement process.
Goal           AQ-4          Protect the health of all residents, regardless of age, culture,
                             ethnicity, gender, race, socioeconomic status, or geographic
                             location, from the health effects of pollution with equitable
                             environmental policymaking and enforcement.
Policies       AQ-4.1        Evaluate potential environmental justice issues by requiring a review of
                             environmental impacts for potential development projects.
               AQ-4.2        Separate, buffer, and protect sensitive receptors from significant
                             sources of pollution to the greatest extent possible.
               AQ-4.3        Encourage the participation of the business community, civic groups,
                             special interest groups, and the general public in the formulation and
                             implementation of programs that effectively reduce air pollution.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                   ▸ 21 ◂                                Air Quality Element

                  GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Goal           AQ-5             Promotion of alternative transportation modes.
Policies       AQ-5.1           Promote and encourage the use of public transit, such as the Metrolink
                                and local bus lines.
               AQ-5.2           Support the future development and use of the Metro Rail Gold Line
                                station in Glendora.
               AQ-5.3           Promote telecommuting and modified work schedules as a method of
                                trip reduction.
REDUCE ENERGY CONSUMPTION
Planning Consideration: Energy consumption influences air quality. Conservation of energy
resources can provide a significant impact on the reduction of emissions. Glendora understands that
methods and strategies for energy conservation can contribute the improvement of regional air
quality.
Goal           AQ-6             Reduced demand for energy resources.
Policies       AQ-6.1           Promote energy conservation throughout the City.
               AQ-6.2           Educate and encourage Glendora residents and business owners on
                                opportunities for reduced energy consumption.
               AQ-6.3           Develop new incentives and promote existing incentives that
                                encourage the use of energy conservation strategies by private and
                                public developments.
               AQ-6.4           Promote energy-efficient design features, including appropriate site
                                orientation, use of lighter color roofing and building materials, and use
                                of deciduous shade trees and windbreak trees to reduce fuel
                                consumption for heating and cooling.
               AQ-6.5           Provide incentives for “green building” programs that go beyond the
                                requirements of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code and
                                encourage energy efficient design elements as appropriate.
               AQ-6.6           Utilize all available renewable energy sources to reduce fuel
                                consumption and demand on the power grid.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸ 22 ◂                               Air Quality Element

                  GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
               AQ-6.6        Require all project applications to identify project energy demands,
                             existing energy supplies, potential environmental impacts associated
                             with energy use, and feasible energy efficiency measures, in accordance
                             with Appendix F of the California Environmental Quality Act Guidelines.
Goal           AQ-7          Reduced pollutant emissions from stationary sources, including
                             point sources and area sources.
Policies       AQ-7.1        Require residential building construction to comply with energy use
                             guidelines in Title 24 of the California Administrative Code.
               AQ-7.2        Require projects to mitigate anticipated emissions that exceed Air
                             Quality Management Plan Guidelines.
               AQ-7.3        Support the SCAQMD’s efforts to require stationary air pollution
                             sources, such as gasoline stations, restaurants with charbroilers and
                             deep fat fryers, to comply with and exceed applicable SCAQMD rules
                             and control measures.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                   ▸ 23 ◂                               Air Quality Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
CHAPTER 3
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
1.0 INTRODUCTION
 	
 
    

  
    

consists not only of the physical transportation system itself, such as streets, highways, bicycle routes
and sidewalks, but also to the various modes of transportation, such as cars, buses, trucks (goods
movement), rail, bicycles, ridesharing and walking, as well. Circulation also refers to the movement of
people and goods and products within and through the City. The circulation and transportation
system plays an important role in shaping the overall structure and form of the City, in that it both
divides and connects land uses at the same time.
The relationship of the Circulation Element to the Land Use Element is critical since the circulation
system must adequately handle future traffic as the City and surrounding areas continue to grow, and
provide the means to move people and goods through and within the City of Glendora. Land use and
circulation must be closely tied to ensure that citizens are able to move in and around the City to
locations where they live, work, shop, and spend leisure hours. The circulation system is directly
affected, and even shaped by existing and future land use patterns.
The Circulation Element identifies and establishes the City's policies governing the system of
roadways, intersections, bicycle paths, pedestrian ways and other components of the circulation
system, which collectively provide for the movement of people and goods throughout the City. The
Circulation Element establishes official city policy that:
         Identifies the transportation facilities that will be required to serve both present and future
            vehicular and non-vehicular travel demand in the City;
         Identifies classifications and design standards for circulation facilities; and
         Identifies strategies to implement the City's circulation system.
The Circulation Element describes existing circulation conditions in the City, and establishes standards
for implementation of future improvements in conjunction with planned growth, and provides a
method for measuring system performance for future updates. The Element considers not only the
physical requirements of the transportation system (roadway facility type, number of lanes, etc.), but
also operational issues such as the provision of transit services, and programs and policies that
encourage use of alternative transit modes.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                         ‫ځ‬1‫ڋ‬                                      Circulation Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
2.0 AUTHORITY FOR ELEMENT
The State of California Government Code Section 65302 (b) requires that a General Plan include:
´$FLUFXODWLRQHOHPHQWFRQVLVWLQJRIWKHJHQHUDOORFDWLRQDQGH[WHQWRIH[LVWLQJDQGSURSRVHGPDMRUWKRURXJKIDUHV
transportation routes, terminals, and other local public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the land use
HOHPHQWRIWKHSODQµ
3.0 SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
The City of Glendora shares borders with the City of San Dimas on the east, southeast, and south,
City of Covina on the southwest, and the City of Azusa on the west. The Angeles National Forest and



Many of the arterial roadways through the City of Glendora extend beyond the city boundaries into
neighboring cities. Circulation issues and travel patterns, likewise, extend beyond the Glendora city
limits. The land use decisions and traffic patterns in these other jurisdictions have the potential to
affect the quality of traffic flow and mobility in the City of Glendora, and conversely, traffic conditions
and decisions made by the City of Glendora can affect its neighbors. In particular, existing and future
commercial development in San Dimas on the east side of the City, and future development on the
former Monrovia nursery property on the west have the potential to affect traffic conditions in some
portions of the City of Glendora.
3.1 EXISTING CIRCULATION SYSTEM
3.1.1 Regional and Local Access
Regional access to the City of Glendora is provided by the Foothill Freeway (I-210). The I-210
Freeway provides east-west regional circulation through the City, connecting with the Orange
Freeway (SR-57) at the eastern boundary of the City. Interchanges with the I-210 Freeway are
provided at Grand Avenue, Sunflower Avenue, and Lone Hill Avenue. Arrow Highway, which forms
	ern border, continues easterly through the City of San Dimas, and has an interchange
with the SR-57 Freeway.
Continuous travel routes through the City are constrained by the I-210 Freeway and the 260-acre
South Hills Park, located in the middle of the City. North-south mobility through the City is limited
to arterials and collectors on either side of the park that cross the I-210 Freeway, which include
Barranca Avenue, Grand Avenue, Glendora Avenue, and Lone Hill Avenue. Other limited north-
south collectors that carry local traffic include Loraine Avenue, Valley Center Avenue, Bonnie Cove
Avenue, Sunflower Avenue, and Amelia Avenue.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                            ‫ځ‬2‫ڋ‬                                       Circulation Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
East-west roadways through the city include Sierra Madre Avenue, Foothill Boulevard, Route 66
(formerly called Alosta Avenue), Gladstone Street, and Arrow Highway. Baseline Road ends at
Glendora Avenue, on the west side of South Hills Park, and picks up again at Amelia Avenue, at the
eastern city boundary. Other limited east-west collectors that carry local traffic include Leadora
Avenue, Bennett Avenue, and Ada Avenue.
3.1.2 Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program (LA CMP)
The I-210 Freeway and a portion of the I-210 / SR-57 interchange are the only routes in the City of
Glendora designated in the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program (LA CMP). Since
no CMP arterials are designated in Glendora, there are no intersections in Glendora designated as
CMP monitoring intersections.
3.1.3 Roadway Functional Classification System
The City of Glendora circulation system consists of a network of local neighborhood streets providing
access to the arterial street system, which in turn provide access to the regional freeway system. This
network serves two distinct and equally important functions: it provides access to adjacent land uses,
and it facilitates the movement of persons and goods to and from, within and through the City. The
design and operation of each street is determined by the importance placed on each of these functions.
Streets that have a mobility and/or regional access function will have more lanes, higher speed limits
and fewer driveways. Where access to properties is required, streets will have fewer lanes, lower
speeds, parking, and more frequent driveways to serve abutting properties.
To define the intended uses of roadways, many jurisdictions, including Glendora, use a functional
classification system. The system provides a logical framework for the design and operation of the
roadway system and helps residents and elected officials identify preferred characteristics of each
street.
	  !      "##$ 	
 
%  & *
&
Collector, and Local. Descriptions of these four categories are provided below.
Freeway + A freeway is a controlled-access, high-speed facility with anywhere from six to ten lanes,
plus auxiliary and merge lanes. The I-210 Freeway is the only freeway through the City, with eight
lanes (four lanes in each direction) carrying up to 150,000 vehicles per day.
Arterial + The primary function of an arterial is to provide for regional, sub-regional, and inter-city
travel, carrying approximately 12,000 to 50,000 vehicles per day. Arterials generally consist of four to
six travel lanes (two to three in each direction) with the optimal right-of-way width of 100 feet and a
curb-to-curb width of 84 feet. Speed limits range from 35 to 55 miles per hour.
Collector + Collectors are designed to carry traffic between local streets and the arterial roadway
network. This category of roadway generally consists of two to four travel lanes (one to two in each
direction) with the optimal right-of-way width of 60 to 80 feet with a curb-to-curb width of 40 feet.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                         ‫ځ‬3‫ڋ‬                                    Circulation Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Collectors typically carry approximately 12,000 vehicles per day. Posted speed limits range from 25
to 40 miles per hour.
Local + Local streets are designed to provide direct access to individual properties not served by
arterial and collector roadways. Local streets include roadways not classified as arterials or collectors.
A Local street generally consists of two travel lanes (one in each direction) with parking permitted on
one or both sides. Local streets generally have a right-of-way width of 50 feet and a curb-to-curb
width of 36 feet. Posted speed limits range from 25 to 30 miles per hour.
The existing functional classifications for the roadways in the City of Glendora, as currently designated
	

&
Table CIR-1, Existing Roadway Classifications, and are
depicted on Exhibit CIR-1, Existing Roadway Classifications. The number of existing lanes for each
roadway is also shown on Table CIR-1 and is shown on Exhibit CIR-2, Existing Roadway Lanes.
The City of Glendora street cross-sections for the various roadway types, which are provided on the
9<!9&9
"=>&Exhibit CIR-3, Standard
Street Sections. It is noted that the designations described in the Circulation Element are not consistent
with the Standard Plan cross-sections, as shown on the following chart.
                Circulation Element                            Standard Plan Specification
    Designation                Description              Designation               Specification
 Arterial                        "==?@            Major                          "==?@
                             JK	-to-curb                                    JK	-to-curb
                           4 to 6 lanes, divided                                 6 lanes, divided
 Collector                    60 +J=?@           Secondary                    J=+JK?@
                             K=	-to-curb                                    QK	-to-curb
                                2 to 4 lanes                                    4 lanes undivided
 Local Street                     X=?@            Collector                       Q=?@
                             YQ	-to-curb        (Local Residential)         K=	-to-curb
                                   2 lanes                                            2 lanes
                                                     Local + Residential             X=?@
                                                     (24 Lots or Less)           YQ	-to-curb
                                                                                      2 lanes
 R/W = right-of way
 [
Glendora Community Plan 2025                        ‫ځ‬4‫ڋ‬                                   Circulation Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                                Table CIR-1
                                     Existing Roadway Classifications
                                                                     Existing         Existing
                               Arterial
                                                                   Classification      Lanes
                                          East - West Roadways
   Sierra Madre Avenue                                               Collector         2 lanes
   Leadora Avenue                                                    Collector         2 lanes
   Comstock Ave: Loraine Avenue to Valley Center                     Collector         2 lanes
   Bennett Avenue                                                    Collector         2 lanes
   Foothill Boulevard: Citrus Avenue to Glendora                     Collector     4-lane divided
   Foothill Boulevard: east of Glendora Street                       Collector         2 lanes
   Ada Avenue                                                        Collector         2 lanes
   Route 66                                                           Arterial     4-lane divided
   Auto Centre Drive                                                 Collector     4-lane divided
   Gladstone Street                                                  Collector     4-lane divided
   Baseline Avenue                                                   Collector     4-lane divided
   Arrow Highway                                                      Arterial     4-lane divided
                                         North - South Roadways
   Citrus Avenue: Foothill to Sierra Madre                            Arterial    4-lane undivided
   Barranca Avenue: north of Leadora Avenue                          Collector         2 lanes
   Barranca Avenue: south of Leadora Avenue                          Collector    4-lane undivided
   Grand Avenue: north of Sierra Madre Avenue                         Arterial         2 lanes
   Grand Avenue: Sierra Madre Avenue to Gladstone                     Arterial     4-lane divided
   Grand Avenue: south of Gladstone                                   Arterial     4-lane divided
   Glendora Avenue: Sierra Madre Avenue to Ada Avenue                Collector         2 lanes
   Glendora Avenue: Ada Avenue to Arrow Highway                      Collector     4-lane divided
   Cullen Avenue                                                     Collector         2 lanes
   Bonnie Cove Avenue                                                Collector         2 lanes
   Live Oak Avenue                                                   Collector         2 lanes
   Sunflower Avenue                                                  Collector     4-lane divided
   Elwood Avenue                                                     Collector         2 lanes
   Loraine Avenue                                                    Collector     4-lane divided
   Valley Center Avenue                                              Collector         2 lanes
   Lone Hill Avenue: north of Route 66                               Collector         2 lanes
   Lone Hill Avenue: Route 66 to Gladstone                            Arterial     4-lane divided
   Lone Hill Avenue: south of Gladstone                               Arterial     4-lane divided
   Amelia Avenue: north of Route 66                                  Collector         2 lanes
   Amelia Avenue: south of Route 66                                  Collector     4-lane divided Pu
Glendora Community Plan 2025                        ‫ځ‬5‫ڋ‬                               Circulation Element

                Source: Kimley-Horn Associates, Inc.; June 2007.
                                                                              CHAPTER 3 • CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                               GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Exhibit CIR-1
                               06/07 • JN 10-102317
                                                                   Existing Roadway Classifications

                Source: Kimley-Horn Associates, Inc.; June 2007.
                                                                      CHAPTER 3 • CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                       GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Exhibit CIR-2
                               06/07 • JN 10-102317
                                                                   Existing Roadway Lanes

Source: Kimley-Horn Associates, Inc.; June 2007.
                                                          CHAPTER 4 • NOISE ELEMENT
                                                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
               06/07 • JN 10-102317
                                                 Standard Street Sections
                                                                        Exhibit CIR-3

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
3.1.4 Public Transportation Services
The City of Glendora is well served by public transit systems. The Foothill Transit and the Glendora
Mini-Bus both operate routes that extend into or through the City of Glendora. Local lines include
service to Citrus College, four regional shopping centers, and the main bus terminal in El Monte.
Limited express service is available weekdays to Cal State Los Angeles, the University of Southern
California, and Downtown Los Angeles from El Monte. Bus lines travel down multiple streets such as
Arrow Highway, Route 66, Grand Avenue, Lone Hill Avenue, Foothill Boulevard, and Sierra Madre
Avenue.
Exhibit CIR-4, Public Transportation Services, illustrates the bus routes that run through the City of
Glendora. A brief description of each of the transit services in the City of Glendora is provided below.
Foothill Transit Authority
Foothill Transit (FTA) operates several routes in the City of Glendora.
      f  Route 187 is operated between Claremont and Pasadena, serving Glendora via Foothill
          Boulevard and Route 66 en route. Service is provided every day with a frequency of one bus
          every twenty minutes in each direction, except that the frequency is decreased to one bus
          every one-half hour during the weekends and holidays.
      f  Route 189 is operated between Claremont and Glendora, generally traveling along Foothill
          Boulevard, Gladstone Street, and Glendora Avenue. Service is provided Monday through
          Friday with a frequency of about one bus per hour in each direction.
      f  Route 281 is operated between the Puente Hills Mall and Glendora, serving Glendora via
          Citrus Avenue, Foothill Boulevard, Barranca Avenue, and Route 66. Service is provided
          every day with a frequency of generally one bus every one-half hour in each direction, except
          that the frequency is decreased to one bus per hour during the weekends and holidays.
      f  Route 284 is operated between the Plaza at West Covina and Glendora, traveling along Lone
          Hill Avenue, Foothill Boulevard, and Glendora Avenue in the City of Glendora. Service is
          provided every day with a frequency of generally one bus per hour in each direction.
      f  Route 488 is operated between the El Monte Transit Station and Glendora, serving Glendora
          via Grand Avenue, and Foothill Boulevard. Service is provided every day with a frequency of
          generally one bus per hour in each direction, except that the frequency is increased to one bus
          every one-half hour during the weekday peak periods.
      f  Route 492 is operated between Downtown Los Angeles and the Montclair Transit Center,
          traveling along Arrow Highway at the southern end of the City. Service is provided every
          day with a frequency of generally one bus every one-half hour in each direction, except that
          the frequency is decreased to one bus per hour during the weekends and holidays.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ‫ځ‬9‫ڋ‬                                   Circulation Element

                Source: Kimley-Horn Associates, Inc.; June 2007.
                                                                            CHAPTER 3 • CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                             GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Exhibit CIR-4
                               06/07 • JN 10-102317
                                                                   Public Transportation Services

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
       f  Route 494 is operated between the El Monte Transit Station and the San Dimas Park and
           Ride Center, traveling along Lone Hill Avenue, Foothill Boulevard, and Citrus Avenue in
           the City of Glendora. Service is provided Monday through Friday with a frequency of about
           one bus every one-half hour in each direction.
      f  Route 498 is operated between Downtown Los Angeles and the Citrus College Park and
          Ride, serving Glendora via Grand Avenue and Foothill Boulevard. Service is provided
          Monday through Friday with a frequency of generally one bus every one-half hour in each
          direction, except that the frequency is increased to one bus every ten minutes during the
          weekday peak period.
      f  Route 690 is operated between Downtown Pasadena and the Montclair Transit Center,
          traveling along Baseline Road through the City of Glendora. Service is provided every day
          with a frequency of generally one bus every one-half hour in each direction.
      f  Route 851 is operated between Eastland Center in West Covina, serving Glendora via
          Glendora Avenue, Arrow Highway, Sunflower Avenue, Gladstone Street, Sierra Madre
          Avenue, and Valley Center. Service is provided Monday through Friday with a frequency of
          generally one bus per hour in each direction, except that the frequency is increased to one bus
          every one-half hour during the weekday peak period.
*OHQGRUD·V0LQL-Bus

 -bus offers curb-to-curb transportation services for senior citizens and permanently
disabled persons of Glendora. The bus operates Monday through Friday from 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM,
Saturday and Sunday from 9:00 AM to 2:00 PM. The cost is 50 cents each way. The service transfers
riders to the Pomona Valley Transit Station at the Lone Hill Shopping Center, the Metro Link Station
in Covina, and also to the Azusa Transit system at the Citrus College Center.
3.1.5 Bicycle Facilities
Bicycle routes are provided on a number of roadways within the City of Glendora. For east-west
travel, Class III bike routes (signed routes) are provided on portions of Sierra Madre Avenue, Leadora
Avenue, Bennett Avenue, Foothill Boulevard, Mauna Loa Avenue, and Gladstone Avenue. For north-
south travel, bike routes are provided on portions of Grand Avenue, Glendora Avenue, Pasadena
Avenue, Live Oak Avenue, Loraine Avenue, Valley Center Avenue, and Lone Hill Avenue. The
existing bikeways in Glendora are illustrated on Exhibit CIR-5, Bikeways.
The bikeway system is intended to provide bicyclists with connections between neighborhoods, parks,
schools, and other neighborhood and recreational facilities. Foothill Transit provides bike racks on all
buses, to improve mobility and provide the bicycle rider with travel mode options for longer trips.
?!  ! 
 	!    and open space system also provide residents with
recreational biking opportunities.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                          ‫ ځ‬11 ‫ڋ‬                              Circulation Element

                Source: Kimley-Horn Associates, Inc.; June 2007.
                                                                   CHAPTER 3 • CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Exhibit CIR-5
                               06/07 • JN 10-102317
                                                                                   Bikeways

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
The City of Glendora plans to upgrade the existing bicycle system to encourage and facilitate
alternative travel modes, which will also benefit air quality. The City will adopt a City Policy for
Bicycle and Mopeds, which will include lane striping, signing, and control devices, in accordance with
9!	
*




]

age.
The plan considers construction of Class I (off-road facility) along Foothill Boulevard to provide access
to Citrus Community College, Azusa Pacific University, and the proposed Gold Line Station.
3.1.6 Truck Routes
The City of Glendora has designated selected roadways as truck routes to provide for the regulated
movement of trucks through the City. The designated truck routes in Glendora are illustrated on
Exhibit CIR-6, Truck Routes. The designation of truck routes is intended to direct truck traffic to those
streets where it would cause the least amount of neighborhood intrusion and where noise, vibration,
and other factors would have the least impact. Primary arterials and roadways providing access to the
freeways are the most likely candidates for truck route designation. The designation of truck routes
does not prevent trucks from using other roads or streets needed to make deliveries to specified
destinations, or for other reasons, as defined in the Motor Vehicle Code of the State of California.
3.1.7 Rail
Proposed Foothill Extension of Metro Gold Line
The Foothill Extension of the Metro Gold Line is proposed to follow an alignment from its current
terminus in Pasadena to its proposed eastern terminus in the City of Montclair, passing through many
Foothill cities, including Glendora. The Gold Line extension project will be completed in phases.
Glendora is in Phase II, which is projected to open in 2014. The Draft Environmental Impact Report
(DEIR) for the Gold Line extension was released in 2004, and the release of the Final EIR is pending.
Service is planned to be offered from approximately 4:30 AM to 12:30 AM seven days a week. The
trains will stop at stations every 10 minutes during the rush hours (6 per hour), and every 20 minutes
during off-peak hours (3 per hour). A station is proposed to be located approximately 180 feet east of
] *	& ^	 	     ]

!  ! 

  
   
center platform station from the east or west end. The Gold Line DEIR identifies a need for 400
parking spaces at the Glendora station.
Gold Line passengers will be able to connect with the Metro Red Line at Union Station in Downtown
Los Angeles, which will also allow passengers to connect with the Metro Blue Line (Long Beach) and
the Metro Green Line (Pasadena).
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ‫ ځ‬13 ‫ڋ‬                                    Circulation Element

                Source: Kimley-Horn Associates, Inc.; June 2007.
                                                                   CHAPTER 3 • CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Exhibit CIR-6                  06/07 • JN 10-102317
                                                                              Truck Routes

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Existing At-Grade Rail Crossings
There are currently eight at-grade rail crossings of the existing rail line in the City of Glendora. To
improve traffic safety once the number of train movements through these intersections increase, the
Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (LACMTA or MTA) has adopted a Grade
Crossing Safety Improvement Program, which includes a four-gate crossing (two gates in each
direction) at accident-prone locations, to reduce the incidence of drivers attempting to drive around
single-arm gates; increased manned enforcement details, and photo enforcement at the at-grade
crossings. The City will work with MTA to advocate grade-separated rail crossing for safety and to
reduce congestion at the diagonal Grand/Foothill intersection crossing, and other key locations.
3.2 ANALYSIS OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
3.2.1 Level of Service Definition for Intersections
Intersections are analyzed using the Intersection Capacity Utilization (ICU) methodology as specified
by the Los Angeles CMP. The ICU methodology uses peak hourly traffic volumes and lane capacities
to calculate a volume-to-capacity ratio (V/C ratio) for each turning movement on each approach. A
capacity of 1,600 vehicles per lane per hour through signalized intersections is assumed, with a 10
percent clearance factor to account for the effect of yellow and red phases in each signal cycle. Critical
movements are then identified and an ICU value determined based on a summation of the critical V/C
ratios. The ICU methodology provides a comparison of intersection volumes to the intersection
capacity and the results are then related to LOS values, ranging from "A" to "F," according to the
following chart.
                                     Intersection Level of Service
                                   and Corresponding ICU Values
                                                        Intersection Capacity
                          Level of Service                 Utilization (ICU)
                                  A                           0.00 + 0.60
                                  B                           0.61 + 0.70
                                  C                           0.71 + 0.80
                                  D                           0.81 + 0.90
                                  E                           0.91 + 1.00
                                  F                        Greater than 1.00
Level of Service (LOS) terms are used to qualitatively describe prevailing conditions and their effect on
traffic. Broadly interpreted, the LOS concept denotes any one of a number of differing combinations
of operating conditions that may take place as a roadway is accommodating various traffic volumes.
The LOS is related to the volume-to-capacity ratio (V/C). To determine the V/C ratio, the average
daily traffic volume on a particular roadway link is divided by the link capacity. There are six defined
Levels of Service&`{9|*}	!|}!!|
}|}
defined in the chart on the following page.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ‫ ځ‬15 ‫ڋ‬                                Circulation Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                      Level of Service Descriptions
   Level                                                                                        Range of
    of                                 Description of Operation                               V/C Ratios
  Service
     A       Low volumes; high speeds; speed not restricted by other vehicles; all signal 0.00 - 0.60
             cycles clear with no vehicles waiting through more than one signal cycle.
             Operating speeds begin to be affected by other vehicles; between one and
     B       ten percent of the signal cycles have one or more vehicles which wait            0.61 - 0.70
             through more than one signal cycle during peak traffic periods.
             Operating speeds and maneuverability closely controlled by other traffic
     C       between 11 and 30 percent of the signal cycles have one or more vehicles         0.71 - 0.80
             which wait through more than one signal cycle during peak traffic periods:
             recommended ideal design standard.
             Tolerable operating speeds; 31 to 70 percent of the signal cycles have one
    D        or more vehicles which wait through more than one signal cycle during            0.81 - 0.90
             peak traffic periods; often used as design standard in urban areas.
             Capacity; the maximum traffic volumes an intersection can accommodate;
     E       restricted speeds; 71 to 100 percent of the signal cycles have one or more       0.91 - 1.00
             vehicles which wait through more than one signal cycle during peak traffic
             periods.
             Long queues of traffic; unstable flow; stoppages of long duration; traffic
     F       volumes and traffic speed can drop to zero; traffic volumes will be less than    > 1.00
             the volume which occurs at Level of Service E.
As shown on this chart, traffic conditions are best when the daily traffic volumes are less than 60 or 70
percent of the theoretical capacity of the intersection, while extreme congestion and delays can be
expected when the daily traffic volumes approach or exceed 100 percent of the intersection capacity.
3.2.2 Level of Service Standard
As of the last General Plan update in 1992), Objective 1 of Goal 1 of the Circulation Element stated
`
9`
9|}
roads and intersections. In December, 2003, in conjunction with the processing of the General Plan
Amendment for the Route 66 Specific Plan, the City amended the Circulation Element to establish
`
9`{9|<}
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ‫ ځ‬16 ‫ڋ‬                                Circulation Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
3.2.3 Peak Hour Intersection Analysis
Twenty intersections were selected for analysis of existing traffic conditions as well as future traffic
conditions that would be anticipated when General Plan land uses would be built out. The selection
of the 20 intersections was based on which intersections are currently carrying high peak hour
volumes, such as those near activity centers and freeway interchanges, as well as those near vacant or
underutilized parcels where development could occur and traffic growth might be anticipated. The 20
intersections selected for analysis are:
    1.      Sierra Madre Avenue at Loraine Avenue
    2.      Bennett Avenue at Grand Avenue
    3.      Foothill Boulevard at Grand Avenue
    4.      Foothill Boulevard at Loraine Avenue
    5.      Foothill Boulevard at Valley Center Avenue
    6.      Route 66 at Barranca Avenue
    7.      Route 66 at Grand Avenue
    8.      Route 66 at Glendora Avenue
    9.      Route 66 at Loraine Avenue
    10.     Route 66 at Compromise Line Road
    11.     Route 66 at Lone Hill Avenue
    12.     Route 66 at Amelia Avenue
    13.     Baseline Road at Grand Avenue
    14.     Baseline Road at Glendora Avenue
    15.     Gladstone Street at Grand Avenue
    16.     Gladstone Street at Glendora Avenue
    17.     Gladstone Street at Sunflower Avenue
    18.     Gladstone Street at Lone Hill Avenue
    19.     Auto Centre Drive at Lone Hill Avenue
    20.     Marketplace (entrance) at Lone Hill Avenue
3.2.4 Intersection Capacity Analysis
Existing lane configurations and traffic control at the study intersections are shown on Exhibit CIR-7,
Existing Lane Configurations and Traffic Control. Morning and evening peak hour traffic counts were
conducted at the 20 intersections in March 20061, and are depicted on Exhibit CIR-8, Existing Peak
Hour Traffic Volumes. The peak hours are the highest volume hour within the morning peak period
(7:00 - 9:00 AM) and the evening peak period (4:00 - 7:00 PM). Copies of the traffic count data
sheets are provided in Appendix A. ICU analyses were conducted to evaluate the existing operating
conditions of the 20 intersections. The resulting ICU values and the corresponding LOS are
summarized in Table CIR-2, Existing Conditions Peak Hour Intersection Operation. Intersection analysis
worksheets for existing conditions are provided in Appendix B.
1
  Traffic counts were conducted on Tuesday through Thursday during the week of March 21, 2006.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                          ‫ ځ‬17 ‫ڋ‬                                   Circulation Element

                Source: Kimley-Horn Associates, Inc.; June 2007.
                                                                                              CHAPTER 3 • CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                                               GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Exhibit CIR-7
                               06/07 • JN 10-102317
                                                                   Existing Lane Configurations and Traffic Control

                Source: Kimley-Horn Associates, Inc.; June 2007.
                                                                                CHAPTER 3 • CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                                 GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Exhibit CIR-8
                               06/07 • JN 10-102317
                                                                   Existing Peak Hour Traffic Volumes

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
&

		
!`{9|<}
	!	
!`{9|}

%
     f   Route 66 and Lone Hill Avenue (AM Peak Hour)
     f   Gladstone Street and Lone Hill Avenue (PM Peak Hour)
Needed improvements to achieve acceptable Level of Service at these two intersections will be
discussed in the following section.
                                             Table CIR-2
                       Existing Conditions Peak Hour Intersection Operation
                                                          AM Peak Hour            PM Peak Hour
                Signalized Intersection                   ICU         LOS        ICU         LOS
   Sierra Madre Ave / Loraine Ave                         0.471        A         0.318          A
   Bennett Ave / Grand Ave                                0.494        A         0.475          A
   Foothill Blvd / Grand Ave                              0.602        B         0.898          D
   Foothill Blvd / Loraine Ave                            0.725        C         0.545          A
   Foothill Blvd / Valley Center Drive                    0.785        C         0.582          A
   Route 66 / Barramca Ave                                0.704        C         0.748          C
   Route 66 / Grand Ave                                   0.785        C         0.779          C
   Route 66 / Glendora Ave                                0.777        C         0.867          D
   Route 66 / Loraine Ave                                 0.784        C         0.568          A
   Route 66 / Compromise Line Road                        0.789        C         0.622          B
   Route 66 / Lone Hill Ave                               0.922        E         0.886          D
   Route 66 / Amelia Ave                                  0.677        B         0.745          C
   Baseline Rd / Grand Ave                                0.716        C         0.825          D
   Baseline Rd / Glendora Ave                             0.523        A         0.578          A
   Glastone St / Grand Ave                                0.894        D         0.837          D
   Gladstone St / Glendora Ave                            0.626        B         0.661          B
   Gladstone St / Sunflower Ave                           0.503        A         0.507          A
   Gladstone St / Lone Hill Ave                           0.557        A         0.946          E
   Auto Centre / Lone Hill Ave                            0.524        A         0.871          D
   Marketplace / Lone Hill Ave                            0.371        A         0.511          A
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ‫ ځ‬20 ‫ڋ‬                                Circulation Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
4.0 GENERAL PLAN BUILDOUT TRAFFIC CONDITIONS
This element addresses forecasted traffic conditions upon buildout of the City of Glendora. Buildout
traffic conditions include not only the future growth in traffic that will result from development of
vacant and under-utilized parcels within the City, but also growth in traffic from neighboring cities,
and area-wide traffic that passes through the Glendora. Because of its location, situated just north of
the I-210 Freeway, and positioned between downtown Los Angeles and several other San Gabriel
Valley cities to the west and the County of San Bernardino to the east, the City of Glendora streets
!-west travel demand on its arterial streets.
As the region continues to grow, and regional transportation facilities (most specifically the I-210 in
the case of Glendora) become more congested, the effect of regional traffic on city streets will continue
to be felt. The County of Los Angeles Congestion Management Program (CMP) forecasts a 14.76
percent increase in traffic volumes in the San Gabriel Valley area by the Year 2025. While some of
this growth within the City of Glendora is accounted for by the buildout of its vacant and
underutilized parcels city-wide, a portion of this also represents growth in through traffic particularly
in the east-west direction. The analysis for the update of the City of Glendora Circulation Element
includes not only the future traffic associa 	
	    
 	& 	   
traffic growth throughout the region, as well.
4.1 METHODOLOGY
Analysis of projected traffic conditions at buildout of the City was conducted to determine whether or
 	
 		
	
plan. Buildout assumes that each vacant or underutilized parcel in the City will buildout to its full
General Plan potential. If roadway or intersection deficiencies are projected to occur as a result of
buildout of General Plan land uses, then improvements needed to accommodate future traffic volumes
will be identified.
The methodology for evaluating future traffic volumes on the roadway segments and at intersections
in Glendora is based on the following major premises:
      f  The Circulation Element must be consistent with all other Elements of the General Plan,
          especially the Land Use Element, such that there is a good balance between the
          transportation capacity to be provided and the travel demand to be generated by the
          buildout land uses.
      f  The effects of increased traffic in Glendora due to growth and development in neighboring
          		
|	!}	!&
          its presence must be recognized so that the Circulation Element can be responsive.
      f  		

!
	
	!&
          assumed to be the buildout network for the buildout analysis. If improvements to the
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ‫ ځ‬21 ‫ڋ‬                                    Circulation Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
          roadway system or intersections are needed to accommodate General Plan Buildout, these
          will be recommended as mitigation measures.
      f  The traffic for development in Glendora on vacant or underutilized parcels was estimated
          and added to the background future traffic volumes. Further details are presented in the
          following paragraphs.
4.2 FUTURE LAND USE TRIP GENERATION
While the City of Glendora is generally developed, parcels throughout the city are still vacant, or are
underdeveloped and have the potential for further development. The Land Use Element of the
General Plan quantifies the potential development on these underutilized and vacant parcels. The
remaining potential development on these parcels of interest in Glendora is estimated to consist of
3,066 dwelling units and approximately 2.23 million square feet of development. This total includes
the proposed land uses planned for the Route 66 Specific Plan area.
For the analysis of future traffic conditions, each parcel was identified in terms of its potential future
land use, including the land use type (residential, retail, office, industrial, etc.) and the quantity of
those land uses (dwelling units, thousand square feet, etc.). The number of trips that would be
generated by the potential development was calculated and is summarized in Appendix C to this
report. In total, the buildout land uses have the potential to generate approximately 3,500 new trips
in the morning peak hour, and approximately 8,300 trips in the evening peak hour.
The traffic analysis is intended to provide an evaluation of the traffic impacts associated with buildout
   ! 
 	&  	   `  
  	
	 
 	
information was based on existing and General Plan land use data provided by the City and compiled
parcel by parcel by RBF Consulting. All vacant and underutilized parcels were accounted for in the
future land use database, including major approved and pending projects, such as the Route 66
Specific Plan and the Diamond Ridge Marketplace.
Buildout land uses were grouped by Traffic Analysis Zone (TAZ) as shown in Appendix C. The
distribution assumptions for each TAZ include a combination of assignments to multiple destinations
within the city and destinations external to the city. A detailed printout of the distribution
assumptions for each TAZ is provided in Appendix C.
4.3 BUILDOUT TRAFFIC PROJECTIONS
The additional trips that would be generated by the proposed developments were estimated and
distributed on the surrounding road network as described earlier in the report. Interaction between
complementary land uses within the city, and pass-by assumptions were taken into account in the
distribution and assignment of traffic. The buildout traffic estimates for the study intersections are
presented in Exhibit CIR-9, Buildout Peak Hour Traffic Volumes.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ‫ ځ‬22 ‫ڋ‬                                Circulation Element

                Source: Kimley-Horn Associates, Inc.; June 2007.
                                                                                 CHAPTER 3 • CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                                  GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Exhibit CIR-9
                               06/07 • JN 10-102317
                                                                   Buildout Peak Hour Traffic Volumes

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
4.4 BUILDOUT TRAFFIC CONDITIONS AT INTERSECTIONS
The ICU analysis was conducted for buildout conditions, and the Level of Service was determined for
each of the 20 study intersections, and the results are presented in Table CIR-3, Buildout Conditions
Park Hour Intersection Operation. The data in Table CIR-3 indicates that 12 of the 20 intersections

 	
   `{9 |<} or better under buildout conditions. The following eight
	
`{9|}`{9|}
      f  

	
*	`{9|}	
      f  ?	QQ*	`{9|}	
      f Route 66 and Glendora A	`{9|}	
      f ?	 QQ ` 

 *	 `{9 |}   *  	  `{9 |}   
          Peak Hour)
      f 
?*	`{9|}	
      f 
9*	`{9|}*	
      f Gla9`

*	`{9|}	
      f *	`

*	`{9|}	
4.5 RECOMMENDED MITIGATION MEASURES
	
	    

 	
    `
  9 |}  |}  eight study
intersections. Some of these deficiencies were identified previously in traffic studies for other approved
and pending projects, such as the Route 66 Specific Plan and Diamond Ridge Marketplace. Wherever
possible, mitigation measures identified here are consistent with mitigation measures for approved and
! ^      	
  `
  9 |<} 	
buildout conditions at the eight impacted intersections. Wherever possible, the improvements will be
achieved by re-striping and/or re-assigning lanes at intersections to minimize construction impacts on
adjacent properties. These improvements are:
      f  Foothill Boulevard and Grand Avenue: The addition of a second westbound left-turn lane
          would improve `
9`{9|}`{9|}
      f  Route 66 and Grand Avenue: The addition of a third eastbound through lane would
          `
9`{9|}`{9|<}?	QQ9
          Plan Traffic Study). An alternative improvement for this intersection would be the
          conversion of the southbound exclusive right-turn lane to a shared through-right-turn lane.
          Either of these improvements can be achieved within the existing paved travelway.
      f  Route 66 and Glendora Avenue: The addition of a second westbound left-turn lane would
          `
9`{9|}`{9|<}
Glendora Community Plan 2025                            ‫ ځ‬24 ‫ڋ‬                                     Circulation Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
      f   Route 66 and Lone Hill Avenue: The conversion of the southbound exclusive right-turn
           lane to a shared through-right-turn lane would improve the Lev
9`{9|}
           `{9 |}   
        `{9 |<}
           would require right-of-way take and would impact the businesses on the southwest and
           northwest corners of the intersection.
      f   Baseline Road and Grand Avenue: The addition of a second westbound right-turn lane
           	


`{9|}`{9|<}	


           to accommodate the very high westbound right-turn demand coming from the freeway off-
           ramp. However, it may require right-of-way take on the north side of the street to achieve
           this improvement. An alternative improvement for this intersection would be the conversion
           of the southbound exclusive right-turn lane to a shared through-right-turn lane. This
           improvement can be achieved within the existing paved travelway on Grand Avenue.
      f   Gladstone Street and Grand Avenue: The addition of a third southbound through lane
           	
   

    `{9 |}  `{9 |<}     
           achieved within the existing paved travelway on Grand Avenue.
      f   Gladstone Street and Lone Hill Avenue: The addition of a third northbound through lane
              		 	!
 	
   

    `{9 |} 
           `{9|}
      f   Auto Centre and Lone Hill Avenue: the addition of a second westbound right-turn lane
           	


`{9|}`{9|<}
These recommended intersection improvements are depicted on Exhibit CIR-10, Recommended
Intersection Improvements. A summary of the buildout ICU and Level of Service values with the
recommended mitigation measures are presented in Table CIR-4, Buildout Conditions Peak House
Intersection Operation Before and After Recommended Mitigation. Intersection analysis worksheets for
buildout with mitigation conditions are provided in Appendix B.
5.0 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CIRCULATION PLAN
Buildout of the city entails the potential development of 3,066 new dwelling units and approximately
2.23 million square feet of development on vacant and underutilized parcels in Glendora. This total
includes the proposed land uses planned for the Route 66 Specific Plan area. This development is
estimated to generate over 100,000 new daily trips, with approximately 3,500 new trips in the
morning peak hour, and approximately 8,300 trips in the evening peak hour.
With buildout of the City, increased traffic volumes will occur throughout the City, with deficient
`
9|}|}!	
Glendora Community Plan 2025                           ‫ ځ‬25 ‫ڋ‬                                  Circulation Element

                 Source: Kimley-Horn Associates, Inc.; June 2007.
                                                                                      CHAPTER 3 • CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                                       GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Exhibit CIR-10
                                06/07 • JN 10-102317
                                                                    Recommended Intersection Improvements

                  GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                          Table CIR-3
                     Buildout Conditions Peak Hour Intersection Operation ²
                                                      AM Peak Hour         PM Peak Hour
                 Signalized Intersection              ICU       LOS       ICU          LOS
    Sierra Madre Ave / Loraine Ave                    0.513      A        0.369         A
    Bennett Ave / Grand Ave                           0.529      A        0.527         A
    Foothill Blvd / Grand Ave                         0.630      B        0.958          E
    Foothill Blvd / Loraine Ave                       0.762      C        0.598         A
    Foothill Blvd / Valley Center Drive               0.856      D        0.674         B
    Route 66 / Barramca Ave                           0.749      C        0.864         D
    Route 66 / Grand Ave                              0.837      D        0.913          E
    Route 66 / Glendora Ave                           0.824      D        0.970          E
    Route 66 / Loraine Ave                            0.810      D        0.635         B
    Route 66 / Compromise Line Road                   0.826      D        0.768         C
    Route 66 / Lone Hill Ave                          0.995      E        1.005          F
    Route 66 / Amelia Ave                             0.690      B        0.791         C
    Baseline Rd / Grand Ave                           0.774      C        1.008          F
    Baseline Rd / Glendora Ave                        0.569      A        0.668         B
    Glastone St / Grand Ave                           0.919      E        0.897         D
    Gladstone St / Glendora Ave                       0.670      B        0.753         C
    Gladstone St / Sunflower Ave                      0.532      A        0.623         B
    Gladstone St / Lone Hill Ave                      0.602      B        1.002          F
    Auto Centre / Lone Hill Ave                       0.515      A        0.973          E
    Marketplace / Lone Hill Ave                       0.421      A        0.607         B
Glendora Community Plan 2025                 ‫ ځ‬27 ‫ڋ‬                           Circulation Element

                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                                    Table CIR-4
                         Buildout Conditions Peak Hour Intersection Operation
                                 Before and After Recommended Mitigation
                                                                            AM Peak Hour  PM Peak Hour
                            Signalized Intersection                         ICU     LOS   ICU        LOS
  Foothill Blvd / Grand Ave                                                 0.630    B   0.958         E
     With Mitigation: Add WB Left Turn Lane                                 0.592    A   0.792         C
  Route 66 / Grand Ave                                                      0.837    D   0.913         E
     With Mitigation 1: Add EB Through Lane                                 0.837    D   0.894         D
     With Mitigation 2: Convert SB Right Turn to SB Through-Right Turn Lane 0.783    C   0.846         D
  Route 66 / Glendora Ave                                                   0.824    D   0.970         E
     With Mitigation: Add WB Left Turn Lane                                 0.824    D   0.877         D
  Route 66 / Lone Hill Ave                                                  0.995     E  1.005         F
     With Mitigation 1: Convert SB Right Turn to SB Through-Right Turn Lane 0.937     E  0.936         E
     With Mitigation 2: Add EB Left Turn, SB Through, and EB Through Lane   0.871    D   0.898         D
  Baseline Rd / Grand Ave                                                   0.774    C   1.008         F
     With Mitigation 1: Add WB Right Turn Lane                              0.774    C   0.876         D
     With Mitigation 2: Convert SB Right Turn to SB Through-Right Turn Lane 0.694    B   0.884         D
  Glastone St / Grand Ave                                                   0.919     E  0.897         D
     With Mitigation: Add SB Through Lane                                   0.825    D   0.897         D
  Gladstone St / Lone Hill Ave                                              0.602    B   1.002         F
     With Mitigation: Add NB Through Lane and SB Through Lane               0.545    A   0.882         C
  Auto Centre / Lone Hill Ave                                               0.515    A   0.973         E
     With Mitigation: Add WB Right Turn Lane                                0.515    A   0.833         D
Glendora Community Plan 2025                             ‫ ځ‬28 ‫ڋ‬                          Circulation Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Recommendations for this Circulation Element to address future traffic conditions are presented
below.
     f   Improvements to mitigate the deficient peak hour conditions at study intersections have been
          presented in Section 4.5 of this Element.
     f   A funding or fee assessment mechanism, such as a traffic impact fee, or an improvement
          district, should be implemented to collect a portion of the costs to implement these
          improvements from new development.
     f   It is recommended that the roadway classifications in the Roadway Standards section of the
          Circulation Element be modified to be consistent with the newly adopted Standard Street
          99<!9&

%
             o Major + 84 feet of pavement within 100 feet of right-of-way (4 to 6 lanes divided)
             o Secondary + 64 feet of pavement within 80 to 84 feet of right-of-way (4 lanes)
             o Collector + 40 feet of pavement with 60 feet of right-of-way (2 lanes)
     f   !
&|*
}!	

          eliminated. It is recommended that all Arterial roadways currently built to the 100-foot
          right-of-way be classified as a Major, and that those currently built to less than the 100-foot
          right-of-way be classified as a Secondary.
     f   It is recommended that the Major classification allow for either Major-4 or Major-6 category,
          to account for those roadways built to the Major standard, but striped for only four lanes.
     f   It is recommended that the following roadway segments be improved to provide six travel
          lanes (three in each direction):
             o Grand Avenue between Route 66 and Gladstone Street
             o Lone Hill Avenue between Route 66 and Gladstone Street
     f   It is recommended the existing Collectors that are built to two lanes be classified as a
          Collector, and that those that are four lanes be classified as a Secondary.
These recommended changes are shown on Table CIR-5, Recommended Roadway Classifications, and are
depicted on Exhibit CIR-11, Recommended Roadway Classifications.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ‫ ځ‬29 ‫ڋ‬                                Circulation Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                               Table CIR-5²
                                 Recommended Roadway Classifications
                                                          Existing        Existing     Recommended
                       Arterial
                                                       Classification      Lanes        Classification
                                            East - West Roadways
  Sierra Madre Avenue                                     Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Leadora Avenue                                          Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Comstock Ave: Loraine Avenue to Valley Center           Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Bennett Avenue                                          Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Foothill Boulevard: Citrus Avenue to Glendora           Collector    4-lane divided     Secondary
  Foothill Boulevard: east of Glendora Street             Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Ada Avenue                                              Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Route 66                                                 Arterial    4-lane divided     Major - 4
  Auto Centre Drive                                       Collector    4-lane divided     Secondary
  Gladstone Street                                        Collector    4-lane divided     Secondary
  Baseline Avenue                                         Collector    4-lane divided     Secondary
  Arrow Highway                                            Arterial    4-lane divided     Major - 4
                                           North - South Roadways
  Citrus Avenue                                            Arterial   4-lane undivided    Secondary
  Barranca Avenue: north of Leadora Avenue                Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Barranca Avennue: south of Leadora Avenue               Collector   4-lane undivided    Secondary
  Grand Avenue: north of Sierra Madre Avenue               Arterial        2 lanes         Collector
  Grand Avenue: Sierra Madre Avenue to Route 66            Arterial    4-lane divided     Major - 4
  Grand Avenue: Route 66 to Gladstone                      Arterial    4-lane divided     Major - 6
  Grand Avenue: south of Gladstone                         Arterial    4-lane divided     Major - 4
  Glendora Avenue: Sierra Madre Ave to Ada Ave            Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Glendora Avenue: Ada Avenue to Arrow Highway            Collector    4-lane divided     Secondary
  Cullen Avenue                                           Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Bonnie Cove Avenue                                      Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Live Oak Avenue                                         Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Sunflower Avenue                                        Collector    4-lane divided     Secondary
  Elwood Avenue                                           Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Loraine Avenue                                          Collector    4-lane divided     Secondary
  Valley Center Avenue                                    Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Lone Hill Avenue: north of Route 66                     Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Lone Hill Avenue: Route 66 to Gladstone                  Arterial    4-lane divided     Major - 6
  Lone Hill Avenue: south of Gladstone                     Arterial    4-lane divided     Major - 4
  Amelia Avenue: north of Route 66                        Collector        2 lanes         Collector
  Amelia Avenue: south of Route 66                        Collector    4-lane divided     Secondary
Note: Recommended classification changes are shown in Bold Italics .
Glendora Community Plan 2025                        ‫ ځ‬30 ‫ڋ‬                             Circulation Element

                 Source: Kimley-Horn Associates, Inc.; June 2007.
                                                                                    CHAPTER 3 • CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Exhibit CIR-11
                                06/07 • JN 10-102317
                                                                    Recommended Roadway Classifications

6.0 PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS, GOALS,
        AND POLICIES
TRAFFIC SAFETY
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora understands that the safe and efficient
movement of vehicles and pedestrians contributes to overall community safety. Planning, design
and maintenance of existing and future transportation infrastructure should seek to enhance the
safety of vehicular traffic and pedestrians utilizing local roadways.
Goal           CIR-1            Safety for motorists and pedestrians on local roadways.
Policies       CIR-1.1          Determine appropriate design of local roadway system considering
                                all potential users including automobile, bicycle, and pedestrian
                                users.
               CIR-1.2          Based on traffic counts, add audible and “countdown” signals to
                                enhance pedestrian safety.
               CIR-1.3          Initiate public education programs that address the following
                                components:
                                f       Pedestrian rights, legal movements.
                                f       Location of bike lanes and routes.
                                f       Youth involvement/programs with Police (e.g. bike rodeos,
                                        etc.).
               CIR-1.4          Improve public directional and safety signage.
               CIR-1.5          Enforce speeds and traffic laws on all City streets.
               CIR-1.6          Employ traffic calming measures where appropriate to deter
                                speeding.
               CIR-1.7          Explore opportunities to fund sidewalk safety enhancements
                                through the Safe Routes to School program.
LOCAL COORDINATION OF LAND USE AND CIRCULATION PLANNING
Planning Consideration: Local land use planning significantly influences the safe and efficient
function of the local roadway system. The ability to adequately serve the transportation needs of
the community should be a primary consideration in all land use planning decisions so that
impacts of growth and development are reflected by appropriate improvements.
Goal           CIR-2            Coordinated transportation and land use planning.

Policies CIR-2.1  Ensure transportation planning is fully evaluated in the context of
                  future land use planning decisions.
         CIR-2.2  Ensure that the evaluation of potential transportation impacts is an
                  integral component of all land use decisions.
         CIR-2.3  Encourage the sharing of land use and transportation data between
                  the City and adjacent jurisdictions to ensure transportation impacts
                  are properly mitigated.
         CIR-2.4  Support Caltrans’ efforts to improve traffic flow on the I-210
                  freeway.
         CIR-2.5  Support the efforts of the MTA in providing alternative
                  transportation modes within Glendora that would compliment land
                  use planning efforts.
         CIR-2.6  Enhance business and directional signage.
         CIR-2.7  Explore better use of uninterrupted roadways (e.g., Gladstone and
                  Foothill).
         CIR-2.7  Create a funding or fee assessment mechanism, such as traffic
                  impact fee or improvement district, to implement roadway or
                  intersection improvements in the City or those necessary to support
                  new development or redevelopment.
         CIR-2.9  Incorporate the Gold Line Extension into the local planning
                  program.
         Program: Provide adequate station facilities that support and enhance
                  surrounding land uses.
         CIR-2.10 Plan for adequate bus service to meet Glendora’s future needs.
         Program: Work with Foothill Transit on new route development.
         Program: Develop a fixed route local shuttle service, using either public or
                  private franchises.
         Program: Enhance bus stop facilities with shaded seating areas, waste
                  receptacles and route information.
                                 Page 33

                CIR-2.12:      Ensure future development along existing railroad rights-of-way
                includes appropriate public dedications or public easements to include
                opportunities for additional open space, and/or pedestrian and bicycle pathways.
Goal            CIR-3          Infrastructure improvements coordinated with local growth.
Policies        CIR-3.1        Continue to update traffic count database every five years.
Planning Consideration: Design considerations that minimize the intrusion of traffic into local
neighborhoods and divert through traffic onto appropriate roadways should be encouraged.
Goal            CIR-4          Reduced transportation impacts in local neighborhoods.
Policies        CIR-4.1        Designate routes to regional commerce that have minimum impact
                               on schools and homes.
                CIR-4.2        Clearly designate and understand arterials versus neighborhood
                               streets.
                CIR-4.3        Provide alternative options for local travel.
                Program:       Provide opportunities for local shuttle/ jitney service.
                Program:       Implement a pedestrian and bikeway master plan.
REGIONAL COORDINATION
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora understands circulation impacts from local
planning decisions also affect the function and quality of circulation in adjacent jurisdictions.
Conversely, planning decisions of adjacent jurisdictions can affect the function and quality of the
circulation system within the City of Glendora. While the City of Glendora understands that it is
part of the regional transportation system, the City seeks to discourage the use of non-arterials as
major circulation routes and protect existing and future Glendora neighborhoods from unwanted
traffic intrusions.
Goal            CIR-5          Appropriate coordination of transportation planning with
adjacent jurisdictions.
Policies        CIR-5.1        Coordinate local and regional circulation planning with County
                               Congestion Management Plan.
                CIR-5.2        Continue to stay involved and aware of local jurisdiction
                               developments (e.g., Monrovia Nursery in Azusa).
                CIR-5.3        Coordinate signals on inter-city thoroughfares such as Grand
                               Avenue, Lone Hill, and Route 66.
                                              Page 34
                CIR-5.4         Support regional transportation planning including the Gold Line
                                extension, bus network planning, and regional bikeway and hiking
                                networks.
                CIR-5.4         Except where required to support emergency access, no public or
                                private streets shall connect to the planning areas of adjoining
                                communities.
                Program:        For new development the City shall not permit vehicular
                                connections into the planning area from adjoining cities as
                                condition of development approval.
                Program:        For new development, the City shall not permit vehicular
                                connections into the planning area from adjoining cities except
                                where emergency access is deemed appropriate. The City shall
                                require appropriate limited access devices and improvements in its
                                environmental review and land development processes to ensure
                                vehicular connections are limited to emergency vehicles only.
TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITY SYSTEM EFFICIENCY
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora is approaching buildout conditions. As future
growth will continue to impact the existing circulation and infrastructure systems, specific
strategies should be implemented to maximize infrastructure efficiency. Emphasizing strategies
that reduce demand for and that implement physical improvements that promote system
efficiency will contribute to a well functioning circulation system.
Goal            CIR-6           Acceptable level of service on local roadways.
Policies        CIR-6.1         Improve the function of the circulation system through
                                transportation system management strategies.
Goal            CIR-7           Improved access to alternative modes of transportation.
Policies        CIR-7.1         Explore funding for alternative transportation.
                CIR-7.2         Enhance alternative transportation services (mini-bus, seniors and
                                private shuttle franchise service).
                CIR-7.3         Initiate a citywide campaign to promote for carpooling/park-n-ride.
                CIR-7.4         Create and implement a masterplan(s) for pedestrians, trails and
                                bikeways.
                                                Page 35
     CIR-7.5      Ensure adequate pedestrian/ bike amenities at key destinations
                  such as the Village, the Marketplace and other retail service areas
                  such as along Route 66.
Goal CIR-8        Controlled utility and infrastructure access between Glendora and
                  adjoining jurisdictions.
     Policies     Infrastructure for new development shall be limited to the service
                  of properties within the City’s planning area.
     Programs:
     1. The City shall prohibit City-controlled infrastructure connections through its
     development approval process and public works contract bidding process.
                                 Page 36

Page 3
                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                            CONSERVATION ELEMENT
CHAPTER 8
CONSERVATION ELEMENT
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The purpose of the Conservation Element is to provide direction regarding the conservation,
development and utilization of natural resources. Existing resources within the City of Glendora are
identified in order to understand how future development impacts these resources and to provide
guidance for the maintenance, preservation and conservation of these resources. The Conservation
Element addresses the following resources: water, energy, solid waste and biological, as well as
stormwater management. The City of Glendora previously adopted a Historic Preservation Element
as an optional element within the General Plan. Cultural and historical resources and goals and
objectives for the preservation of these resources are discussed within the Historic Preservation
Element.
2.0 AUTHORITY FOR ELEMENT
California Government Code Section 65302(d) requires that a General Plan include:
“A conservation element for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources
including water and its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers and other waters, harbors, fisheries,
wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources. The conservation element shall consider the effect of
development within the jurisdiction, as described in the land use element, on natural resources
located on public lands, including military installations.
The conservation element may also cover: (1) the reclamation of land and waters; (2) prevention and
control of the pollution of streams and other waters; (3) regulation of the use of land in stream
channels and other areas required for the accomplishment of the conservation plan; (4) prevention,
control, and correction of the erosion of soils, beaches, and shores; (5) protection of watersheds; (6)
the location, quantity and quality of the rock, sand and gravel resources; and (7) flood control.”
3.0 SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
The following section outlines existing conservation resources within the City of Glendora.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸1◂                               Conservation Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                           CONSERVATION ELEMENT
3.1 WATER RESOURCES
3.1.1 Water Supply and Service
The City of Glendora receives its water from two sources - groundwater purchased through its
existing Water Rights and imported water purchased from the Metropolitan Water District of
Southern California (MWD) and Covina Irrigation Company. Approximately 83 percent of
Glendora’s water comes from local groundwater sources and 17 percent from imported water
sources. Imported water is treated by the MWD at its Weymouth Filtration Plant in La Verne and is
delivered to Glendora through three separate metered service connections. The City’s average
annual water demand over the past seven years has been 13,600 acre-feet.
The City of Glendora Water Division serves approximately 6,520 acres including 6,158 acres within
the City’s corporate boundaries, 335 acres of incorporated Los Angeles County areas, 17 acres in San
Dimas and 10 acres in Azusa. Suburban Water Systems provides service to 485 acres of the City of
Glendora between Barranca and Grand Avenues, as well as to a 10-acre area between Grand and
Bender Avenues south of Dawson Avenue. The City of Azusa serves 144 acres within the City
boundaries between Barranca and Citrus Avenues south of the AT & SF Railroad.
A majority of the existing water system was developed as a result of acquisition of fifteen small
water companies dating as far back as 1887. The system consists of 16 pressure zones that are
consolidated to four zones for billing and ratemaking. Water facilities include three hydropneumatic
systems and two zones served through pressure regulating systems; 12 wells (nine of which are
currently active), 23 pumping stations with 50 booster pumps, 27 water reservoirs, 196 miles of
pipeline and approximately 13,000 service meters.
3.1.1.1 Local Groundwater
The City is located within the Main San Gabriel Groundwater Basin which covers 167 square
miles which is estimated to hold about 2.8 trillion gallons of water. Water enters the Basin from
countless natural and man-made locations and is extracted by local water producers like
Glendora. The City of Glendora has an adjudicated to pump approximately 4 percent of the safe
annual yield from the Basin.
The City pumps groundwater from its active wells located at the mouth of Azusa Canyon and upper
Glendora Basin. Wells 1, 2, 10 and 11 are located in the Glendora Basin, wells 5, 8, 9 and 12 are
located in the Upper San Gabriel Basin and well No. 7 (Vosburg) and wells 3 and 4 (Irwindale) are
located in the Main San Gabriel Basin. The City has prescriptive right to pump groundwater as
determined by the San Gabriel Basin Watermaster. For Fiscal Year (FY) 2004/05 Glendora’s share
was 7,361 acre-feet and for FY 2005/2006 Glendora’s share was 10,391 acre-feet. The City can
pump above its prescriptive right by purchasing replenishment water, if available. As replenishment
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸2◂                               Conservation Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             CONSERVATION ELEMENT
water may be limited, the City purchases imported water through the MWD for the balance of its
needs.
In 2002, Glendora’s City Council authorized the formation of the Glendora Water System Study
Committee to review and report on the state and financial health of the City’s water system. The
following recommendations were made:
    f   An aggressive Capital Improvement Program be implemented immediately to completely
        upgrade the system over the next 30 years;
    f   Long-term bonds be utilized to implement the Capital Improvement Program (CIP);
    f   The City’s water rates be increased to support the CIP and continue to provide adequate
        contingency reserves;
    f   City Council direct staff to review revenues and expenditures of water Fund 31 on an annual
        basis and adjust rates (up or down), if necessary, for Energy, Purchased Water and other
        operation and maintenance costs;
    f   Perform a study to identify alternative sites and build a new facility capable of housing the
        Water Agency support staff and materials; and
    f   The City pursue the purchase of additional Water Rights, initially by Staff or if necessary,
        seek the services of a third-party agent experienced in Water Rights acquisitions.
As a result of the study, Resolution No. 03-38 was adopted on May 13, 2003 and established new
fees, rates and charges for water service within Glendora. The Resolution acknowledged that
Glendora’s water infrastructure system was deteriorated and would require upgrading. The
Resolution called for Glendora’s water infrastructure to undergo a capital improvements program to
be funded through low cost debt service issues and that Glendora’s water infrastructure requires
upgrading, the cost of which would be passed on to consumers of the water services provided by the
Water Division of the Public Works Department through rate and fee increases. New fees, rates and
charges established in the resolution became effective with the first billing cycle following July 1,
2003. In addition, the Water Division was directed to pursue the acquisition of additional water
rights as recommended by the Water System Study Committee Report. It was determined that
additional water rights would provide an increase in the annual prescriptive right by 2,000 acre-feet
per year (AF/Y). Additionally, by increasing its groundwater pumping capacity, the City can pursue
additional prescriptive rights beyond the recommended 2,000 AF/Y.
3.1.1.2 Surface Water
No naturally occurring permanent surface water features exist within the City of Glendora.
However, Open Water/Freshwater March areas occur where dams and debris basins provide artificial
conditions for a freshwater march environment (refer to Section 3.6). Debris basins, check dams and
storm drains transport water during wet weather events.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸3◂                              Conservation Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                           CONSERVATION ELEMENT
3.1.1.3 Recycled Water
The City does not currently have plans for a recycled water system. Water conservation programs
are implemented through the Uniform Building Code (UBC) for new developments. Additionally,
new developments within the City are required to provide drought tolerant landscaping.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                   ▸4◂                               Conservation Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             CONSERVATION ELEMENT
3.2 ENERGY RESOURCES
3.2.1 Electricity
Southern California Edison (SCE) provides electricity to the City of Glendora. SCE supplies power
to 11 million people through 4.3 million business and residential accounts in a 50,000-square-mile
service area. Services are provided by overhead and underground facilities throughout the City.
3.2.2 Natural Gas
The Southern California Gas Company (The Gas Co.) provides gas service to the City of Glendora.
The Gas Co. serves 18 million people through 5 million gas meters in more than 530 communities.
3.3 SOLID WASTE
Athens Services provides solid waste collection and recycling services to the City of Glendora. The
refuse is collected and hauled to Athens Material Recovery Facility (MRF) in the City of Industry.
Prior to being transported to the landfill, the waste is processed to separate recyclables from the
waste stream.
The City of Glendora has adopted a Source Reduction and Recycling Element (SRRE) in response to
Assembly Bill 939; the California integrated Waste Management Act (AB 939). AB 939 requires all
California cities to divert 25 percent of their waste stream from landfills by 1995 and 50 percent by
the year 2000. The SRRE identifies how the City of Glendora intends to achieve these goals. As of
2004, the waste diversion rate for the City of Glendora was 51 percent.
To assist the City in achieving the 50 percent waste diversion goal, a construction and demolition
waste ordinance was adopted in 2005. The ordinance requires development projects over a certain
threshold to submit solid waste management plans to the City as part of their permit process. Waste
management plans are required to indicate how the developer will recycle a minimum of 50 percent
of all waste materials generated by the project. The developer must provide evidence of compliance
with the approved waste management plan at project completion.
3.4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Stormwater flows through a series of storm drains located within the City and is eventually
discharged into the San Gabriel River via a channelized tributary. The San Gabriel River watershed
consists of an extensive area of undisturbed riparian and woodland habitats and a series of flood
control dams in its upper reaches, but is highly urbanized in the middle and lower reaches. Large
spreading grounds, used to recharge aquifers, lie toward the middle of the watershed. The lower part
of the river flows through a concrete-lined channel in a heavily urbanized portion of the county
before becoming a soft-bottom channel once again near the ocean in Long Beach.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸5◂                              Conservation Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             CONSERVATION ELEMENT
The San Gabriel River Watershed is within the jurisdiction of the Los Angeles Regional Water
Quality Control Board (LARWQCB), which is responsible for designing and implementing the Los
Angeles Basin Plan (Basin Plan). The Basin Plan is designed to preserve and enhance water quality
and protect the beneficial uses of all regional waters. Specifically, the Basin Plan designates
beneficial uses for surface and ground waters, sets narrative and numerical objectives that must be
attained or maintained to protect the designated beneficial uses and conform to the state's
antidegradation policy, and describes implementation programs to protect all waters in the Region.
In addition, the Basin Plan incorporates (by reference) all applicable State and Regional Board plans
and policies and other pertinent water quality policies and regulations.
Urban stormwater runoff is the largest source of unregulated pollution to the waterway and coastal
areas of the United States. Stormwater runoff can be contaminated with a variety of pollutants that
contribute to increased health risks and environmental damage.
The Clean Water Act and other Federal, state and regional regulations require the City of Glendora to
control the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system, including the discharge of pollutants
from construction sites and areas of new development or significant redevelopment.
3.4.1 Federal Requirements
Local stormwater pollution control measures are implemented pursuant to the Clean Water Act
(CWA), Federal Water Quality Control Act and National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES).
3.4.1.1 Clean Water Act
The Clean Water Act (CWA) is the primary Federal law that protects the quality of the nation’s
surface waters, including lakes, rivers, and coastal wetlands. The CWA prohibits any person from
discharging pollutants through a point source into a water of the United States, which include oceans,
bays, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and wetlands, unless they have an NPDES permit. Permit review
is the CWA’s primary regulatory tool. NPDES permits regulate the discharges from publicly owned
facilities. The NPDES program also regulates discharges such as stormwater discharges from
industrial activities and municipal stormwater discharges including, urban stormwater runoff,
combined sewer overflows and storm sewer overflows.
The Clean Water Act amendments of 1987 established a framework for regulating stormwater
discharges from municipal, industrial and construction activities under the NPDES program. The
primary objectives of the municipal stormwater program requirements are to effectively prohibit non-
stormwater discharges and reduce the discharge of pollutants from stormwater conveyance systems
to the maximum extent practicable (MEP), including management practices, control techniques and
system design engineering method and such other provisions that the U.S. EPA or the California
State Water Resources Control Board deem appropriate for the control of such pollutants.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸6◂                               Conservation Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                            CONSERVATION ELEMENT
3.4.1.2 National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Program
The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Program is a
comprehensive two-phased national program for addressing the non-agricultural sources of
stormwater discharges adversely affecting the quality of the nation’s waters. The Program uses the
NPDES permitting mechanism to require the implementation of control and monitoring measures
designed to prevent harmful pollutants from being washed into local water bodies by stormwater
runoff.
The NPDES program requires the owner or operator of any facility, or any person responsible for any
activity that discharges waste into the surface waters of the U.S. to obtain a NPDES permit from the
Regional Water Quality Control Board, as mandated by the CWA.
3.4.2 State and Regional Programs
The CWA provides that states are authorized to operate their own NPDES programs provided such
programs meet minimum Federal requirements. The Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control
Board issues the municipal stormwater National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit.
The City of Glendora currently operates under Permit NO. CAS004001, Order No. 01-182. The
Permit was adopted on December 31, 2001 and expires on December 31, 2006.
The objective of Order No. 01-182 is to protect the beneficial uses of receiving waters in Los
Angeles County. To meet this objective, the Order requires that the Los Angeles Countywide Storm
Water Quality Management Plan (SQMP) specify Best Management Practices (BMPs) that will be
implemented to reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater to the MEP. Further, Permittees are
to assure that stormwater discharges from the MS4 shall neither cause nor contribute to the
exceedance of water quality, standards and objectives nor create conditions of nuisance in the
receiving waters, and that the discharge of non-stormwater to the MS4 has been effectively
prohibited.
Permit No. CAS004001 requires the implementation of a Stormwater Quality Management Program
(SQMP), which provides specific guidelines to control, reduce and monitor discharges of waste to
storm drain systems. The emphasis of the SQMP is pollution prevention through education, public
outreach, planning and implementation of source control BMPs first and structural and treatment
control BMPs second.
3.4.2.1 Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan (SUSMP)
The Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan (SUSMP) was developed as part of the Los Angeles
Regional Water Quality Control Board’s Municipal Stormwater Program. The SUSMP addresses
stormwater pollution from certain types of new development and redevelopment. The SUSMP
specifies the minimum required BMPs that must be used for a designated project. Additional BMPs
may be required on certain targeted categories of projects based on these regulations at the discretion
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸7◂                               Conservation Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             CONSERVATION ELEMENT
of the City of Glendora. Applicable project applicants are required to incorporate appropriate
SUSMP requirements into their development plans.
3.4.3 City of Glendora Programs
3.4.3.1 Stormwater Runoff and Pollution Control Ordinance
The Stormwater Runoff and Pollution Control Ordinance provides specific local regulations related
to stormwater pollution prevention. The purpose of the ordinance is to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of Glendora by regulating illicit discharges to the municipal stormwater
system to the maximum extent practicable; eliminating illicit connections to the municipal
stormwater system; eliminating spillage, dumping, and disposal of pollutant materials into the
municipal stormwater system; and reducing pollutant loads in stormwater and urban runoff, from
land uses and activities identified in the municipal NPDES permit.
3.4.3.2 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)
The City requires that a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and Monitoring Program
Plan be completed for industries that require a NPDES General Industrial Activities Storm Water
Permit and for any construction activity in the City requiring a NPDES construction permit.
SWPPPs are operator/owner prepared plans that identify BMPs for implementation and monitor the
effectiveness of the BMPs. The SWPPP identifies the source control and/or treatment control
practices (BMPs) that would significantly reduce, avoid or mitigate runoff pollutants to the
“maximum extent practicable.”
3.5 HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE
The City has an adopted Household Hazardous Waste Element, which addresses the handling
and disposal of household hazardous or special wastes. The Element identifies various programs
to reduce hazardous waste, and establishes an implementation and monitoring program.
The Los Angeles County Department of Public Works hosts various events for Glendora
residents to dispose of household hazardous waste items. The Household Hazardous Waste
Collection Event, operated by the County of Los Angeles Department of Public Works and the
Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts, is a one-day, drive-through collection event where
residents are invited to drive to a specific location to drop off their hazardous waste. Collection
Events are scheduled in different areas throughout the County. They are free, open to the public
and are usually held on a Saturday.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸8◂                             Conservation Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             CONSERVATION ELEMENT
3.6 BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
Biological resources include natural and altered biotic habitats (vegetative communities and
corresponding wildlife habitat), as well as associated flora and fauna. The largest portion of
Glendora’s biological resources is located in areas that have not experienced large-scale
development intrusion, such as the foothills and South Hills areas. The foothills consist of
approximately 3,488 acres within the Angeles National Forest. Other native habitat is set aside
in the Glendora Wilderness Park, South Hills Park and by the Glendora Conservancy.
3.6.1 Flora
Glendora can be described by its physical characteristics: the valley and hillside areas. The
valley is generally located south of Sierra Madre Avenue, excluding the South Hills. It is
characterized by gentle sloping land, which is largely developed. The majority of the vegetation
is introduced with some native vegetation consisting of coastal sage scrub and chaparral.
Relatively few wildlife arefound in the developed valley areas.
The hillside areas consist of terrain generally exceeding 10 percent average slope and are
generally located north of Sierra Madre Avenue, excluding the South Hills. Four vegetative
types broadly classified as woodlands, chaparral, coastal sage scrub and freshwater marsh may
be found in the hillsides. These areas are composed of native and non-native plant species.
Woodland and coastal sage scrub habitats are considered to be sensitive habitats and have the
highest potential to host sensitive species. The City’s flower, Brodiaea filifolia, an endangered
plant species, was re-discovered in 1989 at a location now designated as a preserve. The
Brodiaea is both state and federally listed as an endangered species. Within the eastern portion
of the foothills, critical habitat has been designated for the federally listed California gnatcatcher
in costal sage scrub and chaparral habitat.
Woodland is present along major drainage courses and on mesic (moist) sites such as canyons
and north facing slopes. The composition of the woodland varies depending on elevation, soil,
aspect, moisture availability and other factors. Along major drainages, such as in Dalton
Canyon, dominant trees include white alder, California sycamore, coast live oak and willows. In
many areas, riparian woodland forms a closed-canopy stand with an open understory.
Intermittent streams that convey water, primarily only after major storm events, and other mesic
sites such as canyons and north facing slopes support woodland dominated by coast live oak,
scattered willows and California sycamores and at lower elevations, California black walnut.
Understory vegetation is typically dense and often comprised of woody shrubs from the
surrounding or nearby chaparral community.
Chaparral occupies hillsides and ridge tops in the higher elevations of the area where slightly
more moderate conditions such as deeper soils and more available moisture are present. The
slopes above the oak woodlands support mixed chaparral stands. In many locations there is
considerable blending of the woodland and shrub communities. In the smaller drier canyons,
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸9◂                               Conservation Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                            CONSERVATION ELEMENT
chaparral shrubs occupy the canyon bottoms, which have no woodland overstory. The chaparral
vegetation is dominated by chamise and hoaryleaf ceanothus. Other common shrubs are toyon,
holley-leafed cherry, scrub oak, various rhus, and California coffeeberry..
Fire is an integral and essential component of the chaparral ecosystem. As chaparral matures and
forms dense stands, plant material gradually dies back, leaving dry standing fuels. Under these
conditions and when fuel moistures are lowest, primarily during drought periods in the late
summer and early fall, chaparral becomes highly susceptible to fire. Most chaparral plants are
adapted to periodic fires and can readily recolonize a burned site within a few months or years
following a fire.
Coastal sage scrub occupies drier slopes and ridges. This plant community is dominated by half
shrubs, herbaceous perennials, and annual weeds and grasses. It is lower growing and typically
has a more open canopy in comparison to chaparral. Dominant shrubs of the community are
typically winter active, avoiding summer drought by shedding their larger leaves. The dominant
shrubs are California sagebrush, black sage and white sage. In areas of disturbance by man or
fire, large weeds and grasses predominate over the shrubs. Similar to chaparral, coastal sage
scrub is subject to fire and has evolved with adaptations to periodic burning.
Open Water/Freshwater Marsh areas occur where dams and debris basins provide artificial
conditions for a freshwater marsh environment. The Big Dalton Debris Basin has freshwater
marsh habitat. This debris basin typically has water year round and there is a natural spring
north of the basin. However, plants within this basin are frequently disturbed and the physical
conditions are unstable due to the fluctuations in water levels, sediment burial, grading and
debris removal in the basin. Characteristic plants generally include Scirpus, Typha, Eleocharis,
Carex, Cyprerus, Juncus and Alisma.
3.6.2 Fauna
Wildlife species are present within the hillside areas of Glendora. Sensitive species are those plants
and animals occupying or potentially occurring in the area that are endangered or rare. The terms
endangered and rare are defined by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), California
Department of Fish and Game, as well as the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and its
guidelines, or are otherwise of current local, regional or State concern. Plant communities and
species are considered sensitive based on (1) Federal, State or local laws or policies that regulate
their protection; (2) limited distributions; and/or (3) the habitat requirements of sensitive plants or
animals.
There are countless interrelationships and interdependencies that exist among the various animal
species, plants and animals, and plant communities within Glendora. Plants are food source and
shelter for many animals. In turn, some animals become food for predatory animals. Alteration or
destruction of habitats break these relationships and causes decline or elimination of plant and animal
populations.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸ 10 ◂                            Conservation Element

                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                              CONSERVATION ELEMENT
Significant wildlife habitats do not typically occur within the urbanized portions of the City.
However, the hillsides have been identified as containing wildlife habitats. The preservation of
habitats associated with the hillsides and canyons are of concern to the City. Development within the
hillsides can potentially result in the destruction of oak woodlands eliminating habitats associated
with canyons. The grading of ridges and slopes reduces shrub and grassland vegetation, which are
used as forage and shelter by animals. In addition, increased erosion and run-off can result.
Development can also result in the increase of introduced species of plants and animals, which
compete and replace native species.
Glendora has been recognized regionally as a biodiversity “hot spot”.Federally listed as threatened
and State listed as endangered, the thread leaved Brodiaea is now well-established and protected in
preserves known to occur within Glendora. The State and federally listed least Bell’s vireo and
federally threatened California gnatcatcher are also known to occur within the City. Other
potentially present threatened or endangered species within the City include the slender-horned
spineflower, California yellow-billed cuckoo and southwestern willow flycatcher.
3.6.3 Critical Habitat
On October 24, 2000, the USFWS designated 513,650 acres of critical habitat for the California
gnatcatcher in Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino and San Diego Counties, California.
Critical habitat identifies specific areas that are essential to the conservation of a listed species and,
with respect to areas within the geographic range occupied by the species, which may require special
management considerations or protection. The primary constituent elements for the coastal
gnatcatcher are those habitat components that are essential for the primary biological needs of
foraging, nesting, rearing of young, intra-specific communication, roosting, dispersal, genetic
exchange or sheltering. All areas designated as critical habitat for the coastal California gnatcatcher
contain one or more of the primary constituent elements. Based on data collected since the time of
it’s listing, the estimated total number of gnatcatchers in the United States (all within California) is
about 2,898 pairs in 1996.
Glendora lies within the westernmost portion of Critical Habitat Unit 12 that contains approximately
10,080 acres of critical habitat along the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains and in Bonelli
Regional Park. The City includes approximately 875 acres of California gnatcatcher critical habitat
within the foothills. The habitat consists of coastal sage scrub interspersed with chaparral or non-
native grasses. Out of the 875 acres of designated critical habitat, 450 acres are within the National
Forest. The closest known occurrence for this species is located in gnatcatcher critical habitat, in
Wildwood Canyon. Gnatcatcher locations are also recorded in Bonelli Park, approximately two
miles south of the Critical Habitat within Glendora.
3.6.4 Wildlife Corridors
Wildlife corridors provide avenues along which wide ranging animals can travel, migrate and meet
mates; plants can propagate; genetic interchange can occur; populations can move in response to
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸ 11 ◂                             Conservation Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             CONSERVATION ELEMENT
environmental changes and natural disasters; and individuals can recolonize habitats from which
populations have been locally extirpated.
Habitat corridors are essential in preventing habitat fragmentation and isolation. Habitat
fragmentation occurs when a proposed action results in a single, unified habitat area being divided
into two or more areas, such that the division isolates the two new areas from each other. Isolation of
habitat occurs when wildlife cannot move freely from one portion of the habitat to another, or from
one habitat type to another. The South Hills area consists of approximately 400 acres of essentially
isolated habitat where no wildlife corridor exists to connect it with other natural areas. However,
populations of deer and other wildlife continue, which is evidence that pathways for migration do
exist.
The foothills area exists as an extension of the larger habitat area of the San Gabriel Mountains. The
City of Glendora understands that future development of the foothills requires planning to prevent
isolation of habitats, such as the isolation of sensitive coastal sage scrub habitat that has occurred in
the South Hills. Wildlife corridors can be created along streambeds, canyons, ridgelines or hillsides
in such a way that habitat is not isolated while providing for the above functions of wildlife corridors.
3.6.5 Biologically Sensitive Areas
Communities are generally considered to be sensitive if they provide habitat for listed or otherwise
sensitive species, are of special value to the local ecosystem (e.g., water sources), or are regulated by
local, State or Federal resource agencies.
Woodland areas, particularly along streambeds, are highly sensitive habitat. Major drainages that
consist of woodland habitat support a wide diversity of wildlife species and may function as habitat
linkages or corridors.
Coastal sage scrub is also considered a sensitive community based on widespread awareness among
the resource agencies, policy makers and public that this community as undergone extensive losses in
the past. Coastal sage scrub is mixed with chaparral and non-native grasslands within the foothills.
Coastal sage scrub is also located in the South Hills. The majority of the Critical Habitat for the
California gnatcatcher is located within the coastal sage scrub community, and a pair of gnatcatchers
has been observed within the area.
Chaparral is generally the least sensitive of the native communities within Glendora, because it is a
common and widespread community in the region. In some cases, however, chaparral may support
sensitive resources.
3.7 GLENDORA CONSERVANCY
The Glendora Community Conservancy (GCC) is a private, nonprofit corporation formed in July
1991. The GCC was formed with the mission to promote the preservation of land and/or buildings
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸ 12 ◂                              Conservation Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             CONSERVATION ELEMENT
for historic, educational, ecological, recreational, scenic or open space opportunities. Nearly     300
acres are owned and stewarded by volunteers and projects through Conservancy programs.              The
Brodiaea Reserve on Conservancy property is second in size in protection of this rare species.      The
Conservancy hosts a calendar of activities and projects available to residents, organizations       and
businesses to sponsor, fund and/or participate in.
4.0 PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS, GOALS, AND POLICIES
WATER CONSERVATION
Planning Consideration: Water is a limited resource in Southern California. The City of Glendora
understands water conservation should be a consideration in future land use planning decisions and
everyday activities. Future population growth will increase both water needs and carrying capacity
needs. Through the establishment of effective water conservation and reuse programs, the City can
contribute to local, regional and state efforts to reduce the demand and use of water resources.
Goal            CON-1            Protection and conservation of Glendora’s water resources.
Policies        CON-1.1          Establish a comprehensive program for the utilization of recycled
                                 water for irrigation purposes.
                CON-1.2          Reduce water demand for irrigation purposes through the utilization
                                 of water conserving landscape materials.
                CON-1.3          Establish specific requirements for the use of water conserving
                                 landscape materials in new development and redevelopment projects,
                                 parks and municipal facilities.
                CON-1.4          Establish outreach and incentive programs to educate residents on
                                 methods of water conservation and to encourage their use.
                CON-1.5          Establish methods to analyze water conservation issues when
                                 determining the need and development of future parks.
Goal            CON-2            Utilization of water conservation technologies and practices.
Policies        CON-2.1          Establish a comprehensive program for the utilization of recycled
                                 water for irrigation purposes.
                CON-2.2          Reduce water demand for irrigation purposes through the utilization
                                 of water-conserving landscape materials.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                        ▸ 13 ◂                          Conservation Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                           CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                CON-2.3        Establish specific requirements for the use of water conserving
                               landscape materials in new development and redevelopment projects,
                               parks and municipal facilities.
                CON-2.4        Establish and implement water conservation methods for all
                               municipal facilities.
Goal            CON-3          Effective and well-maintained water infrastructure system.
Policies        CON-3.1        Ensure the City’s Water Master Plan provides an accurate projection
                               of future water demand and conveyance.
                CON-3.2        Ensure existing water infrastructure systems are properly maintained.
                CON-3.3        Ensure infrastructure for new development is limited to serving
                               properties within the planning area or water service area.
WASTEWATER, SOLID WASTE GENERATION AND ENERGY DEMAND
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora understands that future population growth will
increase wastewater and energy demand as well as solid waste generation. Glendora understands that
effective strategies of source reduction and conservation will lessen the impacts of population
increases on wastewater, solid waste and energy demand.
Goal            CON-4          Adequate conveyance and disposal of wastewater.
Policies        CON-4.1        Ensure the wastewater infrastructure system within the City is
                               effective and adequately maintained.
                CON-4.2        Ensure new development and redevelopment projects adequately
                               analyze potential impacts to the existing wastewater infrastructure
                               system.
                CON-4.3        Incorporate project-level stormwater mitigation measures to reduce
                               potential impacts to water quality and ensure mitigation measures are
                               adequately monitored.
                CON-4.4        Establish programs to educate residents regarding impacts of
                               stormwater runoff on water quality and provide a variety of
                               opportunities for Glendora residents to dispose of hazardous
                               materials.
                CON-4.5        Protect the planning area from unnecessary stormwater run-off from
                               outside the planning area that would have the potential to require
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸ 14 ◂                             Conservation Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                           CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                             additional stormwater conveyance or treatment facilities maintained
                             by the City.
              CON-4.6        Ensure new development and redevelopment projects adequately
                             analyze potential impacts to the existing wastewater infrastructure
                             system.
              CON-4.7        Protect the planning area from the conveyance of wastewater from
                             outside the planning area that would have the potential to require
                             additional wastewater conveyance or treatment facilities.
Goal          CON-5          Reduced demand for energy resources through the use of
                             conservation techniques.
Policies      CON-5.1        Investigate and implement opportunities for energy conservation at all
                             City-maintained facilities.
              CON-5.2        Encourage the incorporation of energy conservation features in the
                             design of all new construction and substantial rehabilitation projects
                             and encourage the installation of conservation devices in existing
                             developments.
              CON-5.3        Encourage private energy conservation programs that minimize high
                             energy demand and that use alternative energy sources.
              CON-5.4        Require all new developments to incorporate energy-efficient
                             lighting, heating, and cooling systems pursuant to the Uniform
                             Building Code.
              CON-5.5        Provide education and outreach to residents and businesses on
                             opportunities to decrease energy consumption.
Goal          CON-6          Reduced generation of solid waste within Glendora.
Policies      CON-6.1        Provide education and outreach to residents and businesses to
                             encourage their involvement in source reduction and recycling.
              CON-6.2        Continue to work towards fulfilling the requirements established in
                             the California Integrated Waste Management Act for the diversion of
                             solid waste.
              CON-6.3        Establish a tree master plan to expand the urban forest throughout the
                             City.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                  ▸ 15 ◂                            Conservation Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                           CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                CON-6.4       Ensure appropriate placement and proper maintenance of tree
                              resources within the City.
Goal            CON-7:        A comprehensive citywide landscape strategy.
Policies        CON-7.1       Establish a cohesive landscape plan to ensure consistent landscaping
                              throughout the City.
                CON-7.2       Establish specific requirements for consistent landscaping in new
                              development and redevelopment projects, parks and municipal
                              facilities.
STORMWATER POLLUTION
Planning Consideration: The potential environmental impacts of stormwater runoff are a
significant concern to Glendora residents. Stormwater runoff can carry pollutants into the
watershed, negatively affecting local and regional water quality. Maintenance and improvement
of the City’s stormwater system to reduce potential impacts to water quality should be a priority.
Goal            CON-8         Proper conveyance and treatment of stormwater and
                              implementation of techniques to reduce pollutants consistent
                              with Federal, State and regional regulations and standards.
Policies        CON-8.1       Ensure existing drainage facilities are properly maintained.
                CON-8.2       Ensure all new development and redevelopment projects comply with
                              Federal, State, regional and City regulations and ordinances related to
                              stormwater.
                CON-8.3       Incorporate project-level stormwater mitigation measures to reduce
                              potential impacts to water quality and ensure mitigation measures are
                              adequately monitored.
                CON-8.4       Establish programs to educate residents regarding impacts of
                              stormwater runoff on water quality and provide a variety of
                              opportunities for Glendora residents to dispose of hazardous
                              materials.
                CON-8.5       Continue to support regional and State efforts in controlling point and
                              non-point sources of water pollution.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸ 16 ◂                            Conservation Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                           CONSERVATION ELEMENT
CON-8.6         Investigate the potential to create city or multi-jurisdictional facilities which
                remove or reduce stormwater pollutants.CONSERVATION AND
                PRESERVATION OF SENSITIVE LANDS
Planning Consideration: The City’s residents acknowledge the importance of conserving the
City’s open space and natural resources for the benefit of community residents, and the region.
Glendora’s location adjacent to United States Forest Service lands, as well as the variety of other
sensitive habitats and natural systems within and contiguous to the community should be
acknowledged in land use planning efforts. With planning and action to protect tributaries and
ridgelines, sustainable and long-term results from healthy native species of plants and wildlife
may be anticipated.
Goal            CON-9          Preservation and conservation of natural resources and
                               sensitive habitats.
Policies        CON-9.1        Investigate opportunities for open space land acquisition for the
                               preservation of natural resources and sensitive habitats.
                CON-9.2        Continue to partner with the Glendora Community Conservancy to
                               determine funding opportunities for open space land acquisition for
                               the preservation of natural resources and sensitive habitats.
                CON-9.3        Pursue partnerships with other organizations, such as the United
                               States Forest Service to ensure preservation of natural resources
                               and sensitive habitats.
                CON-9.4        Ensure the preservation of the natural plant communities in the
                               hillside areas.
                CON-9.5        Ensure land use decisions consider the preservation of sensitive
                               plant and animal species, critical habitat, wildlife corridors and
                               biologically sensitive areas.
                CON-9.6        Develop a land management/ land maintenance plan, including
                               best management practices, of City-owned conservation areas to
                               increase fire safety, protect biodiversity and preserve native plant
                               species.
                CON-9.7        Ensure preservation of local watersheds in development to
                               maintain native plant habitats and ensure connectivity of wildlife
                               corridors.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸ 17 ◂                           Conservation Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                            CONSERVATION ELEMENT
PRESERVATION AND ENHANCEMENT OF LANDSCAPE RESOURCES
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora is proud of its naturally landscaped hillsides and
its mature residential and commercial landscapes. Preservation, enhancement, care and
maintenance of these important landscape resources will continue providing a positive
contribution to the quality and character of Glendora.
Goal           CON-10          A tree preservation strategy.
Policies       CON-10.1        Involve residents in the maintenance and preservation of individual
                               trees by providing them with a choice of trees planted.
               CON-10.2        Maintain the tree preservation ordinance to ensure the preservation
                               of existing tree resources.
               CON-10.3        Establish a tree master plan to expand the urban forest throughout
                               the City.
               CON-10.4        Ensure appropriate placement and proper maintenance of tree
                               resources within the City.
REGIONAL COORDINATION
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora understands that conservation activities
occurring within Glendora have an effect on regional conservation efforts and vice versa.
Therefore, planning decisions made by the City of Glendora should be coordinated with those of
other agencies to ensure environmental and conservation efforts establish an effective and
comprehensive regional approach.
Goal           CON-11          Proactive City participation with local, regional and State
                               agencies to promote multi-agency involvement in
                               understanding and addressing environmental and conservation
                               issues.
Policies       CON-11.1        Investigate new opportunities to work with local, regional and
                               State agencies regarding environmental and conservation issues.
               CON-11.2        Ensure City involvement in regional planning efforts through
                               representation of City Staff at regional, County and State meetings.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸ 18 ◂                           Conservation Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                           CONSERVATION ELEMENT
Goal          CON-12         Form partnerships with State, Federal and private entities to
                             address preservation and protection of the hillsides.
Policies      CON-12.1       Investigate opportunities to form partnerships with State, Federal
                             and private entities regarding preservation and protection of the
                             hillsides.
              CON-12.2       Promote and encourage multi-agency involvement in determining
                             opportunities for hillside preservation and protection.
              CON-12.3       Investigate opportunities to work with other city and county
                             conservancies, in addition to the Glendora Community
                             Conservancy and San Gabriel Mountains River Conservancy.
              CON-12.4       Utilize public and private grant opportunities to acquire, preserve
                             and protect hillside properties.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                  ▸ 19 ◂                           Conservation Element

   
    City of Glendora  
    2013‐2021 Housing Element 
     
     
 
                 Planning Department 
            116 East Foothill Boulevard 
                    Glendora, CA 91741 

 
           City of Glendora
2013-2021 Housing Element
                    Planning Department
               116 East Foothill Boulevard
                     Glendora, CA 91741

Table of Contents
Table of Contents ........................................................................................................................... i
1.   INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................. 1
     A. Community Context ........................................................................................................ 1
     B. Role of Housing Element ................................................................................................ 2
     C. Data Sources .................................................................................................................. 2
     D. Public Participation ......................................................................................................... 3
     E. Relationship to the General Plan .................................................................................... 4
2.   HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT ..................................................................................... 5
     A. Population Characteristics .............................................................................................. 5
     B. Household Characteristics .............................................................................................. 9
     C. Housing Stock Characteristics ...................................................................................... 22
3.   HOUSING CONSTRAINTS ................................................................................................ 37
     A. Market Constraints ....................................................................................................... 37
     B. Governmental Constraints ............................................................................................ 38
     C. Environmental Constraints ........................................................................................... 57
4.   HOUSING RESOURCES................................................................................................... 59
     A. Availability of Sites for Housing .................................................................................... 59
     B. Financial Resources ..................................................................................................... 65
     C. Administrative Resources ............................................................................................. 66
     D. Opportunities for Energy Conservation ........................................................................ 67
5.   HOUSING PLAN ................................................................................................................ 69
     A. Evaluation of Past Accomplishments ........................................................................... 69
     B. Housing Goals and Policies .......................................................................................... 70
     C. Housing Programs ........................................................................................................ 73
     D. Summary of Quantified Objectives ............................................................................... 78
Appendix A: Public Outreach .................................................................................................... A-1
Appendix B: Residential Sites Inventory ................................................................................... B-1
Appendix C: Review of Past Accomplishments ........................................................................ C-1
Appendix D: Housing Element Glossary ................................................................................... D-1
                                                   City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                        November 2013
                                                                                                                                        i
List of Tables
Table 1: Age Characteristics and Trends ...................................................................................... 6
Table 2: Race and Ethnicity .......................................................................................................... 7
Table 3: Employment Profile ......................................................................................................... 8
Table 4: Household Characteristics ............................................................................................ 10
Table 5: Income Distribution ....................................................................................................... 12
Table 6: Special Needs Groups .................................................................................................. 12
Table 9: Large Households by Tenure and Income Level, Glendora (2006-2008) ..................... 17
Table 10: Homeless Facilities Around Glendora ......................................................................... 21
Table 11: Housing Stock Characteristics .................................................................................... 23
Table 13: Changes in Median Home Sale Prices (2010-2012) ................................................... 26
Table 14: Median and Average Rents by Number of Bedrooms (2012) ..................................... 26
Table 15: Maximum Affordable Housing Costs (2012) ............................................................... 27
Table 16: Inventory of Assisted Housing .................................................................................... 30
Table 17: Rental Subsidies Required ......................................................................................... 31
Table 18: Estimated New Construction Costs ............................................................................ 32
Table 19: Market Value of At-Risk Housing Units ....................................................................... 32
Table 20: Housing Assistance Needs of Lower Income Households (2006-2008) ..................... 34
Table 21: Disposition of Home Purchase and Improvement Loan Applications ......................... 38
Table 22: Residential Land Use Categories ............................................................................... 39
Table 23: Residential Land Use Designations in Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan ..................... 40
Table 24: Residential Land Uses in Civic Center Area Plan ....................................................... 40
Table 26: Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan Development Standards .......................................... 44
Table 27: Civic Center Area Plan Development Standards ........................................................ 44
Table 28: Housing Types Permitted by Zone .............................................................................. 46
Table 29: Uses Permitted in Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan .................................................... 47
Table 30: Uses Permitted in Civic Center Area Plan .................................................................. 47
Table 31: Development Plan Reviews ........................................................................................ 53
Table 32: Planning and Development Fees ................................................................................ 56
Table 33: Off-Site Improvement Standards ................................................................................ 57
Table 34: Residential Capacity for the 2013-2021 Housing Element ......................................... 63
Table 36: Quantified Objectives .................................................................................................. 78
                                             City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                  November 2013
                                                                                                                                  ii
List of Figures
Figure 1: Population Growth Trends ............................................................................................. 5
Figure 2: Educational Attainment .................................................................................................. 8
Figure 3: Household Type............................................................................................................. 9
Figure 4: Median Household Income .......................................................................................... 11
Figure 5: Housing Units .............................................................................................................. 22
Figure 6: Housing Age ................................................................................................................ 24
Figure 7: Median Home Sales Price (2012) ................................................................................ 25
Figure 8: Income Needed to Afford Housing Compared with Income ......................................... 29
Figure 9: Overcrowding............................................................................................................... 35
                                               City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                    November 2013
                                                                                                                                   iii
 
1. INTRODUCTION
The Housing Element represents an awareness of the need within the City of Glendora to
assure that housing is provided for all economic segments of the community. The Element also
satisfies the legal requirements that housing policy be a part of the General Plan. This Glendora
Housing Element is in compliance with the 2013-2021 update cycle for jurisdictions in the
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) region.
A. Community Context
Located at the base of the San Gabriel Mountains in the eastern San Gabriel Valley, Glendora
began as a small citrus-producing community until the 1950s, when the community gradually
transformed into a more diversified residential-based community. The City of Glendora has
grown from a small community of approximately 2,000 residents around the time of its
incorporation in 1911 to 50,073 residents as of the 2010 Census.
Glendora remains a family-oriented community with large parks and open-space, excellent
public and private schools, and one of the lowest crime rates in the region. In addition, Glendora
residents benefit from comprehensive community services, including a state-of-the-art library.
Glendora is noted for its community spirit and extensive citizen participation in community life,
reflected in its motto "Pride of the Foothills."
The City's housing stock offers a range of housing opportunities, from older single-family
neighborhoods in the downtown Village area to newer homes in the northern foothills.
Meanwhile, the southern portion of the City has more affordable housing opportunities. In 2011,
median home sales prices were $370,000 for a single-family residence and $297,000 for
condominiums/townhouses, while typical apartment rents ranged from $650 to $3,350.
Although the improvement in the economy during the past few years has spurred residential
development, it has caused a rapid increase in housing and land prices. These increases place
an increasingly higher burden upon lower income individuals and families, seniors, the disabled,
large families, and other persons with special housing needs. Rising housing costs before the
most recent recession are reflected in the fact that about 63 percent of lower-income
households overpaid for housing between 2006 and 2008.
Glendora will face important housing issues during the housing element cycle including the
following: a balance between employment and housing opportunities; a match between the
supply of and demand for housing; preserving and enhancing affordability to provide housing for
all segments of the population; preserving the quality of the housing stock; and providing new
types of housing necessary to accommodate changes in the characteristics of the residents. This
Housing Element provides policies and programs to address these issues.
                                         City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                          November 2013
                                                                                              1
B. Role of Housing Element
The Housing Element is concerned with specifically identifying ways in which the housing needs
of the existing and future resident population can be met. This Housing Element covers the
planning period of October 15, 2013 through October 15, 2021, and identifies strategies and
programs that focus on:
        Conserving and improving existing affordable housing;
        Providing adequate housing sites;
        Assisting in the development of affordable housing;
        Removing governmental and other constraints to housing development; and
        Promoting equal housing opportunities.
An important goal of this Element is to preserve the character of existing single-family
residential neighborhoods and continue to improve the higher density neighborhoods. Diversity
in the types of housing in the City is necessary to accommodate a population with varying
socioeconomic needs. This Housing Element provides policies and programs to address these
issues.
The Glendora Housing Element consists of the following major components:
        Introduction: An overview of the purpose and contents of the Housing Element (Section
         1);
        Housing Needs Assessment: An analysis of the demographic and housing
         characteristics and trends (Section 2);
        Housing Constraints: A review of potential market, governmental, and environmental
         constraints to meeting the identified housing needs (Section 3);
        Housing Resources: An evaluation of resources available to address housing goals
         (Section 4);
        Housing Plan: A statement of the Housing Plan to address the identified housing needs,
         including housing goals, policies and programs (Section 5).
C. Data Sources
Various sources of information were used to prepare the Housing Element. The 2010 Census
provides the basis for population and household characteristics. Although dated, the Census
remains the most comprehensive and widely accepted source of information. In addition, 2010
Census data must be used in the Housing Element to ensure consistency with other Regional,
State, and federal housing plans. However, several data sources were used to supplement and
update the 2010 Census as follows:
        Population and demographic data is updated with estimates by the American
         Community Survey (ACS);1
1   The 2010 Census no longer collects detailed household and demographic information through the “long form.”
    Instead, detailed information is collected through a series of smaller surveys known as the American Community
    Surveys (ACS). Different data are collected every one, three, or five years and vary depending on the size of the
    jurisdiction. Results are averages over the survey timeframe. Therefore, multiple ACS datasets are used in this
    Housing Element, depending on the specific variable in question.
                                                 City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                        November 2013
                                                                                                               2

       Housing market information, such as home sales, rents, and vacancies, is updated by
        City records and property tax assessor files;
       Public and nonprofit agencies are consulted for data on special needs groups, the
        services available to them, and gaps in the system; and
       Lending patterns for home purchase and home improvement loans are provided
        through the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) database.
D. Public Participation
Opportunities for residents to recommend strategies, review, and comment on Glendora's
Housing Element are an important component in addressing the City's housing needs. This
section describes the public outreach process undertaken by the City in crafting the goals,
policies, and programs in this Housing Element.
Housing Element Outreach Process
The City held a study session before the Planning Commission on March 19, 2013 to present
the 2013-2021 Public Review Draft Housing Element. To ensure that all economic segments of
the community maintained involvement throughout the Housing Element update process, the
City advertised the study session through:
       Notifications published in the San Gabriel Valley Examiner;
       Special invitations sent out to local service providers, housing developers, and
        community groups; and
       Information posted on the City’s website
No members of the public commented on the Draft Housing Element at this meeting, however,
as of March 2013, the City has received one written comment, which is included in Appendix A.
This letter expressed some concern about the termination of a rental subsidy program at one of
the City’s affordable housing properties. The resident also questioned the City’s current
affordable housing strategy and the decision to promote high intensity residential uses along
Route 66. In addition, the resident requested additional information on the City’s infrastructure
capacity and affordable housing stock. She also provided suggestions for additional outreach
opportunities and possible actions the City could take to conserve and preserve its affordable
housing.
The City values the opinions of its residents and has taken a number of actions to address the
concerns of those who will be impacted by the termination of rental subsidies at Heritage Oaks.
The City has contracted a consultant to assist with the wind down of this program and has
already set aside funds to assist affected households. Glendora’s affordable housing strategy
and activities along the Route 66 corridor are consistent with the goals and objectives of the
City’s adopted plans, including the General Plan, 2008-2014 Housing Element and Route 66
Corridor Specific Plan, which were all developed with input from the community. City staff will
provide detailed information about its infrastructure capacity and affordable housing stock to
any resident who requests it and take into consideration any suggestion made by its residents.
Telephone Interviews
To solicit input from community stakeholders and agencies serving the needs of low and
moderate income persons and persons with special housing needs, telephone interviews with
housing developers and service providers were conducted during the development of the 2013-
2021 Housing Element.
                                         City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                          November 2013
                                                                                             3

As of the writing of this Draft Housing Element, two service providers have provided interviews (see
Appendix A) – Cory’s Kitchen Foodbank and EYE-DAS Foundation. These agencies have noted that in
recent years, partly due to the economy, the number of homeless persons (or those at risk of becoming
homeless) and the number of persons with special supportive service needs has increased.
Communities throughout the region, however, are unable to keep up with the needs of these individuals
because of diminishing funding at the federal, state, and local levels, The agencies have stated that
transitional housing options are needed to help the homeless regain financial independence.
E. Relationship to the General Plan
The 2013-2021 Housing Element is one of the seven mandatory elements of the City's
comprehensive General Plan. The City of Glendora completed an update of its General Plan
(called the Glendora Community Plan 2025) in 2006. The City's adopted General Plan is
currently comprised of the following seven required elements: (1) Land Use Element; (2)
Circulation Element; (3) Conservation Element; (4) Open Space/Recreation Element; (5) Safety
Element; (6) Noise Element; and (7) Housing Element, The City has also opted to include two
additional elements comprised of Air Quality and Historic Preservation. The City has completed
a review of the proposed Housing Element for internal consistency with the other adopted
elements of the general plan. As portions of the General Plan are amended in the future, the
Housing Element will be reviewed along with other elements to ensure internal consistency is
maintained.
Pursuant to SB 162 and SB 244, the City will review and update, as necessary, its Land Use
and Safety Elements upon completion of the Housing Element to address flood hazards and
management, and the provision of services and infrastructure in disadvantaged unincorporated
communities (if any).
                                           City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                November 2013
                                                                                                 4

2. HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
A. Population Characteristics
Population characteristics affect the type and amount of housing needed in a community.
Issues such as population growth, age characteristics, race/ethnicity, and employment trends
combine to influence the type of housing needed and ability to afford housing. This section
details the various population characteristics affecting housing needs in the City of Glendora.
1. Population Trends
Since incorporation in 1911, the City has grown from a small citrus-producing community of
2,000 persons to 50,073 persons by 2010. Historically, much of the City's population growth
was due to annexation of surrounding unincorporated land. From 1980 to 1990, annexations
led the City's population to grow by about 10,000. Whether from annexation, natural growth, or
in-migration, population growth can bring about change in the community’s demographic
composition, including age, race and ethnicity, household income, and other population
characteristics that can affect housing need.
According to the Census, the City's population was 50,073 persons in 2010. This represents an
approximately one-percent increase from the 2000 Census figure of 49,415. As shown in
Figure 1, Glendora's population growth was minimal between 2000 and 2010, as was growth in
neighboring areas. Among nearby jurisdictions, Covina’s growth rate was most similar to that
of Glendora, while Azusa’s population increased by approximately six percent. The Cities of La
Verne and San Dimas both experienced declines in total population of approximately two
percent and five percent, respectively.
                                Figure 1: Population Growth Trends
      Source: Bureau of the Census (1990-2010).
                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                             November 2013
                                                                                              5

2. Age Characteristics
Glendora's housing needs are determined largely by the age characteristics of residents. For
instance, each age group has distinct lifestyles, family type and size, income levels, and
housing preferences. As people move through each stage, their housing needs and preferences
also change. As a result, evaluating the changing age characteristics of a community is an
important factor in addressing future housing needs of residents.
Table 1 illustrates the age characteristics of residents from 1990 to 2010. As shown below,
between 2000 and 2010 the numbers of both Preschool Age and School Age children
decreased by 19 percent and 12 percent, respectively. The City’s College Age population
experienced an increase of 31 percent, while the number of Young Adults decreased by 18
percent, during the 2000s. This younger segment of the adult population typically occupies
rental units, condominiums, or smaller and more affordable single-family homes.
Large numerical increases were evident among the Middle Age population, which increased 26
percent, and the Senior Adult population, which increased 14 percent. Middle-aged adults
typically prefer larger homes as they form families and raise children. In terms of housing need,
Senior Adults typically live in single-family homes, but may begin to consider trading-down their
larger homes for more affordable housing such as smaller homes and condominiums.
The largest discernible changes in the City’s age profile have been the decrease in the
proportion of Young Adults (29 percent in 2000 versus 24 percent in 2010) and the increase in
the proportion of Middle Age Adults (23 percent in 2000 versus 29 percent in 2010). These
shifts were notable, but not substantial, and could have been caused by younger people moving
out of the City. Glendora does have a significant older adult and senior population, however,
and the City’s proportion of Middle Age and Senior Adults has increased since 2000. As the
City’s population continues to age, there may be less pressure on the housing market for larger
homes and greater need for smaller, more affordable homes.
                               Table 1: Age Characteristics and Trends
                         1990 Census         2000 Census          2010 Census        % Change
   Age Groups                                                                     1990-    2000-
                      Persons    Percent  Persons    Percent   Persons   Percent
                                                                                  2000     2010
Preschool (under
                         3,619        7%     3,103        6%      2,506      5%     -14%     -19%
5 years)
School Age
                         9,007       19%    10,546       21%      9,251     19%      17%     -12%
(5-17)
College Age (18-
                         4,374        9%     3,737        8%      4,912     10%     -15%      31%
24)
Young Adults
                        15,715       33%    14,373       29%     11,842     24%      -9%     -17%
(25-44)
Middle Age (45-
                        10,034       21%    11,473       23%     14,483     29%      14%      26%
64)
Senior Adults
                         5,079       11%     6,183       13%      7,079     14%      22%      15%
(65+)
Total                   47,828      100%    49,415     100%      50,073    100%       3%        1%
Median                       33.7                 36.9                40.2             --        --
Source: Bureau of the Census (1990-2010).
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                              6

  3. Race and Ethnicity
  Race and ethnicity2 provide valuable insight about the housing needs of a community because
  housing preference varies along cultural lines. Different cultures have different housing needs.
  For example, some cultures are accustomed to living with extended family members or other
  relatives, or having a large family size. Understanding changes in race/ethnicity provides a basis
  for addressing housing needs.
  The City of Glendora, like most communities throughout San Gabriel Valley, has experienced
  gradual changes in the racial and ethnic composition of its population. From 2000 to 2010, the
  City’s total population increased by less than 700 persons, but clear shifts in Glendora’s race
  and ethnicity profile have occurred. As shown in Table 2, there have been significant increases
  in the City’s Hispanic population since 1990. These shifts are due to two factors: 1) actual
  changes in the City’s demographic profile; and 2) a change in the way the Census reports race
  and ethnicity.
  As of 2010, Whites continued to make up the majority of the population, followed by Hispanics
  and Asian-Americans. Since 2000, the number of Hispanic residents in the City has increased
  by 43 percent while the number of Asian-Americans has increased by 30 percent. The White
  population in Glendora was the only racial/ethnic category to experience a decrease (of about
  15 percent) since 2000. The number of Black residents in the City has climbed steadily over the
  years, but the proportion of Black residents has remained fairly steady.
                                            Table 2: Race and Ethnicity
                            1990                       2000                      2010               % Change
Race/Ethnicity
                    Persons Percent           Persons Percent           Persons Percent       1990-2000 2000-2010
White                  37,414         78%       33,564          68%       28,565        57%        -10%          -15%
Hispanic                6,988         15%       10,740          22%       15,348        31%         54%           43%
Asian-
                        2,603           5%        3,003          6%        3,898         8%         15%           30%
American
Black                     482           1%          704          1%            834       2%         46%           18%
All Other                 341           1%        1,404          3%        1,428         3%        312%            2%
Total                  47,828        100%       49,415         100%       50,073       100%          3%            1%
Source: Bureau of the Census (1990- 2010).
  4. Employment
  Education and employment have an important impact upon housing needs to the extent that
  housing affordability is tied to household income. According to the 2009-2011 American
  Community Survey (ACS), an estimated total of 25,035 Glendora residents were in the labor
  force, with approximately 2,398 residents unemployed. Glendora’s unemployment rate (9.6
  percent) was lower than the overall unemployment rate for Los Angeles County (12.2 percent).
  2    The Census distinguishes racial groups from ethnic groups. It counts ethnicity as either being of Hispanic or
       Latino origin or not being of Hispanic of Latino origin. The groups are based on social and political
       considerations, not scientific or anthropological ones and the Census asks respondents to indicate whether or
       not they are of Hispanic origin as well as the racial group they identify with.
                                                    City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                                               7

The education level of Glendora residents was higher than that of County residents (Figure 2).
The City had less than half the percentage of residents over age 25 without a high school
diploma, as compared to the County. Glendora also had a higher percentage of residents with
some college education and Associate degrees, which usually translate into greater income-
earning potential. The percentage of residents holding four-year degrees and graduate or
professional degrees were equal for both the City and County.
                                Figure 2: Educational Attainment
        35%
                                                             Los Angeles County    Glendora
        30%
        25%
        20%
        15%
        10%
         5%
         0%
                 Less than High School       Some        Associate    Bachelor's   Graduate/
                High School   Diploma       College       Degree       Degree    Prof essional
                                                                                    Degree
        Source: American Community Survey (ACS), (2009-2011)
Table 3 summarizes the occupations of Glendora residents. As of 2011, the largest proportion
of residents were employed in management, business, science, and arts occupations (39
percent), followed closely by residents employed in sales and office occupations (32 percent).
Individuals employed in management, business, science, and arts positions typically have
higher incomes, while those employed in service or agriculture related occupations typically
earn lower incomes. In 2011, the City had 227 residents employed in farming, fishing, and
forestry occupations, representing approximately one percent of the civilian employed
population 16 years and over.
                                   Table 3: Employment Profile
                                                                               2011
                                Occupations
                                                                       Persons     Percent
           Management, Business, Science and Arts                          9,006       39%
           Sales and Office                                                7,361       32%
           Service                                                         2,928       13%
           Production, Transportation, and Material Moving                 1,971        9%
           Natural Resources, Construction, and Maintenance                1,871        8%
           Total                                                          23,137      100%
           Source: American Community Survey (ACS), (2007-2011).
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                              November 2013
                                                                                               8
B. Household Characteristics
Household type and size, income levels, the presence of special needs populations, and other
household characteristics influence the type of housing that is suitable to meet the diverse
housing needs of residents. This section details the various household characteristics affecting
housing needs.
1. Household Type
The Census reports that Glendora had 17,141 households in 2010. The distribution of
households is also documented in the 2010 Census. As shown in Figure 3, the majority of the
City's households were families (76 percent). Of total households in the City, 25 percent were
comprised of married couples with children under age 18. Married couples with no children
made up the largest group of households at 32 percent. Singles and Other non-family
households comprised the remaining 24 percent of households residing in Glendora.
                                      Figure 3: Household Type
                                                                           Other
                                                                             5%
                                               Singles
                                                  19%
                         Other
                       Families
                          19%                                         Families
                                                                   (Married With
                                                                     Children)
                                          Families                      25%
                                          (Married
                                           Without
                                          Children)
                                             32%
            Source: Bureau of the Census, (2010).
Table 4 illustrates changes in the composition of households from 2000 to 2010. During this
period, the distribution of families and non-families remained fairly stable, with families still
comprising over three-quarters of all households in Glendora. Although the proportion of
“Family” households has remained fairly constant, the prevalence of certain types of family
households in the City did change. The proportion of married families with children, for example,
has decreased over the years while the proportion of other families (such as single-parent or
extended families) has increased.
                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                               November 2013
                                                                                             9

                                  Table 4: Household Characteristics
                              1990                 2000                 2010           % Change
 Household Type                                                                     1990-    2000-
                      Persons     Percent  Persons     Percent   Persons   Percent
                                                                                    2000     2010
Families                12,615        77%    12,985       77%      13,014     76%       3%     <0%
  Married With
                         5,318        33%      5,065      30%       4,325     25%      -5%    -15%
  Children
  Married Without
                         5,098        31%      5,205      31%       5,523     32%       2%      6%
  Children
  Other Families         2,199        13%      2,715      16%       3,166     19%      23%     17%
Non-families             3,712        23%      3,955      23%       4,127     24%       7%      4%
  Singles                2,865        18%      3,254      19%       3,256     19%      14%      0%
  Other                    847         5%        701       4%         871      5%     -17%     24%
Total                   16,237      100%     16,940      100%      17,141    100%       4%      1%
Average
                          2.88                  2.88                 2.88               0%      0%
Household Size
Source: Bureau of the Census, (1990-2010).
2. Household Income
Income is the most important factor in determining whether a household or family is able to
balance housing costs with basic necessities of life while avoiding housing problems such as
cost burden and overcrowding. Income levels can vary considerably among households, based
upon tenure, household type, location of residence, and race/ethnicity, among others.
According to the 2007-2011 ACS, the estimated median household income for Glendora was
$75,939. Figure 4 compares the City's median household income with that of nearby
communities in the San Gabriel Valley and Los Angeles County. As shown, four out of the five
East San Gabriel Valley cities had higher median household incomes than the County.
                                           City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                             November 2013
                                                                                              10
                               Figure 4: Median Household Income
                  $90,000
                  $80,000
                  $70,000
                  $60,000
                  $50,000
                  $40,000                       $75,939    $77,088  $74,610
                                      $67,638
                  $30,000     $53,826                                       $56,266
                  $20,000
                  $10,000
                       $0
                              Azusa   Covina Glendora La Verna        San LA County
                                                                    Dimas
                 Source: American Community Survey (ACS), (2007-2011).
To facilitate the analysis of income distribution among households in communities, the State
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) groups households into categories
by income. Income categories are determined as a percentage of the Area Median Income
(AMI) and then adjusted for household size in the following manner:
       Extremely Low Income- less than 30 percent of the AMI
       Very Low Income- between 31 and 50 percent of the AMI
       Low Income- between 51 and 80 percent of the AMI
       Moderate Income- between 81 and 120 percent of the AMI
       Above Moderate Income- greater than 120 percent of the AMI
Collectively, extremely low, very low, and low income households are referred to as lower
income households (up to 80 percent AMI.
The 2010 Census does not collect information on the number of households belonging to each
of the income categories described above. However, household income data were tabulated by
the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) using the 2005-2009 ACS (Table
5). As shown below, between 2005 and 2009, approximately 27 percent of the City’s
households earned lower incomes, while approximately 73 percent had earned incomes of
moderate or above.
                                         City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                          11

                                         Table 5: Income Distribution
                                                     Number of                                 Los Angeles
                 Income Group                                           Percent of Total
                                                   Households                                County Percent
    Extremely Low (30% or less)                                1,225                7.4%                 13.7%
    Very Low (31 to 50%)                                       1,125                6.8%                 11.5%
    Low (51 to 80%)                                            2,157               13.1%                 15.6%
    Moderate (81 to 100%)                                      2,623               15.9%                 16.8%
    Above Moderate (over 100%)                                 9,332               56.7%                 42.4%
    Total                                                     16,463              100.0%                100.0%
  Source: SCAG (ACS, 2005-2009).
    3. Special Needs
    Certain segments of the population have greater difficulty in finding decent, affordable housing
    due to special circumstances. Special circumstances may be related to one's employment and
    income, family characteristics, disability, and household characteristics among others. As a
    result, certain groups within Glendora may experience a higher prevalence of lower income,
    overpayment, overcrowding, or other housing problems.
    These “special needs” households include seniors, persons with disabilities, large households,
    single-parent households, people living in poverty, farmworkers, and the homeless. Table 6
    summarizes the special needs groups within the City.
                                        Table 6: Special Needs Groups
                                      Number of               Owners                Renters          Percent of
                                    Households/                                                          Total
     Special Needs Groups
                                       Persons          Number     Percent   Number      Percent     Household/
                                                                                                        Persons
Households that include at
least one Senior (person age                   4,839         n.a.       n.a.       n.a.       n.a.            28%
65 or over)
Senior-Headed Households                       4,106       3,476       85%         630       15%              24%
Senior Living Alone                            1,428       1,058       74%         370       26%               8%
Persons with Disabilities*                     4,640        n.a.       n.a.       n.a.        n.a.             9%
Large Households                               2,437       1,801       74%         636       26%              14%
Single-Parent Households                       1,373         n.a.       n.a.       n.a.       n.a.             8%
Female-Headed Households
                                               2,280         n.a.       n.a.       n.a.       n.a.            13%
With Children
People Living in Poverty**                     3,956         n.a.       n.a.       n.a.       n.a.             8%
Farmworkers (persons)**                          227         n.a.       n.a.       n.a.       n.a.             1%
Homeless                                          29         n.a.       n.a.       n.a.       n.a.           <1%
Notes:
*=2010 Census data not available. Estimate is from the 2007-2011 ACS.
**=2010 Census data not available. Estimate is from the 2009-2011 ACS.
n.a. = Data not available.
Sources: Bureau of the Census (2010), and American Community Survey (ACS), (2007-2011) and (2009-2011).
                                                  City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                     November 2013
                                                                                                          12

Seniors
Seniors often have special housing needs due to income, location concerns, health care costs,
and disabilities. According to the 2010 Census, 14 percent of Glendora’s population (7,079
persons) was comprised of seniors, defined as 65 years and older. Furthermore, 24 percent of
all households in Glendora were headed by a senior.
Some of the special needs of seniors are as follows:
         Disabilities. Of the senior population, 28 percent have a disability.
         Limited Income. Many seniors have limited income for health expenses. Because of their
          retired status, 32 percent of senior households in Glendora earned extremely low or very
          low incomes, defined as below 30 percent and 50 percent of the AMI, respectively.
         Overpayment. Because of the limited supply of affordable housing, about 48 percent of
          senior renter-households and 31 percent of senior owner-households were overpaying
          for their housing, defined as spending more than 30 percent of household income on
          housing costs.
Senior heads of households have a greater level of need than householders of other age
groups. Many seniors have fixed incomes and experience financial difficulty in coping with
rising housing and living costs. Senior homeowners often require help in meeting ongoing
housing costs, especially utility and related costs, and many are forced to defer necessary
repairs. The prevalence of disabilities in the City’s senior population can further present unique
challenges and housing needs for this population.
Resources Available
The special needs of seniors can be met through a range of services, including congregate
care, rent subsides, shared housing, and housing rehabilitation assistance. For the frail or
disabled elderly, housing can be modified with features that help ensure continued independent
living arrangements. Elderly with mobility/self care limitations also benefit from public transit
alternatives.
According to Community Care Licensing Division records, 19 licensed residential care facilities
for the elderly are located in Glendora with a total capacity of 167 beds. Larger community care
facilities, convalescent homes, and other similar uses for more than six persons are permitted in
the Medical Services (MS) Zone and in the TCMU and CRR subdistricts of the Route 66 Corridor
Specific Plan, subject to a conditional use permit. The City recently amended its Zoning Code to
differentiate between small residential care facilities (that serve six or fewer persons) and large
residential care facilities (that serve seven or more people). Pursuant to the Lanterman Act,
licensed residential care facilities for six or fewer persons are treated as a regular residential
use and permitted where residential uses are permitted.
The Los Angeles County Housing Authority currently provides Housing Choice Vouchers
(Section 8) to assist very low income households in Glendora. The Human Services Division of
the City’s Community Services Department and the La Fetra Center for Seniors provide
programs and services for seniors to promote dignity and self-esteem, foster independence,
facilitate social interaction, and dispel negative stereotypes. Services include the following:
information and referral; education classes and leisure activities; social activities; recreational
activities; nutrition program; legal aid; notary services; and tax preparation. The La Fetra
                                           City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                              November 2013
                                                                                              13

Center’s program schedule is detailed in a seasonal brochure distributed by the Community
Services Department. For seniors and permanently disabled persons in need of transportation
services, Glendora’s Mini-Bus offers curb-to-curb transportation.
Persons with Disabilities (including Developmental Disabilities)
Physical, mental, and/or developmental disabilities may prevent a person from working, restrict
one’s mobility, or make it difficult to care for oneself. Thus, persons with disabilities often have
special housing needs related to limited earning capacity, a lack of accessible and affordable
housing, and higher health costs associated with a disability. An additional segment of residents
suffer from disabilities that require living in an institutional setting. Because of these conditions,
persons with disabilities have special housing needs.
The 2010 Census did not collect information on disability. According to 2009-2011 ACS data,
approximately nine percent of Glendora residents had a disability. The ACS also tallied the
number of disabilities by type for residents with one or more disabilities. Among the disabilities
tallied, ambulatory difficulties were most prevalent (52 percent), while independent living (45
percent) and cognitive (41 percent) difficulties were both also highly prevalent. Among the
senior population, ambulatory (63 percent) and independent living (58 percent) difficulties were
the most common (Table 7).
                                 Table 7: Disability Status (2009-2011)
                                                              % of Disabilities Tallied
                       Disability Type                Age 5      Age 18
                                                                               Age 65+  Total
                                                       to 17       to 64
            With a hearing difficulty                      8%         20%         40%      28%
            With a vision difficulty                      13%         18%         18%      18%
            With a cognitive difficulty                   63%         48%         28%      41%
            With an ambulatory difficulty                 28%         46%         63%      52%
            With a self-care difficulty                   37%         26%         24%      26%
            With an independent living difficulty                     43%         58%      45%
            Total Persons with Disabilities                441       2,216       1,983   4,640
            Notes:
                1. Persons under 5 years of age are not included in this table.
                2. Persons may have multiple disabilities.
            Source: American Community Survey (ACS) (2009-2011).
The living arrangement of persons with disabilities depends on the severity of the disabilities
and finances. Many persons live at home in an independent arrangement or with other family
members. To maintain independent living, persons living with disabilities may need assistance.
Four factors – affordability, design, location, and discrimination – significantly limit the supply of
housing available to households of persons with disabilities. The most obvious housing need
for persons with disabilities is housing that is adapted to their needs. State and federal
legislation mandate that a percentage of units in new or substantially rehabilitated multi-family
apartment complexes be made accessible to individuals with limited physical mobility. Most
single-family homes, however, are inaccessible to people with mobility and sensory limitations.
Housing may not be adaptable to widened doorways and hallways, access ramps, larger
bathrooms, lowered countertops, and other features necessary for accessibility. Location of
housing is also an important factor for many persons with disabilities, as they often rely upon
public transportation to travel to necessary services and shops.
                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                   November 2013
                                                                                                 14

Persons with Developmental Disabilities
A recent change in State law requires that the Housing Element discuss the housing needs of
persons with developmental disabilities. As defined in Section 4512 of the Welfare and
Institutions Code, developmental disability means “a disability that originates before an
individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely, and
constitutes a substantial disability for that individual. As defined by the Director of
Developmental Services, in consultation with the Superintendent of Public Instruction, this term
shall include mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term shall also
include disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation or to require
treatment similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall not include
other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.”
The Census does not record developmental disabilities. According to the U.S. Administration on
Developmental Disabilities, an accepted estimate of the percentage of the population that can
be defined as developmentally disabled is 1.5 percent. This equates to 751 persons in the City
of Glendora with developmental disabilities, based on the 2010 Census population.
According to the State’s Department of Developmental Services, as of November 2012,
approximately 568 Glendora residents with developmental disabilities were being assisted at the
Developmental Center and Regional Center. Most of these individuals were residing in a
private home with their parent of guardian and 149 of these persons with developmental
disabilities were under the age of 18.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional
housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment
where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an
institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because
developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the
developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an
appropriate level of independence as an adult.
Resources Available
Under State and federal laws, local governments are required to provide “reasonable
accommodation” to persons with disabilities when exercising planning and zoning powers. In
2008, the City revised its Zoning Ordinance to include standards and policies to reasonably
accommodate the housing needs of persons with disabilities.
In addition, community care facilities within the City provide a supportive housing environment to
persons with special needs in a group situation. Thirty-three licensed community care facilities
are located in Glendora. As shown in Table 8, three types of facilities are tabulated: adult
residential facility, residential care facility for the elderly, and adult day care. Larger community
care facilities, convalescent homes, and other similar uses for more than six persons are
permitted in the Medical Services (MS) Zone and in the TCMU and CRR subdistricts of the Route
66 Corridor Specific Plan, subject to a conditional use permit. The City recently amended its
Zoning Code to differentiate between small residential care facilities (that serve six or fewer
persons) and large residential care facilities (that serve seven or more people). Pursuant to the
Lanterman Act, licensed residential care facilities for six or fewer persons are treated as a
regular residential use and permitted where residential uses are permitted.
                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                              November 2013
                                                                                                15

                          Table 8: Licensed Community Care Facilities
                    Type of Facility                    # of Facilities    Total Capacity
                    Adult Residential Facility                       12                 166
                    Residential Care for the Elderly                 19                 167
                    Adult Day Care                                     2                174
                    Source: State Department of Social Services, Licensing Division, (2012).
Additional community services offered to residents with disabilities include Glendora’s Mini-Bus
service, which offers curb-to-curb transportation.               Mini-Bus program details along with
information on how to access additional paratransit services are included in the City’s seasonal
Community Services brochure. In partnership with the non-profit, Glendora Public Library
Friends Foundation, temporarily or permanently disabled adults who are homebound can have
library materials delivered to their home. The foundation also operates the Glendora READS! –
Adult Literacy program, which sponsors outreach programs for adults who are homebound or
disabled in health care-retirement facilities. Other services offered to homebound residents
include meals delivered twice daily Monday through Friday through the YWCA’s Meals-on-
Wheels Program. For residents who have vision disorders, the Eye-DAS (Eye Diseases are
Serious) program by the Eye-DAS Foundation provides an educational and social environment,
which meets on a regular basis, to ensure that visually impaired residents are informed about
current medical and social issues as well as the latest in available resources.
Large Households
Large households are defined as those with five or more members. A large household may be a
large family (e.g., parents with children and/or extended family members), two or more families
sharing the same housing unit, more than five unrelated individuals living together, or any of
these combinations. Large households are identified as a group with special housing needs
based on the limited availability of affordable, adequately sized housing units. It is not
uncommon for large households to have lower incomes or consist of more than one family. To
save on housing costs, many lower income large households resort to residing in smaller units,
frequently resulting in overcrowded living conditions. Large households can also put a physical
strain on the housing stock, resulting from the greater wear-and-tear that more inhabitants can
have on a unit.
According to the 2010 Census, Glendora had 2,437 large households, which made up 14
percent of the City’s total households. The housing needs of large households are typically met
through larger units. According to the 2009-2011 ACS, Glendora had a total of 11,742 housing
units with three or more bedrooms that could reasonably accommodate large families without
overcrowding. Overcrowding, however, was still common because a vast majority of these
larger units were owner occupied and generally more expensive.
Table 9 shows that, between 2006 and 2008, large households were more likely to experience
housing problems, when compared to total households in the City. Housing problems that are
taken into consideration include, cost burden (overpayment) greater than 30 percent of income
and/or overcrowding and/or without complete kitchen or plumbing facilities.
                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                     November 2013
                                                                                                   16

       Table 9: Large Households by Tenure and Income Level, Glendora (2006-2008)
                                            Renters                      Owners
  Household by Type, Income, &        Large                        Large                     Total
        Housing Problem                              Total                      Total     Households
                                     Related                      Related
                                                    Renters                    Owners
                                   (5 or more)                  (5 or more)
Household Income <=30% AMI                    0           610            80         775         1,385
  With any Housing Problem                    --        75%           100%         75%           75%
  Cost Burden >30%                            --        75%           100%         74%           74%
  Cost Burden >50%                            --        75%            75%         65%           70%
Household Income >30 to                      60           630            55         800         1,430
  <=50% AMI
  With any Housing Problem               100%           83%           100%         68%           74%
  Cost Burden >30%                       100%          100%           100%         61%           83%
  Cost Burden >50%                          0%           33%           36%         38%           36%
Household Income >50 to                      55           825           175       1,520         2,345
  <=80% AMI
  With any Housing Problem               100%           72%            89%         58%           63%
  Cost Burden >30%                       100%           72%            77%         58%           63%
  Cost Burden >50%                          0%           27%           20%         33%           31%
Household Income >80% AMI                  325         2,245          1,125       9,370       11,615
  With any Housing Problem                25%            17%           38%         33%           30%
  Cost Burden >30%                          6%           14%           33%         32%           28%
  Cost Burden >50%                          0%             1%           4%            5%           4%
Total Households                           440         4,310          1,435      12,465       16,775
  With any Housing Problem                44%            46%           50%         41%           42%
  Cost Burden >30%                        31%            48%           45%         40%           42%
  Cost Burden >50%                          0%           21%           11%         14%           16%
Source: HUD, CHAS, (2006-2008).
Resources Available
Lower and moderate income large households can benefit from various affordable housing
programs. For example, Housing Choice Vouchers can be used to help relieve overcrowding for
very low income households.
The City’s Recreation Division offers a variety of recreational, educational, and social activities
to the residents of Glendora. Programs include special community events, youth sports
leagues, educational classes, fitness classes, and leisure activities and trips. The Crowther
Teen & Family Center offers free drop-in services specifically to youth residents in grades sixth
through eighth, while other facilities throughout the City offer supervised activities to youth of all
ages. Program schedules and details for the services detailed above are accessible to
residents through the seasonal brochure distributed through the Community Services
Department.
For residents in need of aid with child care the Citrus College Orfalea Family Children’s Center
provides low and moderate income Glendora households with access to licensed family day
care and pre-school services for their children.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                             November 2013
                                                                                                17

Single Parent Households
Single-parent households, particularly female-headed families with children, often require
special consideration and assistance as a result of their greater need for affordable housing,
accessible day care, health care, and other supportive services. Because of their relatively
lower incomes and higher living expenses, single-parent households usually have more limited
options for affordable, decent, and safe housing. As a result, single parents are considered to
be among the most at-risk groups facing poverty.
According to the 2010 Census, 4,213 female-headed households, approximately 25 percent of
total households, were residing in Glendora. Of these female headed households, 17 percent
(1,005 households) have children. Female-headed households with children in particular, tend
to have lower incomes, thus limiting housing availability for this group. Overall, 651 (five
percent) of all families in Glendora were living below the poverty level between 2009 and 2011.
By comparison, 15 percent of all female-headed families were living below the poverty level.
For female-headed families with children, 19 percent were living below the poverty level.
Resources Available
General programs and policies outlined in the Housing Plan section will help to provide
affordable housing for single-parent female-headed households, with and without children.
In addition, various nonprofit organizations provide supportive services to assist lower income
families. Through the YWCA – Wings program, battered women and their children up to age 18
have access to emergency shelter and prevention and intervention services. The Glendora
Welfare Association offers assistance in financial emergencies by providing services such as,
food vouchers, gasoline vouchers, bus tokens, rental assistance, and utility payments. For
assistance with childcare the Citrus College Orfalea Family Children’s Center provides low and
moderate income households with access to licensed family day care and pre-school services
for their children.
Residents Living Below the Poverty Level
Families with incomes below the poverty level, typically those households with extremely low
and very low incomes, are at greatest risk of becoming homeless and typically require special
programs to assist them in meeting their rent and mortgage obligations so as to not become
homeless. The 2006-2010 ACS identified eight percent of all Glendora residents as living below
the poverty level. These households need assistance with housing subsidies, utility and other
living expense subsidies, as well as other supportive services.
Resources Available
Persons with limited income can benefit from single room occupancy (SRO) housing. The City
recently amended the Zoning Code to permit SRO units by-right in the CRR subdistrict of the
Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan.
Additional services are available in the City to aid households living in poverty. Through the
Glendora Welfare Association assistance is provided in cases of financial emergencies by
providing services such as, food vouchers, gasoline vouchers, bus tokens, rental assistance,
utility payments, and referrals to services outside of the City. For assistance with childcare the
Citrus College Orfalea Family Children’s Center provides low and moderate income households
with access to licensed family day care and pre-school services for their children.
                                         City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                          November 2013
                                                                                             18

Farmworkers
Farmworkers are traditionally defined as persons whose primary incomes are earned through
permanent or seasonal agricultural labor. Permanent farm laborers work in the fields,
processing plants, or support activities on a generally year-round basis. When workload
increases during harvest periods, the labor force is supplemented by seasonal labor, often
supplied by a labor contractor. For some crops, farms may employ migrant workers, defined as
those whose travel distance to work prevents them from returning to their primary residence
every evening.
According to the 2007-2011 ACS, only 227 Glendora residents were employed in the
agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining industry, representing less than one
percent of the residents in 2011. The City has no agriculturally designated land.
Resources Available
Because farmworkers make up such a small percentage of the City’s population, no specific
programs are necessary.
Homeless Persons
State law (Section 65583(a)(7)) mandates that Housing Elements address the special needs of
homeless persons. “Homelessness” as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD), describes an individual (not imprisoned or otherwise detained) who:
     o   Lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence; and
     o   Has a primary nighttime residence that is:
          A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary
             living accommodations (including welfare hotels, congregate shelters, and
             transitional housing for the mentally ill);
          An institution that provides a temporary residence for individuals intended to be
             institutionalized; or
          A public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping
             accommodation for human beings.
This definition does not include persons living in substandard housing, (unless it has been
officially condemned); persons living in overcrowded housing (for example, doubled up with
others), persons being discharged from mental health facilities (unless the person was
homeless when entering and is considered to be homeless at discharge), or persons who may
be at risk of homelessness (for example, living temporarily with family or friends.)
Homelessness is a regional (and national) problem, and in a major metropolitan region,
individual municipal governments lack the resources to implement solutions to eliminate
homelessness. While the exact number of homeless people in the City on any given night is
unknown, a relatively small share of the region’s homeless population is found in Glendora. The
2011 Greater Los Angeles Homeless Count, completed by the Los Angeles Homeless Services
Authority (LAHSA), estimated that there were 29 homeless people in Glendora.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                           19

Resources Available
There are three major types of facilities that provide shelter for homeless individuals and
families: emergency shelters, transitional housing, and service-enriched housing. These types
of facilities are defined below:
    Emergency Shelter: Provides overnight shelter and fulfills a client's basic needs (i.e.
    food, clothing, and medical care) either on-site or through off-site services. The
    permitted length of stay can vary from one day at a time to two months, depending upon
    whether the shelter is short-term or long-term.
    Transitional Housing: Provides housing for up to two years. Residents of transitional
    housing are usually connected to rehabilitative services, including substance abuse and
    mental health care interventions, employment services, individual and group counseling
    and life skills training.
    Permanent Housing: Refers to permanent housing that is affordable in the community
    and/or "service-enriched" permanent housing that is linked with on-going supportive
    services (on-site or off-site) and is designed to allow formerly homeless clients to live at
    the facility on an indefinite basis.
In response to changes in the State Housing Element law, the City amended the Zoning Code in
2011 to specifically identify emergency shelters as a permitted use at two locations in the City.
The two locations include twelve parcels, with a total area of 122,416 square feet (2.81 acres).
No emergency shelters and transitional housing facilities are located in Glendora. However,
several regional facilities serve the homeless in the Eastern San Gabriel Valley (Table 10).
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                              20
                         Table 10: Homeless Facilities Around Glendora
             Facility              Beds                Clients                    Type          Location
East San Gabriel Valley                    Single Men and Women
                                     130                                   Winter Shelter       Pomona
Coalition for the Homeless                 (18+ years with no children)
East San Gabriel Valley
                                      10   Families with Children          Job’s Shelter        El Monte
Coalition for the Homeless
California Hispanic Commission
                                      32   Families with Children          Emergency Shelter    El Monte
on Alcohol and Drug Abuse
California Hispanic Commission
                                      28   Single Women (18+ years)        Emergency Shelter    Pomona
on Alcohol and Drug Abuse
                                           Single Men and Women            Transitional
Casitas Esperanza                     14                                                        El Monte
                                           (18+ years with no children)    Housing
                                           Single Men and Women            Transitional
Casitas Pacificas                     14                                                        El Monte
                                           (18+ years with no children)    Housing
                                           Single Men and Women            Transitional
Casitas Tranquilas                    15                                                        El Monte
                                           (18+ years with no children)    Housing
Women in Need Growing                      Victims of Domestic                                  West
                                      32                                   Emergency Shelter
Strong (WINGS)                             Violence                                             Covina
Our House Shelter                     17   Families with Children          Emergency Shelter    Pomona
                                           Single Men and Women
Pomona Neighborhood Center           100                                   Winter Shelter       Pomona
                                           (18+ years with no children)
                                           Single Men and Women
Ryan Manor                            12                                   Transitional Shelter Pomona
                                           (18+ years with no children)
City of Pomona                         5   Veterans                        Transitional Shelter Pomona
                                           Victims of Domestic
House of Ruth                         35                                   Transitional Shelter Pomona
                                           Violence
Gateway Transitional Housing          13   Families with Children          Transitional Shelter Pomona
Prototypes                            30   Single Women (18+ years)        Women’s Center       Pomona
Pomona Apartments                     52   Families with Children          Transitional Shelter Pomona
Foothill AIDS Project                 10   Mixed Populations               Shelter Plus Care    Pomona
                                           Single Men and Women
Tri-City Mental Health Center         14                                   Shelter Plus Care    Pomona
                                           (18+ years with no children)
                                                                           Permanent
Prototypes-Pomona Apartments          52   Families with Children          Supportive           Pomona
                                                                           Housing
Source: Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority Continuum of Care, (2007).
                                           City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                 November 2013
                                                                                                     21

C. Housing Stock Characteristics
This section of the Housing Element assesses various housing characteristics and conditions
that affect the well-being of City residents. Housing factors evaluated include the following:
housing stock and growth; tenure and vacancy rates; age and condition; and housing costs and
affordability.
1. Housing Growth
The City experienced rapid housing growth in the 1980s, the majority of which was due to
annexation of adjacent unincorporated land. Since 1990, however, residential housing
development has slowed significantly due primarily to the scarcity of vacant land and a
reduction in demand. Between 1990 and 2000, the number of housing units in the City
increased by 1.6 percent, from 16,876 units to 17,145 units. By 2010, the number of housing
units in Glendora grew to 17,778, an increase of four percent since 2000. As exhibited in Figure
5, housing growth in Glendora between 2000 and 2010 was most similar to that of nearby La
Verne, slightly less than the growth that occurred in the County of Los Angeles.
                                         Figure 5: Housing Units
            10%
              9%
              8%
              7%
              6%
       %
    Change 5%
              4%
              3%
              2%
              1%
              0%
                        Azusa        Covina       Glendora      La Verne   San Dimas  LA County
        1990-2000       -1.7%         1.6%           1.6%         1.6%       8.9%       3.4%
        2000-2010        2.9%         1.3%           3.7%         3.5%       0.0%       5.3%
    Source: Bureau of the Census, (1990- 2010).
2. Housing Type and Tenure
Table 11 summarizes various characteristics of Glendora's housing stock. The composition of
the current housing stock has remained essentially unchanged since 2000. Single-family
detached homes continued to make up approximately three-quarters of the housing stock, while
multiple-family units remain about 15 percent of total housing units. There was, however, a
slight decrease in the number of mobile homes during the 2000s. Specifically, two mobile home
                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                             November 2013
                                                                                               22
parks were removed along Route 66. One of the sites was redeveloped as an 87-unit
affordable family housing project – Elwood Family Apartments.
The proportion of owner-occupied households in Glendora decreased slightly between 2000
and 2010. Glendora remains a primarily owner-occupied community though, with about 70
percent of the City’s households owning their homes, far exceeding the countywide average of
47 percent.
                               Table 11: Housing Stock Characteristics
                                          2000                                      2011
  Housing Type
                          No. of Units            % of Total          No. of Units         % of Total
Single-Family
    Detached                       12,461                   73%                12,830                74%
    Attached                         1,096                   6%                 1,125                 7%
Multiple-Family
    2-4 Units                          696                   4%                   707                 4%
    5+ Units                         2,032                  12%                 1,863                11%
Mobile homes                           862                   5%                   733                 4%
Other                                   22                  <1%                     0                  0
Total                              17,169                  100%                17,258              100%
Owner-Occupied                     12,376                   74%                11,355                70%
Renter-Occupied                      4,443                  26%                 4,987                30%
Vacancy Rate                             1.9%                                       5.3%
Source: Bureau of the Census, (2000) and American Community Survey (ACS), (2009-2011).
Between 2000 and 2010 the vacancy rate in the City increased from 1.9 percent to 5.3 percent.
The vacancy rate was highest for rental units at 3.1 percent, while the vacancy rate for
homeowners was 1.7 percent. (The “ideal” vacancy rate for mobility is considered to be two
percent for owner units and five percent for renter units.)
Table 12 summarizes the occupied housing units by tenure and unit size. This analysis shows
that there were 1,746 rental units with three or more bedrooms, not nearly enough to house the
2,437 large renter-households that reside in the City. Furthermore, market rents for larger
apartments and homes were well beyond the reach of the 115 lower income large households
who were renters. The shortage of larger units coupled with unaffordable rents may contribute
to overcrowding among the City’s lower-income households.
                                             City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                 November 2013
                                                                                                   23

                     Table 12: Bedroom Mix By Tenure (Occupied Units only)
                          # Bedrooms             Owned Units     Rental Units     Total
                    Studio                                   31            132       163
                    One-Bedroom                            165           1,169      1334
                    Two-Bedroom                          1,163           1,940     3,103
                    Three-Bedroom                        6,273           1,417     7,690
                    Four-Bedroom                         3,193             277     3,470
                    Five- or More Bedroom                  530              52       582
                    Total                               11,355           4,987    16,342
                    Source: Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey, (2009-2011).
3. Housing Age and Condition
Housing age is an important indicator of housing condition within a community. Like any other
tangible asset, housing is subject to gradual deterioration over time. If not maintained, housing
can deteriorate and depress neighboring property values, discourage reinvestment, and
eventually impact the quality of life in a neighborhood. Thus maintaining and improving housing
quality is an important goal for the City.
Figure 6 below summarizes the distribution of housing by the year built in the City. As of 2011,
approximately 82 percent the City's housing was over 30 years old and 42 percent was over 50
years old. A general rule of thumb in the housing industry is that structures older than 30 years
begin to show signs of deterioration and require reinvestment to maintain their quality. Homes
older than 50 years, unless properly maintained, require major renovations to keep the home in
good working order. Based on Census and County Assessor data, the City Code Enforcement
staff estimate that 2,700 housing units (15 percent of all housing units) in the City are in need of
rehabilitation.
                                          Figure 6: Housing Age
                35.0%                                              33.0%
                30.0%
                                                            25.6%
                25.0%
                20.0%
                                                    14.6%
                15.0%
                                            10.9%
                10.0%
                                                                            5.4%
                 5.0%     3.8%      3.0%                                             3.6%
                 0.0%
                          2000's 1990's 1980's 1970's 1960's 1950's 1940's 1930's
            Sources: Bureau of the Census, (2000) and American Community Survey (ACS), (2009-2011)
The Code Enforcement Division is responsible for enforcing City ordinances related to property
maintenance, building conditions, and other regulations affecting the maintenance of private
                                             City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                 November 2013
                                                                                                   24
residential properties. With a staff of one full-time Code Enforcement officer, the Code
Enforcement Division handles an average of 50 cases a month. In addition to complaints, the
Division provides an average of 50 contacts per month with local businesses, approximately 100
calls per month for information and other referrals, and serves between 100 and 120 residents
in person per month at its office. Building code violations are referred to the Building Division.
4. Housing Costs and Affordability
The cost of housing is directly related to the extent of housing problems in a community. If
housing costs are relatively high in comparison to household income, there will be a
correspondingly higher prevalence of overpayment and overcrowding. This section summarizes
the cost and affordability of the housing stock to Glendora residents.
Ownership Costs
According to DataQuick, a company that collects real estate data, median home prices in
Glendora and nearby jurisdictions were similar to the countywide median sales price of
$330,000 (Figure 7). The City’s median home sales price in 2012 was $360,750, just above the
County’s median.
                           Figure 7: Median Home Sales Price (2012)
               $450,000
               $400,000
               $350,000   LA County: $330,000
               $300,000
               $250,000
               $200,000                                          $400,000
                                                     $360,750              $350,000
               $150,000    $279,250     $300,000
               $100,000
                $50,000
                     $0
                            Azusa        Covina      Glendora    La Verne San Dimas
             Source: DQnews, (2013).
The City’s median sales price in 2011 represents a decrease of approximately five percent from
the previous year (Table 13). However, home prices in the region appear to have stabilized in
2012. When comparing monthly sales data from 2012, the City experienced a decrease of less
than three percent, slightly less than the decrease in San Dimas. Other neighboring
jurisdictions saw small to significant increases in median sales prices, including the County as w
whole, which experienced a five percent increase between 2011 and 2012.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                                25

                  Table 13: Changes in Median Home Sale Prices (2010-2012)
                                                                                        Percent Change in
                           2010                 2011                    2012
                                                                                        Median Sale Price
      Jurisdiction
                                      Number                   Number                    2010-     2011-
                          Price                      Price                   Price
                                       Sold                     Sold                     2011      2012
   Azusa                         --          --     $250,000        644      $279,250          --  11.70%
   Covina               $320,000           645      $300,000        801      $300,000    -6.25%     0.00%
   Glendora             $390,500           433      $370,000        532      $360,750    -5.25%    -2.50%
   La verne                      --          --     $382,000        348      $400,000         --    4.71%
   San Dimas            $378,000           289      $371,500        366      $350,000    -1.72%    -5.79%
   County of Los
                        $335,000        74,209      $315,000    83,770       $330,000    -5.97%     4.76%
   Angeles
   Source: DQnews, (2013).
Rental Costs
Table 14 provides a summary of rents in Glendora. Apartment rents range widely in the City:
high end units and single-family homes can cost two to three times more than lower end and
smaller apartment units, depending on the quality of amenities offered and location of the unit.
Rental listings posted on Craigslist.org for available rental housing in Glendora were reviewed
during November to December of 2012. Table 14 lists the median and average rents for rental
housing by number of bedrooms.
             Table 14: Median and Average Rents by Number of Bedrooms (2012)
            Number of           Number                             Average
                                                 Median Rent                        Rent Range
            Bedrooms              Listed                             Rent
          1                              19              $995            $987        $650 to $1,305
          2                              29             $1,295          $1,371     $1,195 to $1,800
          3                              11             $1,995          $1,957     $1,395 to $2,395
          4                                3            $2,000          $2,267      $1,900 to $2900
          5                                4            $2,600          $2,763     $2,500 to $3,350
          Totals                         66             $1,300          $1,483       $650 to $3,350
          Source: Craigslist.org, November 28, 2012, to December 5, 2012.
Housing Affordability
The costs of home ownership and renting can be compared to a household’s ability to pay for
housing to determine the general affordability of a community’s housing stock. The federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) conducts annual household income
surveys nationwide to determine a household’s eligibility for federal housing assistance. Based
on this survey, HCD developed income limits that can be used to determine the maximum price
that could be affordable to households in the upper range of their respective income category.
Households in the lower end of each category can afford less by comparison than those at the
upper end. Table 15 illustrates maximum affordable mortgage payments and rents for various
household sizes in Los Angeles County earning the top end of their respective income
categories.
For homeownership, Table 15 assumes a 30-year mortgage at a four-percent interest rate and a
10 percent down payment. A comparison of Table 15 with previous tables (Table 13 and Table
                                               City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                   November 2013
                                                                                                        26

14) shows that ownership housing in Glendora is beyond the financial reach of lower income
households. Larger moderate income households may be able to afford a home, but finding
adequately sized affordable housing still poses a challenge for these households.
                       Table 15: Maximum Affordable Housing Costs (2012)
                                         Affordable            Utilities, Taxes and
                                                                                             Affordable Price
                                      Housing Cost                   Insurance
       Annual Income Limits
                                                Owner-              Owner- Taxes/In
                                      Rent                 Rent                             Rent        Sale
                                                  ship                ship     surance
    Extremely Low Income (0-30% AMI)
    1-Person             $14,100        $353       $353      $71       $112          $71      $282     $39,565
    2-Person             $16,100        $403       $403      $79       $141          $81      $324     $42,125
    3-Person             $18,100        $453       $453      $90       $174          $91      $363     $43,754
    4 Person             $20,100        $503       $503      $99       $205         $101      $404     $45,849
    5 Person             $21,750        $544       $544     $114       $252         $109      $430     $42,590
    Very Low Income (30-50% AMI)
    1-Person             $23,450        $586       $586      $71       $112         $117      $515     $83,086
    2-Person             $26,800        $670       $670      $79       $141         $134      $591     $91,930
    3-Person             $30,150        $754       $754      $90       $174         $151      $664     $99,843
    4 Person             $33,500        $838       $838      $99       $205         $168      $739   $108,222
    5 Person             $36,200        $905       $905     $114       $252         $181      $791   $109,851
    Low Income (50-80% AMI)
    1-Person             $37,550        $939       $939      $71       $112         $188      $868   $148,717
    2-Person             $42,900      $1,073     $1,073      $79       $141         $215      $994   $166,871
    3-Person             $48,250      $1,206     $1,206      $90       $174         $241    $1,116   $184,093
    4 Person             $53,600      $1,340     $1,340      $99       $205         $268    $1,241   $201,781
    5 Person             $57,900      $1,448     $1,448     $114       $252         $290    $1,334   $210,858
    Median Income (80-100% AMI)
    1-Person             $44,300      $1,108     $1,292      $71       $112         $258    $1,037   $214,504
    2-Person             $50,650      $1,266     $1,477      $79       $141         $295    $1,187   $242,238
    3-Person             $56,950      $1,424     $1,661      $90       $174         $332    $1,334   $268,770
    4 Person             $63,350      $1,583     $1,846      $99       $205         $369    $1,484   $296,039
    5 Person             $68,350      $1,709     $1,994     $114       $252         $399    $1,595   $312,524
    Moderate Income (100-120% AMI)
    1-Person             $53,150      $1,329     $1,550      $71       $112         $310    $1,258   $262,564
    2-Person             $60,750      $1,519     $1,772      $79       $141         $354    $1,440   $297,086
    3-Person             $68,350      $1,709     $1,994      $90       $174         $399    $1,619   $330,677
    4 Person             $75,950      $1,899     $2,215      $99       $205         $443    $1,800   $364,734
    5 Person             $82,050      $2,051     $2,393     $114       $252         $479    $1,937   $386,921
    Assumptions: 2012 HCD income limits; 30.0% gross household income as affordable housing cost; 20.0%
    of monthly affordable cost for taxes and insurance; 10.0% downpayment; and 4.0% interest rate for a 30-
    year fixed-rate mortgage loan. Utilities based on Los Angeles County Utility Allowance.
    Sources: HCD (2012); and Veronica Tam and Associates (2012).
                                                City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                       November 2013
                                                                                                              27
Affordability by Household Income
Table 15 shows the maximum amount that a household can pay for housing each month (e.g.,
rent, mortgage, and utilities) without exceeding the 30 percent income-to-housing cost ratio that
is the threshold for overpayment. This amount can be compared to current market prices for
single-family homes, condominiums, and apartments to determine what types of housing
opportunities a household can afford.
Extremely Low Income Households: Extremely low income households earn 30 percent or
less of the AMI. Based on financing criteria noted earlier, the maximum affordable home price
for an extremely low income household ranges from $39,565 to $42,590 based on 2012
income limits. Homeownership is out of reach for all extremely low income households.
Similarly, after deductions for utilities, an extremely low income household can afford to pay
$282 to $430 in rent per month, depending on the household size. In practical terms, this
means that even a five-person extremely low income household cannot afford an average
priced one-bedroom without severe overpayment or overcrowding.
Very Low Income Households: Very low income households earn 50 percent or less of the
AMI. Based on the 2012 income limits, the maximum affordable home price for a very low
income household ranges from $83,080 for one-person to $109,851 for a five-person
households. Based on the sales data presented in Table 13, very low income households
cannot afford the median sales price for a home in the City, regardless of size.
As illustrated inError! Reference source not found. Table 15, a very low income household
can afford to pay $515 to $791 in monthly rent, after deductions for utilities and depending on
household size. As a result, very low income families cannot afford to rent in Glendora.
Low Income Households: Low income households earn 51 percent to 80 percent of the AMI.
The maximum affordable home price for a low income household ranges from $148,717 for a
one-person household to $210,588 for a five-person household. Based on the sales data
presented in Table 13, low income households cannot afford to purchase a single-family home.
However, some low income households may be able to afford small rental units.
Median Income Households: Median income households earn 80 percent to 100 percent of
the AMI. The maximum affordable home price for a median income household ranges from
$214,504 for a one-person household to $312,524 for a five-person household. Based on the
sales data presented in Table 13, median income households cannot afford a single-family
home. However, some median income households may be able to afford small rental units.
Moderate Income Households: Moderate income households earn 100 percent to 120 percent
of the AMI. The maximum affordable home price for a moderate income household ranges from
$262,564 for a one-person household to $386,921 for a five-person household. Some moderate
income households can afford smaller homes and are generally able to afford rents in the City.
Larger households though, may still have difficulty finding affordable large rental units.
To afford a median-priced home of $370,000 in 2011, a household income of approximately
$92,000 (145 percent of the County median income for a family of four) would be needed (Table
15). Renting an average apartment at $1,483 would require less income ($71,000); however,
based on wage data from 2012, many of the occupational categories in Los Angeles County,
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                            28
even higher paying professional occupations, pay lower wages than needed to afford housing in
Glendora.
               Figure 8: Income Needed to Afford Housing Compared with Income
  $140,000
                    $124,479
  $120,000
  $100,000                       $91,631
                                                                    Income Needed to Buy a Home ($92,400)
   $80,000
                                                                    Income Needed to Rent an Apt. ($71,100)
                                            $59,891
   $60,000                                              $52,595
                                                                  $40,620
   $40,000                                                                    $29,930
                                                                                          $22,019
   $20,000
        $0
                   Management  Engineering Education   Protective  Sales    Healthcare   Food Prep
                                                        Services              Support
Sources: State Employment Development Department, (2012) and Veronica Tam and Associates, (2012).
5. Assisted Housing At-Risk of Conversion
Existing housing that receives governmental assistance is often a significant source of
affordable housing in many communities. State law requires the City to identify, analyze, and
propose programs to preserve existing multi-family rental units that are currently restricted to
low income housing use and that will become unrestricted and possibly be lost as low income
housing (i.e., “units at risk” or “at-risk units”). State law requires the following:
         An inventory of restricted low income housing projects in the City and their potential for
          conversion;
         An analysis of the costs of preserving and/or replacing the units at risk and a comparison
          of these costs;
         An analysis of the organizational and financial resources available for preserving and/or
          replacing the units “at risk”; and
         Programs for preserving the at-risk units.
The following discussion satisfies the first three requirements of State law listed above
pertaining to the potential conversion of assisted housing units into market rate housing
between October 15, 2013, and October 15, 2023. The Housing Plan section includes a
program for preserving the at-risk units, which meets the final requirement of State law.
Three assisted rental housing projects are located in Glendora. One project, Glendora Gardens,
is at-risk of conversion to market-rate in the next ten years (Table 16):
         Glendora Gardens has 105 units that are rent-restricted as a result of a HUD Section 8
          contract. The former City Redevelopment Agency also assisted in financing the
          acquisition of this site, the relocation of the school facilities, and the improvement of off-
          site public facilities. Pursuant to a negotiated development agreement with Glendora, the
          project’s affordability expired in 2012. The property owner has not filed a Notice of Intent
                                              City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                   November 2013
                                                                                                            29

        to opt out of the Section 8 contract; however, the contract could potentially expire on
        May 31, 2013.
       Heritage Oaks apartment has a total of 152 units, of which 47 are rent-restricted through
        an agreement with the City. Heritage Oaks has a ground lease agreement with the
        former Redevelopment Agency to deed restrict 45 units at affordable housing costs for
        very and low income seniors for 45 years.
       Elwood Family Apartments was completed in 2008. This project has 87 units reserved
        for extremely low, very low, and low income families. It was funded through a
        combination of redevelopment funds, HOME funds, and Low Income Housing Tax
        Credits (LIHTC).
                                Table 16: Inventory of Assisted Housing
                    Total                              Unit Mix           Funding         Expiration of
Project Name                  Affordable Units
                    Units                            (Bedrooms)          Source(s)        Affordability
Non At-Risk
                              9 Extremely Low      33 (2-bedroom)
Elwood                                                                 Glendora RDA
                              52 Very Low          41 (3-bedroom)
Family                87                                                HOME Funds            2062
                              25 Low               12 (4-bedroom)
Apartments                                                                 LIHTC
                              1 Manager            1 (3-bedroom)
                              47 Low and Very      43 (1-bedroom)    Glendora RDA set-
Heritage Oaks        152                                                                      2046
                              Low                  4 (2-bedroom)         aside funds
At-Risk
                                                                                          RDA expired
                                                   28 (0-bedroom)    Glendora RDA set-
Glendora                                                                                  2012; Section
                     105      105 Very Low         76 (1-bedroom)    aside funds, CHFA
Gardens                                                                                   8 expires May
                                                   1 (2-bedroom)       and Section 8
                                                                                             31, 2013
Source: City of Glendora, (2012).
Preservation and Replacement Options
To maintain the existing affordable housing stock, the City works to preserve the existing
assisted units or facilitate the development of new units. Depending on the circumstances of at-
risk projects, different options may be used to preserve or replace the units. Preservation
options typically include: 1) transfer of project to non-profit ownership; 2) provision of rental
assistance to tenants using other funding sources; and 3) purchase of affordability covenants.
For purposes of compliance with 65583, the following describes actions to preserve the
affordability of at-risk units. Such options could be undertaken by any entity.
       Transfer of Ownership: Transferring ownership of an at-risk project to a non-profit
        housing provider is generally one of the least costly ways to ensure that the at-risk units
        remain affordable for the long term. By transferring property ownership to a non-profit
        organization, low income restrictions can be secured indefinitely and the project would
        become potentially eligible for a greater range of governmental assistance.
       Rental Assistance: Rental subsidies using non-Section 8 funding sources can be used
        to maintain affordability of the 105 at-risk units. These rent subsidies could be structured
        to mirror the Section 8 program. Under Section 8, HUD pays the difference between
        what tenants can pay (defined as 30 percent of household income) and what HUD
        estimates as the fair market rent (FMR) for the unit. In Los Angeles County, the 2013
                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                November 2013
                                                                                                   30

      FMR was $911 for a studio unit, $1,101 for a one-bedroom unit and $1,421 for a two-
      bedroom unit.
      The feasibility of this alternative is highly dependent upon the availability of a sustainable
      funding source to make rent subsidies available and the willingness of the property
      owner to participate in the program. As indicated in Table 17, the total cost of
      subsidizing the rents at all 105 at-risk units is estimated at $50,605 per month or
      $607,260 annually. With the dissolution of the redevelopment agency, the City has no
      ability to sustain a rent subsidies program.
                               Table 17: Rental Subsidies Required
                          Fair                      Very Low       Affordable   Monthly        Total
               Total               Household
Unit Size               Market                       Income           Cost –    Per Unit     Monthly
               Units                    Size
                         Rent1                     (50% AMI)2       Utilities3  Subsidy      Subsidy
Very Low Income Units
Studio             28       $911               1       $23,450             $515     $396       $11,088
1-br               76    $1,101                2       $26,800            $591      $510       $38,760
2-br                1    $1,421                3       $30,150             $664     $757          $757
Total            105                                                                           $50,605
Notes:
1. FY 2013 Fair Market Rent (FMR) is determined by HUD.
2. Los Angeles County 2012 Area Median Household Income (AMI) limits set by the California Department of
   Housing and Community Development (HCD).
3. Affordable cost = 30% of household income minus utility allowance.
     Purchase of Affordability Covenants: Another option to preserve the affordability of
      the at-risk project is to provide an incentive package to the owner to maintain the project
      as affordable housing. Incentives could include writing down the interest rate on the
      remaining loan balance, and/or supplementing the Section 8 subsidy received to market
      levels. The feasibility of this option depends on whether the complex is too highly
      leveraged.
     Construction of Replacement Units: The construction of new lower income housing
      units is a means of replacing the at-risk units should they be converted to market-rate
      units. The cost of developing housing depends upon a variety of factors, including
      density, size of the units (i.e. square footage and number of bedrooms), location, land
      costs, and type of construction. Assuming an average construction cost of $82,054 per
      unit, it would cost approximately $8.6 million (excluding land costs) to construct 105 new
      assisted units. Including land costs, the total cost to develop replacement units would be
      even higher.
                                           City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                November 2013
                                                                                                     31

                               Table 18: Estimated New Construction Costs
                                     (A)                     (B)                   (C)                (D)
                                                         Estimated            Estimated           Estimated
        Unit Size
                                Total Units            Average Unit        Gross Building       Gross Building
                                                        Size (sq. ft.)             Size              Costs
    Studio                                     28                   450                15,120        $1,838,403
    1-br                                      76                    600                54,720        $6,653,268
    2-br                                        1                   850                 1,020          $124,019
    Total                                    105                                       70,860        $8,615,690
    Average Per Unit Cost:                                                                              $82,054
    Notes:
    1. (C) = (A) x (B) x 1.20 (i.e. 20% inflation to account for hallways and other common areas).
    2. (D) = (C) x $97.27 (per square foot construction costs) x 1.25 (i.e. 25% inflation to account for parking
       and landscaping costs).
Cost Comparisons
Current market value for the at-risk units is estimated on the basis of potential annual income
and operating and maintenance expenses at the Glendora Gardens project. As indicated
below, the estimated market value of the project is approximately $11.1 million. (This estimate
is provided for the purpose of comparison and understanding the magnitude of costs involved
and does not represent the precise market value of the projects.)
                             Table 19: Market Value of At-Risk Housing Units
                         Unit Information                                   Total
                  Studio Units                                                                    28
                  1-bedroom Units                                                                 76
                  2-bedroom Unit                                                                   1
                  Total Units                                                                    105
                  Annual Gross Income                                                     $1,327,260
                  Annual Operating Cost                                                     $315,250
                  Net Annual Income                                                       $1,012,010
                  Estimated Market Value                                                 $11,132,110
                  Market value for project is estimated with the following assumptions:
                  1. Average market rent based on Fair Market Rents (FY 2013) established by
                     HUD ($911 for a studio unit, $1,101 for a one-bedroom unit and $1,421 for a
                     three-bedroom unit).
                  2. Average unit size is estimated at 450 square feet for a studio unit, 650 square
                     feet for a one-bedroom unit and 1,050 square feet for a three-bedroom unit.
                  3. Vacancy rate is assumed at 0% as the projects are usually fully occupied.
                  4. Annual operating expenses per square foot are estimated to be $5.00.
                  5. Market value = Annual net project income x multiplication factor.
                  6. Multiplication factor for a building in moderate condition is 11.
The above analysis attempts to estimate the cost of preserving the at-risk units at the Glendora
Gardens project under various options. The hypothetical cost of acquiring the at-risk units and
transferring ownership to non-profit housing organizations is high ($11.1 million).                               In
comparison, the annual costs of providing rental subsidies to preserve the 105 assisted units
are relatively low ($607,260); however, long-term provision of rental subsidies for at least 55
years would cost more than $33 million. The option of constructing 105 replacement units is
also costly ($8.6 million, excluding land costs) and constrained by a variety of factors, including
growing scarcity of land zoned for residential use and rising land costs.
                                                   City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                                               32
Resources for Preservation
Available public and non-profit organizations with the capacity to preserve assisted housing
developments include Los Angeles County and various non-profit developers, such as
Jamboree Housing Corporation. Financial resources available include federal CDBG, HOME,
Section 8 rental assistance, and Low Income Housing Tax Credits.
6. Existing Housing Problems
The SCAG data estimating the number of households at each income level presented earlier
does not provide any detail on the specific housing needs and problems faced by the City’s
lower income households. The Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS)
developed by the Census Bureau for HUD, however, provides detailed information on housing
needs by income level for different types of households in Glendora. Detailed CHAS data
based on the 2006-2008 ACS data is displayed in (Table 20). Housing problems considered by
CHAS include:
       Units with physical defects (lacking complete kitchen or bathroom);
       Overcrowded conditions (housing units with more than one person per room);
       Housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 30 percent of gross income; or
       Severe housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 50 percent of gross income.
Overpayment
Most lower and moderate income households cope with housing cost issues either by assuming
a cost burden, or by occupying a smaller than needed or substandard unit. Specifically,
according to CHAS, 83 percent of the City’s very low income households and 63 percent of low
income households experienced one or more housing problems (e.g., cost burden,
overcrowding, or substandard housing condition) between 2006 and 2008.3 The types of
housing problems experienced by Glendora households vary according to household income,
type, and tenure. Some highlights include:
       In general, renter-households had a higher level of housing problems (46 percent)
        compared to owner-households (41 percent).
       Large owner-families had the highest level of housing problems regardless of income
        level (50 percent).
       Approximately 75 percent of extremely low income (households earning less than 30
        percent of the AMI) and 74 percent of very low income households (households earning
        between 31 and 50 percent of the AMI) had housing problems.
About 66 percent of extremely low income elderly households spent more than 50 percent of
their income on housing, including 80 percent of elderly renters and 57 percent of elderly
owners within this income category.
3   U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS)
    data based on 2006-2008 ACS.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                                     33

           Table 20: Housing Assistance Needs of Lower Income Households (2006-2008)
Household by Type,                             Renters                                     Owners
        Income,                                                                                                       Total
     and Housing                         Small        Large        Total                   Large        Total     Households
                            Elderly                                           Elderly
        Problem                         Families    Families     Renters                  Families    Owners
Extremely Low Income
                                255            65                       610        435            80        775            1,385
(0-30% AMI)                                                  --
With any housing
                               80%         100%              --        75%        64%         100%         75%              75%
problem
With cost burden >30%          80%         100%              --        75%        64%         100%         74%              74%
With cost burden >50%          80%         100%              --        75%        57%          75%         65%              70%
Very Low Income
                                140           320           60          630        365            55        800            1,430
(31-50% AMI)
With any housing
                               32%           95%        100%           83%        47%         100%         68%              74%
problem
With cost burden >30%          32%           95%        100%           83%        47%         100%         61%              70%
With cost burden >50%          11%           41%           0%          33%        22%          36%         38%              36%
Low Income
                                260           225           55          825        480          175       1,520            2,345
(51-80% AMI)
With any housing
                               58%           76%        100%           72%        31%          89%         58%              63%
problem
With cost burden >30%          58%           76%        100%           72%        41%          77%         58%              63%
With cost burden >50%           6%           33%           0%          27%        21%          20%         33%              31%
Moderate & Above
                                175         1,105          325        2,245      1,670        1,125       9,370           11,615
Income (>80% AMI)
With any housing
                               58%           25%          25%          17%        16%          38%         33%              30%
problem
With cost burden >30%          58%           24%           6%          14%        16%          33%         32%              28%
With cost burden >50%           6%            2%           0%           1%         4%            4%         5%                4%
Total Households                830         1,715          440        4,310      2,950        1,435      12,465           16,775
With any housing
                               48%           48%          44%          46%        29%          50%         41%              42%
problem
With cost burden
                               48%           47%          31%          44%        31%          45%         40%              41%
>30%
With cost burden
                               28%           17%           0%          21%        17%          11%         14%              16%
>50%
Note: Data presented in this table are based on special tabulations from the American Community Survey (ACS) data. Due
to the small sample size, the margins for error can be significant. Interpretations of these data should focus on the proportion
of households in need of assistance rather than on precise numbers.
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), (2006-2008).
     Overcrowding
     Overcrowding is defined by the State Department of Housing and Community Development
     (HCD) as a household with more than one person per room (excluding bathroom, kitchen).
     Severe overcrowding is one with more than 1.5 persons per room.4 Overcrowding typically
     occurs when housing costs are so high relative to income that families double-up or take on
     roommates or boarders to devote income to other basic needs, such as food and medical care.
     Overcrowding also tends to result in deterioration of homes and shortage of on-site parking.
     4   A housing unit with more than one person per room is considered by HCD and HUD as overcrowded. In
         calculating overcrowding, living and dining rooms are included but kitchens and bathrooms are excluded.
                                                     City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                               November 2013
                                                                                                                       34
Therefore, maintaining a reasonable level of occupancy and alleviating overcrowding is an
important contributor to quality of life.
Overall overcrowding in Glendora decreased noticeably over the past decade, from seven
percent in 2000 to just two percent in 2011. The incidence of overcrowding in Glendora was
substantially lower than in Los Angeles County, where overcrowding affected 12 percent of
households. Renter overcrowding experienced the most dramatic decline -- from over ten
percent in 2000 to just over three percent by 2011 as estimated by the ACS (2007-2011) (see
Figure 9).
                                        Figure 9: Overcrowding
                                14%
                                12%
                                10%
                                 8%
                                 6%
                                 4%
                                 2%
                                 0%
                                            1990           2000         2011
                               Renter      10.4%          12.5%         3.1%
                               Owner        4.0%          5.0%          2.2%
                         Source: Bureau of the Census, (1990 and 2000) and American
                         Community Survey (ACS) (2007-2011)
1. Overpayment (Cost Burden)
Housing cost burden, also known as overpayment, is defined as a housing cost that exceeds 30
percent of a household’s gross income. A severe cost burden is a housing cost that exceeds 50
percent of a household’s gross income.5 Housing cost burden is particularly problematic for low
and moderate income households in that it leaves little resources for a household to pay for
other living expenses. Housing overpayment occurs when housing costs increase faster than
income. Like most urban communities in California, it is not uncommon to overpay for housing.
However, to the extent that overpayment is often disproportionately concentrated among the
most vulnerable members of the community, maintaining a reasonable level of housing cost
burden is an important contributor to quality of life.
5   A household spending more than 30 percent of its gross household income on housing is considered cost-
    burdened both by the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) and the U.S.
    Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
                                             City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                 November 2013
                                                                                                    35

The 2006-2008 CHAS data estimated that 40 percent of the City’s owner-households and 44
percent of renter-households were overpaying for housing. As market rents were generally
affordable to moderate income households, renters in this income group were not as impacted
by cost burden. Among the different household types large-family homeowners and small-
family renters in the lower income groups were most impacted by cost burden, compared to
other household types.
Overall, housing cost burden was most prevalent among extremely low income households in
Glendora (74 percent), while very low income households also experienced a high rate of
overpayment (70 percent). Housing cost burden was most severe among extremely low income
small family renter-households; 100 percent of these households experienced a severe housing
cost burden.
                                      City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                       November 2013
                                                                                       36

3. HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
A variety of factors can encourage or constrain the development, maintenance, and improvement
of housing in Glendora. These include market mechanisms, government rules and regulations,
and physical and environmental constraints. This section addresses these potential constraints
and actions taken to mitigate them.
A. Market Constraints
Land costs, construction costs, and market financing contribute to the cost of housing
reinvestment and potentially can hinder the production of new affordable housing. Although
many constraints are driven by market conditions, jurisdictions have some leverage in instituting
policies and programs to address and mitigate the constraints. This section discusses the
potential market constraints in Glendora.
1. Development Costs
Development costs include land, construction costs, and financing. Construction costs vary
according to the type of housing, with multiple-family housing generally less expensive to
construct than single-family homes on a per-unit basis. However, there is wide variation within
each construction type depending on the size of unit and the number and quality of amenities
provided. Land costs may also vary significantly depending on whether the site is vacant or has
an existing use which must be removed.
According to the Planning Department, the average cost of constructing a small multiple-family
development in Glendora (two stories or less) is approximately $90 per square foot. Larger
multiple-family developments (greater than two stories) typically require the construction of a
parking structure and cost an average of $110-$135 per square foot. For a single-family home,
the average cost of construction ranges from $90-$100 per square foot. However, the cost of
single- and multiple-family housing may also vary significantly. For instance, construction costs
depend upon the quality of materials used, the size of the unit and lot, the location, as well as
the number and quality of amenities provided.
A reduction in amenities and the quality of building materials (above a minimum acceptability for
health, safety, and adequate performance) could result in lower sales prices. In addition,
prefabricated factory-built housing may provide for lower priced housing by reducing
construction and labor costs. Another factor related to construction costs is the number of units
built at one time. As the number of units increase, the per-unit cost of construction is lower due
to economies of scale.
Another key component is the price of raw land and any necessary improvements. The
diminishing supply of residential land combined with a fairly high demand for such development
keeps land costs relatively high in communities across Southern California. In the City,
residential land costs average approximately $30 per square foot. Overall, construction and land
costs in the City are comparable to costs elsewhere in the region.
2. Mortgage and Rehabilitation Financing
The availability of financing affects a person's ability to purchase or improve a home. Under the
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending institutions must disclose information on the
                                         City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                             37
disposition of loan applications by the characteristics of applicants. This applies to all loan
applications for home purchases and improvements, whether financed at market rate or through
government assistance. Table 21 summarizes the disposition of applications submitted to
financial institutions for home purchase and home improvement loans within Glendora in 2011.
        Table 21: Disposition of Home Purchase and Improvement Loan Applications
                                              Total            Percent            Percent          Percent
                Loan Type
                                         Applications         Approved            Denied            Other
    Home Purchase Loans                              688               78%                 9%            13%
    Home Improvement Loans                            97               67%                18%            15%
    Notes:
    1. Percent Approved includes loans approved by the lenders whether or not accepted by the applicant.
    2. Percent Other includes loan applications that were either withdrawn or closed for incompleteness.
                                      TM
    Source: www.LendingPatterns.com , (2011).
Home Purchase and Improvement Loans
In 2011, a total of 688 households applied for loans, either conventional or government-backed,
to purchase homes in Glendora. For home purchase loans, the approval rate for the City was 78
percent. During the same time, a total of 97 households in Glendora applied for home
improvement loans. The approval rate for home improvement loans in Glendora was 67
percent. Given the relatively high rates of approval for home purchase and improvement loans,
financing was generally available.
Foreclosures
From 2000 to 2005 historically low interest rates combined with creative financing packages
including zero-down, interest-only and adjustable interest loans allowed many households to
become homeowners. Many of these loans were sold using predatory lending practices such as
aggressive marketing, hidden fees, and negative amortization. Many of the homebuyers were
led to believe that they could refinance their mortgages to fixed rate in a couple of years and
that home prices would continue to soar. Often, people bought homes that were beyond their
financial means and were unprepared for the rising interest rates and falling home prices. Many
homeowners were forced into foreclosure because of the hikes in interest rates associated with
variable rate loans. The collapse of the mortgage lending market made it increasingly difficult for
even moderate income households to obtain new home financing or refinancing.
In the third quarter of 2012, Los Angeles County recorded 10,064 Notices of Default (NOD), a
30-percent decrease from the same time in 2011.6 On January 7, 2013, 123 homes in Glendora
were listed as foreclosures for sale. These homes were in various stages of foreclosure (from
pre-foreclosure to auction), with some homes in foreclosure sales being listed for more than
$1,600,000.7 The high prices of some foreclosure homes show that households of all income
levels were impacted by the foreclosures.
B. Governmental Constraints
6   http://dqnews.com/Articles/2012/News/California/CA-foreclosures/RRFor121012.aspx,       Accessed   January 7,
    2013.
7   www.homes.com, Accessed January 7, 2013.
                                              City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                      November 2013
                                                                                                            38
Local policies and regulations can impact the price and availability of housing and in particular,
the provision of affordable housing. Land use controls, site improvement requirements, fees and
exactions, permit processing procedures, and various other factors may present constraints to
the maintenance, development and improvement of housing. This section discusses potential
governmental constraints in Glendora.
1. Land Use Controls
The Land Use Element of the Glendora General Plan sets forth the City's policies for guiding
local development. These policies, together with existing zoning regulations, establish the
amount and distribution of land allocated for different uses within the City. As described below in
Table 22, the General Plan has six primary residential designations permitting a varying level of
densities for open space, rural, and urban residential uses. As part of the City’s General Plan
update (Community Plan 2025), the City introduced a new Village Mixed Use designation, which
covers the downtown Village area.
                             Table 22: Residential Land Use Categories
   General Plan             Zoning          Density
                                                                     Allowable Residential Types
     Land Use             District(s)       (du/ac)
Hillside Very Low                                         Least intensive residential land use and is
Density                  RHR and E7           0.1-1       intended for steep hillsides and other areas least
Residential                                               suited for development.
                                                          Intended to serve as transitional areas between
Low Density
                            E-5, E-6          1.1-3       hillside areas and more intensive single-family
Residential
                                                          residential areas.
Low/Medium                                                This residential zone is the most intensive
                        E-3, E-4, and
Density                                       3.1-6       designation for single-family residences and
                              R-1
Residential                                               includes most non-hillside areas.
                                                          Allows for various multiple and single-family
Medium Density
                         LGA and GA          6.1-11       attached housing, including apartments, duplexes,
Residential
                                                          townhouses, and patio homes.
Medium/High                                               This district functions as a transitional zone.
Density                       R-2           11.1-15       Housing permitted includes apartments, duplexes,
Residential                                               townhomes, and patio homes.
                                                          This is the most intensive residential land use
High Density
                              R-3           15.1-20       designation and is designed for higher density
Residential
                                                          residential land uses, such as apartments.
                                                          Encourages development of professional offices,
Village Mixed Use        Civic Center                     public/quasi-public facilities, retail businesses,
                                             15-30
                           Area Plan                      small-lot single-family and multi-family residential
                                                          developments.
Source: Land Use Element, City of Glendora General Plan (2006); and Glendora Municipal Code, (2012).
Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan
The Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area is considered to be the core commercial corridor
within the City of Glendora. Analysis of the Specific Plan area has determined that the corridor
is not maximizing its potential as a primary business and activity corridor. In response, the City
hopes to improve the economic vitality and livability of the corridor through the establishment of
a comprehensive strategy to retain existing business and attract additional commercial,
industrial, office, retail and residential opportunities. The development standards for the Route
66 Corridor Specific Plan allow for significantly greater residential densities than the rest of the
City. The actual densities vary by zoning subdistrict and are detailed in Table 23.
                                             City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                   November 2013
                                                                                                           39

      Table 23: Residential Land Use Designations in Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan
  Land Use                     Density
                   Zoning                                           Residential Type
 Sub-District                   (du/ac)
                                             Mixed use district that emphasizes a mix of single-family and
Town Center
                    TCMU          30.0       multiple-family residential, commercial uses and smaller-scale
Mixed Use
                                             street-oriented retail development.
                                             Intended to provide a wide range of retail sales, business and
Gateway
                    GMU           25.0       personal services primarily oriented to the automobile
Mixed Use
                                             customer
                                             Envisioned to capitalize on adjacent market potential
Barranca                                     introduced by Azusa Pacific University and Citrus College.
                      BG          30.0
Gateway                                      Uses appropriate for this zoning subdistrict include mixed
                                             use, retail sales, restaurants, offices, and other service uses
Route 66                                     Intended to contribute to the mix of housing choices through
                     CRR          25.0
Residential                                  the provision of multiple-family residential development
Additional density is available through incentives for lot consolidation and mixed use
development of between 5 and 15 units per acre, with a potential cumulative bonus of up to 25
units per acre.
Civic Center Area Plan
The Civic Center Area Plan (CCAP) area covers the historic downtown village core of Glendora.
The CCAP is intended to maintain the village area as a vibrant pedestrian oriented area with a
mix of commercial and residential uses. The CCAP includes a parking reduction district and
parking exemption district, both of which provide reduced parking requirements for residential
and commercial development. The CCAP includes three subdistricts; the allowed densities and
development types for each subdistrict are detailed in Table 24.
                   Table 24: Residential Land Uses in Civic Center Area Plan
                    Density
   Zoning                                                      Residential Type
                     (du/ac)
 T-4 Village                       Residential district intended for single-family and multiple-family
                       30.0
    Edge                           residential development
 T-5 Village                       Mixed use district intended for residential on upper floors and
                       30.0
    Core                           commercial uses on ground floors along the main street
T-5A Village                       Mixed use district intended for single-family, multiple-family, and mixed
                       30.0
 Transition                        use development
Hillside Development
Since its incorporation, the City has been known as the “Pride of the Foothills." Given the surge
in development and the potential degradation of environmental features resulting from hillside
grading, the City enacted a Hillside Management Ordinance in 1994 which updated previously
adopted regulatory policies concerning management of the City’s significant foothill acreages.
The ordinance was amended to be more sensitive to the use of land in hillsides so that natural
characteristics (e.g., land forms, vegetation, wildlife, scenic qualities and open space) could be
maintained. Specific goals of the ordinance are as follows:
    (1) Preserve unique and significant geological, biological, and hydrological features;
    (2) Encourage alternative approaches to hillside development through land use patterns and
         intensities that are consistent with natural characteristics;
                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                   November 2013
                                                                                                         40

     (3) Protect prominent vistas of hillside areas in order to maintain the identity, image,
         environmental quality, and aesthetic quality of the City; and
     (4) Protect the public health and safety from potentially hazardous conditions related to
         hillside development.
All parcels with an average slope of ten percent or greater fall under purview of the Ordinance.
To construct residential units, an approved development plan review is required. This ordinance
does not restrict the ability of the City to address its RHNA given that all the homes in the
hillsides would only be affordable to upper income households.
Toward the end of 2001, the Glendora City Council accepted applications and appointed
members for an “Ad Hoc Committee to Preserve the Foothills” to proactively address the
development issues in Glendora that other local hillside communities have faced in recent
years. The Ad Hoc Committee detailed its suggestions to the City for managing hillside
development in a formal document called the Recommended Hillside Strategy. The Hillside
Strategy has four components:
     (1) Open Space Preservation: This component calls for the city to acquire hillside
          properties from willing private property owners in order to ensure the greatest ability to
          preserve open space. The Hillside Strategy identifies three priority acquisition areas,
          including undeveloped areas in the eastern portion of the Glendora foothills, the South
          Hills area, and the northwestern portion of Harrow Canyon.
     (2) Controlled Development: This component steers development towards the lower
          hillside slopes by decreasing the allowable densities as slopes increase, and avoiding
          ridgelines, canyons, streams, channels, and habitat corridors.
     (3) Design Guidelines for New Development: This component calls for the establishment of
          guidelines that minimize the visual intrusiveness of new development by designing new
          residences to fit with the natural character of the hillside areas.
     (4) Clarification of Ambiguities: This final component of the hillside strategy aims to clarify
          existing ambiguities in the General Plan and zoning code. Proposed clarifications
          include: the removal of residences as an allowable use in the Open Space land use
          designation and the creation of a hillside residential General Plan designation that
          would include the residential uses removed from the Open Space designation.
Overlay Districts
The City's Special Height Overlay zone is designed to accommodate land uses that require a
greater building height than is permitted in certain zones. The Special Height Overlay can be
applied to the C-2, C-3, CM, MS, M-1, IP and the PR zones. Pursuant to this zone, a building
may exceed the height limitation in the underlying zone, but shall not exceed eight stories or 80
feet. The minimum front setback must be 25 feet, while the minimum side yard shall be 20 feet
plus four feet for each additional story.
The Historic Preservation Overlay (HPOZ) is intended to promote the general welfare, cultural
enrichment, and economic prosperity of the people by providing for the identification, protection,
preservation, and enhancement of areas of the city having historic, architectural, or cultural
significance. Areas designated as an HPOZ exemplify or reflect special elements of the City’s
cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering, or architectural history.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                              November 2013
                                                                                              41

Mobile homes currently provide about four percent of all the housing stock in Glendora. Mobile
home parks provide an important source of affordable housing within the community for lower-
income households. Glendora has established a Mobilehome Park Overlay zone to provide
appropriate locations where mobilehome parks may be established and maintained. These
regulations are intended to promote an orderly and pleasant residential environment in harmony
with surrounding land uses. The minimum lot area for a mobilehome park in this overlay is 12
acres.
Flexibility in Development Standards
The Specific Plan process and Planned Redevelopment Zones are the primary means to
provide appropriate relief from literal application of zoning regulations and development
standards, where appropriate, to facilitate new development. According to the Glendora Zoning
Code, the purpose of the PR Zone is "to provide for development on a comprehensive basis by
using site planning techniques not permitted through literal application of zoning and subdivision
regulations." The Zoning Code does not set residential development standards for the PR zone.
Pursuant to development plan review process, the residential standards, covenants, and
conditions are established by the City Council. Therefore, projects of any size, type, and density
can be considered for approval.
The PR zone has been used to facilitate construction of affordable housing that is compatible
with adjacent land uses. The Glendora Gardens project was a combination of one- and two-
story structures situated in an R-2 zone. The Heritage Park Apartments was a two-story project
located in front of a slight hill, thus providing an enclave for the structure in an area where the
zoning of the adjacent land uses varies from open space to R-1. Both projects were rezoned to
PR to facilitate development.
2. Residential Development Standards
The City regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential development primarily
through the Zoning Code. Zoning regulations are designed to protect and promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of residents as well as implement the policies of the City's General
Plan. The Zoning Code also serves to preserve the character and integrity of existing
neighborhoods. Table 25 summarizes the most pertinent development standards for single-
family and multiple-family housing.
                            Table 25: Residential Development Standards
                                      General Plan Residential Land Use Category (Zone)
                                                          Low/
  Development          Hillside                                       Medium             Medium/
                                     Low Density        Medium                                            High
    Standard          Very Low                                        Density              High
                                       (E-5, E-6,       Density                                         Density
                       Density                                       (LGA and            Density
                                          E-7)         (E-4, E-3,                                         (R-3)
                     (E-7, RHR)                                         GA)                (R-2)
                                                          R-1)
Building Standards
                                        E5 = 4.1
                    E7 = 0.05-2.2                      E4/E3 = 5      LGA = 7.9
Max. Density                          E6 = 2.9-3.5                                       R-2: 14.5     R-3: 19.8
                    RHR = 0.1-1                         R1 = 5.8     GA = 10.9
                                     E7 = 0.05-2.2
Max. Building
                      2 stories         2 stories       2 stories     2 stories          2 stories     2 stories
Height
Min. Unit Size                                                      600 sq. ft. for a studio + additional 200 sq.
                         n/a               n/a             n/a
(sq. ft.)                                                                       ft. for each bedroom
                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                  November 2013
                                                                                                        42
                             Table 25: Residential Development Standards
                                      General Plan Residential Land Use Category (Zone)
                                                            Low/
   Development          Hillside                                       Medium           Medium/
                                     Low Density          Medium                                        High
      Standard         Very Low                                        Density            High
                                        (E-5, E-6,        Density                                      Density
                        Density                                       (LGA and          Density
                                           E-7)          (E-4, E-3,                                     (R-3)
                      (E-7, RHR)                                         GA)              (R-2)
                                                            R-1)
Max. Floor                                                               400 sq. ft. usable open space per
                          n/a             35%               35%
Area                                                                               residential unit
Lot Standards
Min. Lot Area                        E-5=10,500
                                                                        40,000           10,000        10,000
(sq. ft.)           E-7= 200,000     E-6=12,500 to
                                                        E-3=8,000
                    / 500,000        15,000
                                                        E-4=8,500
Min. Lot Area per   800,000          E-7= 200,000/                   LGA = 5,500
                                                        R-1=7,500                         3,000         2,200
Unit (sq. ft.)      RHR=43,560       500,000                          GA = 4,000
                                     800,000
                                     E-5=85
Min. Lot Width         RHR=200                             R-1/ E-
                                     E-6=100                             120               80             80
(ft.)                   E-7=100                             3=70
                                     E-7=100
                                                           E-4=75
Min. Lot Depth         RHR=200
                                           100               100                        125
(ft.)                   E-7=100
                     RHR=40 (or
                                                        R-1=20/ E-
                       10% of lot
Front Yard (ft.)                            25             3 & E-                        20
                         depth)
                                                            4=25
                         E7=25
                        RHR=30                          R-1=5/ E-
Side Yard (ft.)                             7                               5 (one-story); 10 (two-story)
                         E7=7                             3&E-4=7
                     RHR=50 (or
                       20% of lot                       R-1=25/ E-
Rear Yard (ft.)                             35                                           20
                         depth)                         3&E-4=35
                         E7=35
Parking
Single-Family       2 spaces in a garage
Second kitchen
                    1 space per bedroom in garage or carport
Unit
                    1 enclosed and 1 open space or additional enclosed space/unit + 0.2 spaces per
Multiple-Family
                    bedroom per unit for units with over 2 bedrooms
Mobilehome          9 spaces for every 4 mobilehome units
Guest Space         0.4 spaces per unit for multiple-family units and mobilehomes.
Source: Glendora Municipal Zoning Code.
Parking requirements for residential uses in Glendora are summarized in Table 25. Glendora’s
parking standards are comparable to those of surrounding jurisdictions. Requirements for multi-
family developments are equal to, or less than, requirements for single-family detached
dwellings. Guest space requirements for multi-family developments are reasonable because
these types of developments do not have private driveways for each unit to accommodate
parking for guests. Nonetheless, because the cost of providing parking can make financing the
development of housing affordable to lower and moderate income households more difficult,
reduced parking and other incentives, concessions, or waivers and modifications of
development standards are available for developers of affordable projects that are eligible for a
density bonus.
                                             City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                 November 2013
                                                                                                       43

Development standards for residential development in the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area
and the Civic Center Area Plan area are different from citywide standards and are detailed in
Table 26 and Table 27. In general, the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan and the Civic Center
Area Plan allows for taller buildings, greater maximum floor area, and smaller setbacks. Parking
standards for the areas have also been reduced.
               Table 26: Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan Development Standards
                                      Town Center            Gateway              Barranca            Route 66
                                       Mixed Use            Mixed Use             Gateway            Residential
                                         (TCMU)                (GMU)                (BG)                (CRR)
Building Standards
                                               45 feet              45 feet              35 feet             45 feet
Maximum Building Height
                                            3 stories             3 stories            2 stories           3 stories
Maximum Floor Area Ratio                         0.50                 0.35                 0.35                0.30
Lot Standards
Front Yard (ft.)                                    10                   20                   15                  15
Rear Yard (ft.)                                      0                    0                    0                  10
Side Yard (ft.)                                      0                    0                    0                  10
                                    Same as citywide parking standards (see Table 25) with incentives for
Parking
                                    mixed use developments.
Source: Glendora Municipal Zoning Code.
                    Table 27: Civic Center Area Plan Development Standards
                                                T-4 Village           T-5 Village         T-5A Village
                                                    Edge                  Core             Transition
         Building Standards
                                                         25 feet              45 feet              45 feet
         Maximum Building Height
                                                       2 stories            3 stories            3 stories
         Maximum Floor Area Ratio                            NA                   NA                   NA
         Lot Standards
         Front Yard (ft.)                                     20                  0-5                5-10
         Rear Yard (ft.)                                      20                    0                  0-5
         Side Yard (ft.)                                        5                   0                0-15
                                             In parking exemption district: 1 space per bedroom;
                                             in parking reduction district: 1 space per bedroom
         Parking
                                             plus 0.1 guest spaces per bedroom; elsewhere:
                                             same as citywide parking standards
         Source: Glendora Municipal Zoning Code.
                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                      November 2013
                                                                                                              44
Development Incentives
The City encourages mixed use and residential development, particularly affordable housing
development, and facilitates redevelopment through a variety of development incentives.
Affordable Housing: The City adheres to the State density bonus law to provide density bonuses
and regulatory incentives, including parking requirement reductions, for senior housing projects
and projects that set aside a portion of the units as housing affordable to lower and moderate
income households. In February 2013, the City Council approved an update to the Zoning
Ordinance to maintain consistency with State law.
Lot Consolidation: Incentives are provided for lot consolidation in the Route 66 Corridor Specific
Plan area. The City encourages the consolidation of property within the Route 66 Corridor as a
way to maximize development and redevelopment potential. The following incentives are
available to projects requesting lot consolidation:
       Increased floor area ratio (FAR) bonuses of up to 15 percent and residential density
        bonuses of up to 15 units per acre; and
       Fee assistance and other financial incentives.
The City has approved one project with a lot consolidation density bonus under the Route 66
Corridor Specific Plan. Lot consolidation does not require common ownership. The City’s
incentives for lot consolidation are attractive and therefore developers typically acquire individual
properties from small property owners (who have little ability to act as developers) to package
larger-scale developments.
Mixed Use Development: The City also encourages the development of mixed use projects
within the BG, GMU and TCMU zoning subdistricts of the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area.
Mixed use projects with a residential component qualify for the following incentives:
       Increased FAR bonuses of up to 15 percent and density bonuses of up to ten units per
        acre;
       Increased height bonuses of up to two additional stories;
       The number of off-street parking spaces required may, upon approval by the Planning
        Director, be reduced by the greater of the number of spaces:
            o Five spaces; or
            o If the parcel is within 400 feet of a public parking lot or garage, ten spaces or 25
                percent of the otherwise required number of spaces, whichever is greater.
            o The amount of the in-lieu fee to be prescribed by the City Council. The funds will
                be retained by the City and used exclusively for the purpose of acquiring and
                developing public off-street parking facilities in the Route 66 Corridor Specific
                Plan area.
       Structured Parking. A 10 percent reduction of required parking spaces for all new
        development may be approved by the Planning Director if 50 percent or more of required
        off-street parking is located within an on-site parking structure.
       Additional density bonuses can also be offered to projects that have exemplary
        architectural design and/or contribute to increased employment opportunities in the City.
The City has approved mixed use density and height bonuses for two projects, one of which also
received a lot consolidation density bonus.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                                45

Nonconforming Lot Ordinance: The City Council recognized the need to facilitate the
reasonable use and development of nonconforming lots. In 2000, the City Council passed a
Nonconforming Lot Ordinance that recognizes and affirms the development rights of legally
subdivided lots. The ordinance facilitates such development by allowing parcels that do not meet
the minimum lot size or dimensions of the zone to be fully developed provided that other
development standards are fully met.
The ordinance facilitates development by allowing the merging of nonconforming lots with
conforming or nonconforming lots to create lots that conform more closely to the standards of the
underlying zone. However, if a nonconforming lot cannot be developed or improved in
conformance with existing standards (excluding lot size and dimensions), a Nonconforming Lot
Development Plan Review Permit may be granted to allow development or improvement of the
lot.
3. Provisions for a Variety of Housing
Housing Element law specifies that jurisdictions must identify adequate sites to be made available
through appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the development of
various types of housing for all economic segments of the population. This includes single-family
housing, multiple-family housing, factory-built housing, mobile homes, housing for persons with
disabilities, emergency shelters and transitional housing, among others. Table 28 summarizes
housing types permitted within the primary residential zones. Table 29 summarizes the housing
types permitted in the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan and Table 30 summarizes the housing
types permitted in the Civic Center Area Plan.
                            Table 28: Housing Types Permitted by Zone
                                          General Plan Land Use Category (Zone)
   Housing Types                E-3, E-4,
      Permitted                                      LGA
                       RHR      E-5, E-6,  R-1                 R-2     R-3   MHP     MS     PD
                                                    and GA
                                and E-7
 Residential Uses
 Single-Family           P         P        P          P        P       P     --      --    --
 Duplex (2 units)        --        --       --         P        P       P     --      --    --
 Multiple-Family
                         --        --       --         P        P       P     --      --    --
 (3 or more)
 Factory-Built           P         P        P          P        P       P     P       --    --
 Second Units            P         P        P          P        P       P     --      --    --
 Planned
                         P         P        P          P        P       P     --      --     P
 Development
 Special Needs Housing
 Senior Housing          --        --       --         P        P       P     --     CUP    --
 Community Care
                         --        --       --         --       --      --    --     CUP    --
 Facility
Source: Glendora Municipal Zoning Code
                                           City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                             46
                 Table 29: Uses Permitted in Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan
                   TCMU         GMU       BG          CRR             Special Requirements
Multiple-Family                                              Only in conjunction with mixed use.
                      P           P        P           P
Residential                                                  Allowed by right in CRR.
Assisted Living
                      --          --      CUP         CUP    For more than six persons.
Facilities
Condominiums/                                                Only in conjunction with mixed use.
                      P           P        P           P
Townhomes                                                    Allowed by right in CRR.
Live/Work             P           P        P           P
Mixed Use
                      P           P        P           P
(vertical)
Mixed Use
                      P           P        P           P
(horizontal)
Residential
                      --          --      CUP         CUP    For more than six persons.
Care Homes
Source: Glendora Municipal Zoning Code.
                       Table 30: Uses Permitted in Civic Center Area Plan
                       T-4            T-5          T-5A               Special Requirements
Single-Family
                         P              -            P
Residential
Multiple-Family                                              Not allowed fronting Glendora Avenue in
                         P              P            P
Residential                                                  T-5 zone.
Assisted Living
                         -              -            -       For more than six persons.
Facilities
Condominiums/                                                Not allowed fronting Glendora Avenue in
                         P              P            P
Townhomes                                                    T-5 zone.
Live/Work                -           CUP           CUP
Mixed Use
                         -           CUP           CUP
(vertical)
Mixed Use                                                    Not allowed fronting Glendora Avenue in
                         -           CUP           CUP
(horizontal)                                                 T-5 zone.
Residential
                         -              -            -       For more than six persons.
Care Homes
Source: Glendora Municipal Zoning Code
Besides single-family housing opportunities, the City offers the following housing opportunities
that are available for all economic segments of the community as well as more vulnerable
members of the community, including those earning lower income, seniors, and the homeless,
among others. These include multiple-family units, second units, mobile homes, and other more
affordable housing opportunities.
Factory-Built Units: Manufactured or factory built units meeting State and federal standards
and installed on permanent foundations are treated as regular residential units and therefore
permitted where residential uses are permitted.
Multiple-Family Units: The Zoning Ordinance permits multiple-family housing in the GA, LGA,
R-2, and R-3 zones. The permitted density is 6.1 to 11 units per acre for Limited Garden
Apartments (LGA) and Garden Apartments (GA), 11.1 to 15 units per acre in the R-2 zone, and
15.1 to 20 units per acre in the R-3 zone. Approximately 16 percent of the City's housing stock is
multiple-family residences.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                              November 2013
                                                                                                 47
Second Kitchen Units: Second kitchen units are permitted on parcels zoned for single-family or
multiple-family residential uses under the following conditions:
        A single-family residential dwelling unit must exist on the parcel;
        A second kitchen unit does not already exist on the parcel;
        No more than one second kitchen unit shall be permitted on the parcel;
        The construction of a second kitchen unit is not permitted on a residential parcel with two
         existing detached accessory structures;
        The single-family residence or the second kitchen unit shall be occupied by the property
         owner;
        The second kitchen unit may be rented but shall not be sold, transferred or assigned
         separately from the primary single-family residence;
        The floor area of an attached second kitchen unit shall not exceed 30 percent of the
         existing living area of the primary dwelling unit but in no case shall exceed 1,000 square
         feet, not including required parking; and
        The total area of floor space for a detached second kitchen unit shall not exceed 1,000
         square feet in area, not including required parking, and shall maintain a minimum twenty-
         foot unobstructed distance from the primary dwelling unit as measured from any point on
         either structure, excluding eaves.
Architectural design and site plan are subject to review by the Planning Director. Since 2004, the
City has approved 14 second units, an average of about 1.5 a year.
Mobilehomes: The Glendora Zoning Ordinance permits mobilehomes within a specially
designated Mobilehome Overlay Zone. Between 2009 and 2011, there were 733 mobile homes
within the community, according to the American Community Survey. No other types of
residential structures are allowed in this zone. The MHP Overlay Zone was designed to protect
existing mobile home uses. Specific development standards have also been established to
promote an orderly and pleasant residential environment in harmony and compatible with
surrounding land uses. Lower income individuals and/or families occupy many of these homes.
Senior Housing: Senior housing is permitted as regular multi-family housing in GA, LGA, R-2,
and R-3 zones, as well as conditionally permitted in the MS zone.
Emergency Shelters: In response to changes in the State Housing Element law, the City
amended the Zoning Code in 2011 to specifically identify emergency shelters as a permitted
use at two locations in the City. The two locations include twelve parcels, with a total area of
2.8 acres. The Zoning Code provides objective standards for emergency shelters to regulate
the following, as permitted under State law, including:
        The maximum number of beds permitted;
        Parking based on demonstrated need;
        The size/location of exterior and interior onsite waiting and client intake areas;
        The provision of onsite management;
        The proximity of other emergency shelters, provided that emergency shelters are not
         required to be more than 300 feet apart;
        The length of stay;
                                           City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                             November 2013
                                                                                               48

Transitional Housing: Under Housing Element law, transitional housing is defined as buildings
configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call
for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible
program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six
months (California Health and Safety Code Section 50675.2).
This definition does not encompass all forms of transitional housing. Transitional housing is a
type of housing used to facilitate the movement of homeless individuals and families to
permanent housing. Transitional housing can take several forms, including group quarters with
beds, single-family homes, and multiple-family apartments and typically offers case
management and support services to return people to independent living (usually between six
and 24 months).
The City amended the Zoning Code to address transitional housing. For transitional housing
facilities that operate as regular housing developments, meeting the Health and Safety Code
definition, such uses are permitted by right where housing is permitted.
For transitional housing facilities that operate as group quarters, such facilities are permitted as
community care facilities. Potential conditions for approval of transitional housing for more than
six persons in a group quarters setting may include hours of operation, security, loading
requirements, noise regulations, and restrictions on loitering. Conditions would be similar to
those for other similar uses and would not serve to constrain the development of such facilities.
Supportive Housing: Under the Housing Element law, supportive housing is defined as housing
with no limit on length of stay that is occupied by a target population, and that is linked to onsite
or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving
his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the
community (California Health and Safety Code 50675.14 (b)).
Target population includes adults with low incomes having one or more disabilities, including
mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals
eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act
(Division 4.5, commencing with Section 4500, of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may,
among other populations, include families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out
of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, or homeless
people (California Health and Safety Code 53260 (d)).
Similar to transitional housing, supportive housing can take several forms, including group
quarters with beds, single-family homes, and multiple-family apartments. Supportive housing
usually includes a service component either on- or off-site to assist the tenants in retaining the
housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when
possible, work in the community.
The Zoning Code was amended to address supportive housing. For supportive housing facilities
that operate as regular housing developments, such uses are permitted by right where housing
is permitted. For supportive housing facilities that operate as group quarters, such facilities will
be permitted as residential care facilities. Potential conditions for approval of supportive housing
for more than six persons in a group quarters setting may include hours of operation, security,
loading requirements, noise regulations, and restrictions on loitering. Conditions would be
similar to those for other similar uses and would not serve to constrain the development of such
facilities.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                                49
Single-Room Occupancy (SRO): SRO units are one-room units intended for occupancy by a
single individual. They are distinct from a studio or efficiency unit, in that a studio is a one-room
unit that must contain a kitchen and bathroom. Although SRO units are not required to have a
kitchen or bathroom, many modern SROs have one or the other. The City amended the Zoning
Code to permit SRO units by-right in the CRR subdistrict of the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities: The City of Glendora recognizes the importance of
addressing the housing needs of persons with disabilities. This section reviews potential
governmental constraints to the development and improvement of housing for persons with
disabilities.
Definition of Family: Local governments may unintentionally restrict access to housing for
households failing to qualify as a “family” by the definition specified in the Zoning Code.
Specifically, a restrictive definition of “family” that limits the number of and differentiates
between related and unrelated individuals living together may illegally limit the development and
siting of group homes for persons with disabilities, but not housing for families that are similarly
sized or situated. The City amended the Zoning Code in 2010 to remove the definition of
“family.”
Zoning and Land Use: The Glendora Municipal Code does not offer any guidelines on
residential care facilities. However, it defines a “Community Care Facility” as a facility licensed
by the state or county, which provides lodging, meals, nursing, dietary or other personal
services to convalescents, invalids or the elderly for six or more patients, but does not include
surgery or the care of substance abusers or persons with communicable diseases. This
definition does not include nor mention facilities serving six or fewer patients. Larger community
care facilities, convalescent homes, and other similar uses for more than six persons are
permitted in the Medical Services (MS) Zone and in the TCMU and CRR subdistricts of the Route
66 Corridor Specific Plan, subject to a conditional use permit. The City amended its Zoning Code
to differentiate between small residential care facilities (that serve six or fewer persons) and
large residential care facilities (that serve seven or more people). Pursuant to the Lanterman
Act, licensed residential care facilities for six or fewer persons are treated as a regular
residential use and permitted where residential uses are permitted.
According to the State Department of Social Services, a total of 31 residential care facilities are
located in the City of Glendora. These include:
        12 adult residential facilities (166 beds)
        19 residential care facilities for the elderly (167 beds)
Most of these are small facilities for six or fewer persons. However, a few large adult residential
facilities are also located in the City.
Reasonable Accommodation: Both the federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair
Employment and Housing Act direct local governments to make reasonable accommodations
(i.e. modifications or exceptions) in their zoning laws and other land use regulations when such
accommodations may be necessary to afford disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling. For example, it may be reasonable to accommodate requests from persons
with disabilities to waive a setback requirement or other standard of the Zoning Code to ensure
that homes are accessible for the mobility impaired. Whether a particular modification is
reasonable depends on the circumstances. The City Council adopted Ordinance No. 1904 in
                                             City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                              November 2013
                                                                                                 50

September 2008 to establish a process and procedure to consider and approve development
requests to accommodate persons with disabilities. Pursuant to the ordinance, the following
criteria are considered when evaluating a request for reasonable accommodation:
     (1) Whether the request for accommodation is reasonable and necessary to afford the
         applicant with an equal opportunity to access publicly funded buildings, facilities and
         programs, or privately funded housing, including single and multiple-family dwelling
         units, and public accommodations on an equal basis with citizens who are not disabled;
     (2) Whether there are feasible alternatives to the requested accommodation that may
         provide an equivalent level of benefit;
     (3) The physical attributes of and any proposed changes to property and structures;
     (4) Whether the requested accommodation will impose an undue financial or administrative
         burden on the City;
     (5) Whether the requested accommodation will require a fundamental alteration of the city’s
         rules, policies, practices or procedures;
     (6) If a zoning related issue, whether the requested accommodation would result in a
         detriment of the residential character of that neighborhood; and
     (7) Any other factor(s) that may have a bearing on the request.
The conditions for approval include:
     (1) Inspection of the affected premises periodically, as specified in the conditions, to verify
             compliance with any applicable conditions of approval;
     (2) Prior to any transfer of interest in the premises, notice to the transferee of the existence
         of the modification, the personal status of the modification and the requirement that the
         transferee apply for a new modification is necessary;
     (3) Removal of the improvements, where removal would not constitute an unreasonable and
         unfair financial burden, if the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer
         exists;
     (4) Time limits and/or expiration of the approval if the need for which the accommodation
         was granted no longer exists;
     (5) Other necessary conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and
         welfare.
The requests are reviewed and determined by the appropriate department head(s).
Permits and Fees: There is no fee for the City to consider a request for reasonable
accommodation. Typical building permit fees would apply.
                                           City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                             November 2013
                                                                                                 51

3. Development Permit Procedures
Certainty and consistency in permit processing procedures and reasonable processing times is
important to ensure that the process does not discourage developers of housing or add costs
(including carrying costs on property) that would make the project economically infeasible. The
City is committed to maintaining comparatively short processing times. Total processing times
vary by project, but the following timelines can be used as a general guide:
       Non-hillside single-family project: less than 60 days
       Large single-family subdivisions: one year (for environmental review)
       Multiple-family project: 90 days
       Multiple-family project with subdivision map: six months to one year
Table 31 provides a detailed summary of the typical processing procedures and timelines of
various types of projects in the City.
                   Table 31: Typical Processing Procedures by Project Type
                  Single-
                                Large Single-                          Multiple-
                  Family                              Multiple-
                                 Family (with                        Family (with        Mixed-Use
                   (non-                               Family
                                subdivisions)                       subdividision)
                 hillside)
                                                                                    Development Plan
                                                                   Development
                              Subdivision Map                                       Review (Required
                                                                   Plan Review
                                                                                    in CCAP)
               None if
                              Environmental
               single-                                                              Use Permitted By
                              Review
               story. Only                                                          Right - Conditional
Approvals                     EIR (typically        Development
               requires                                                             Use Permit required
Required                      required for          Plan Review
               “Over the                                           Subdivision      for development
                              hillside
               Counter”                                            Map              improvements (only
                              subdivisions due
               approval.                                                            in conjunction with
                              to presence of
                                                                                    Route 66 Corridor
                              biological
                                                                                    Specific Plan)
                              resources)
Estimated
Total           Less than
                                     1 year          60-90 days     90 to 180 days       60-90 days
Processing       60 days
Times
The City of Glendora can encourage the ongoing construction, maintenance, and improvement
of housing by decreasing, to the extent possible, the time and uncertainty involved in gaining
approvals for various development permits. One such example is the Permit Streamlining Act,
which establishes timelines for development review processes. This section outlines the
procedures for gaining project approvals in Glendora.
Glendora provides for various ways to process minor and major development projects. Different
levels of review are based accordingly on the complexity of the project and whether a variation
in development standards, existing land use, or operating conditions is requested. Table 32
summarizes the varying levels of review and the minimum time frames required to process
permits prior to scheduling before a hearing. Of particular note, for projects involving multiple
requests, all applications are processed concurrently.
                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                               November 2013
                                                                                                   52

                                 Table 32: Development Plan Reviews
                                                         Planning       City
                                          Director                                Processing Time
                                                       Commission      Council
Administrative Changes (e.g.
Administrative CUP and Minor                YES             n/a          n/a          2 months
Modification, etc.)
Minor Permits (Minor CUP)                   YES             n/a          n/a          2 months
Major Permits (CUP, Variance)                n/a           YES           n/a         2-3 months
Tentative Tract Map                          n/a           YES          YES          3-6 months
General Plan Amendment                       n/a           YES          YES           3 months
Zone Change & Development
                                             n/a           YES          YES          3-6 months
Agreements
Development Plan Review                      n/a           YES           n/a         2-3 months
Planned Development                          n/a           YES          YES           6 months
Planned Redevelopment                        n/a           YES          YES           6 months
Source: Planning Department, City of Glendora.
N/A = Review is not applicable.
Development Plan Review: Development plans are reviewed by the City to ensure orderly
development, aesthetic design, safe and harmonious placement. The following types of projects
require a Development Plan Review (the reviewing body is also included in parenthesis):
       Hillside Development (Planning Commission)
       All multiple-family projects (Planning Commission)
       Planned redevelopment (Planning Commission, City Council)
       Planned development (Planning Commission, City Council)
       Civic Center Area Plan development, exclusive of permits for signage and awnings
        (Planning Commission)
       Mobilehome park overlay development (Planning Commission)
       Second story construction for all single-family residential zones including hillside lots
        (Planning Commission)
       Second kitchen units (Planning Director)
Most reviews are conducted by the Planning Commission, including reviews of hillside
developments and multiple-family projects. Once a completed application is submitted, a meeting
between staff and applicants is also arranged in order to review ideas, identify processes and
requirements, ask questions, and discuss potential issues, solutions and approaches. The
reviewing body looks at the following characteristics during a Development Plan Review:
       Consistency with the general plan and other applicable plans
       Whether the site is adequately served by streets, utilities and other services, facilities and
        improvements
       Whether the use will adversely affect the character and integrity of the area, the utility and
        value of properties in the area, and the health, safety and welfare of the public.
Potential development in the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area and the Civic Center Area Plan
area must also undergo additional review and adhere to a specific set of design guidelines.
The following types of projects in the Route 66 Corridor require additional review (the type of
review is also included in parenthesis):
                                              City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                               November 2013
                                                                                                 53

       New building construction (Minor Conditional Use Permit)
       Lot consolidation (Minor Conditional Use Permit)
       Density/intensity bonus incentives (Minor Conditional Use Permit)
       Mixed used development less than 30,000 square feet (Minor Conditional Use Permit)
       Development no higher than three stories (Minor Conditional Use Permit)
       Mixed used development greater than 30,000 square feet (Conditional Use Permit)
       Development higher than three stories (Conditional Use Permit)
The City has established design guidelines for the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area. The
purpose of the design guidelines is to provide consistent design guidance for the development
and redevelopment of the Route 66 Corridor that reflects the community’s commitment to quality
design and economic development. The following projects are subject to the Route 66 Corridor
Specific Plan Design Guidelines:
       All applications for building permits
       Projects/uses requiring the approval of a conditional use permit
       Any construction (whether or not a building permit is required) that affects the exterior
        elevation of an existing building or structure (e.g., replacing doors or windows)
       A change in the exterior appearance of a building (e.g., painting, reroofing, replacing
        siding) or similar changes unless exempted by the Planning Director
       A change in the use of an existing building that requires additional parking
The overall objective is to ensure that the intent and spirit of the guidelines are followed and that
the project respects its surroundings in terms of scale, character, and orientation.
Each of the Specific Plan’s seven sub-districts has a set of district-specific guidelines, which vary
depending on the character of the area. Multiple-family residential projects must also adhere to a
set of design guidelines, which include specifications for:
       Building location and orientation
       Open space requirements
       Architecture (including scale, height, façade, building materials, etc.)
       Landscaping
       Parking and circulation
Prior to the economic downturn, the City was experiencing substantial interest from the
development community to pursue commercial, mixed use, and residential development projects
in the Specific Plan area, demonstrating the incentives offered by the Specific Plan are conducive
to redevelopment.
Conditional Use Permits: Certain types of land uses require special consideration in a particular
zone or in the City as a whole. These land uses require a Conditional Use Permit (CUP). Every
application for a CUP requires a public hearing. The reviewing body looks at the following when
deciding to approve a CUP application:
       Consistency with the general plan and other applicable plans
       Whether the site is adequately served by streets, utilities and other services, facilities and
        improvements
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                              November 2013
                                                                                                 54

        Whether the use will adversely affect the character and integrity of the area, the utility and
         value of properties in the area, and the health, safety and welfare of the public.
4. Fees and Exactions
Glendora collects fees from developers to cover the costs of processing permits and providing
the necessary services and infrastructure related to new development. Fees are calculated
based on the average cost of processing a particular type of case. The City regularly performs a
full cost analysis to update user fees and periodically assesses ways to streamline organizational
processes. Table 33 summarizes common fees.
Most communities also charge development impact fees to cover the cost of added services
required by new residential development. City of Glendora impact fees include: a school fee
($1.84 to $2.05 per square foot of living area), a park development fee $2,273 per single-family
unit and $1,591 per multiple-family unit) and a sanitation connection fee ($4,320 per single-
family unit, $3,240 per condominium unit, and $2,592 per other multiple-family unit).
For a typical single-family residential project, typical planning and development fees total
approximately $14,500 per unit (based on a 3,000-square-foot residence). For a typical multi-
family project, typical fees total $6,500 (based on development of a three-unit project). These
fees are generally lower or comparable to neighboring communities. While fees add to the cost
of construction, the City offers a range of incentives that can off-set the impacts of such fees
(e.g. density bonuses for lot consolidation).
                                           City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                             November 2013
                                                                                                  55

                               Table 33: Planning and Development Fees
                                                                      Single-Family          Multiple-Family
        Type of Fee                     Service Provided
                                                                           Units                   Units
                                 Conditional Use Permit                              $2,425
                                 Variance                                            $2,224
                                 Zone Change                                         $3,126
Planning                         Tentative Subdivision Map                 $5,286 + $85 per lot over 4
                                 General Plan Amendment                              $3,645
                                 Environmental Review (Initial
                                                                                     $1,770
                                 Study)
                                 Environmental Impact Report                $6,171 + $5,000 deposit
                                 Development Plan Review                  $2,483                  $3,297
                                 Planned Development                        $3,275 + $10,000 deposit
Development
                                 Planned Redevelopment                      $3,275 + $10,000 deposit
                                 Building Permit                              Depends on Valuation
                                 Engineering Plan Check and         5 percent of estimated construction cost
                                 Inspection                            of proposed public improvements
                                 Sewer Connection Permit                          $56.75 per lot
Public Works                     Water Main Connection Charge                      $8/front foot
                                 Street Lights                                 $205/light + deposit
                                 Street Trees                                       $190/tree
                                 Transportation Impact Fee                            None
                                 School Impact Fee                           $1.84-$2.05/square foot
Development Impact
                                 Park Development Fee                     $2,273                  $1,591
                                 Sanitation Connection Fee                $4,320              $2,592-$3,240
Source: City of Glendora (2013).
5. Building Codes and their Enforcement
Glendora adopted the 2010 California Building Code, which includes the 2009 International
Building Code, in 2010. The 2010 California Building Code establishes standards and requires
inspections at various stages of construction to ensure code compliance. The California Building
Code also requires new residential construction to comply with the federal Americans with
Disabilities Act. Although these standards and the time required for inspections increase housing
production costs and may impact the viability of rehabilitation of older properties which are
required to be brought up to current code standards, the intent of the codes is to provide
structurally sound, safe, and energy-efficient housing.
The City's Code Enforcement Division is responsible for enforcing both State and City
regulations governing maintenance of all buildings and property. The City has one full-time code
enforcement officer to enforce local codes. The City seeks voluntary code compliance through
administrative processes. Approximately 50 cases are handled per month - primarily related to
property maintenance, building code issues, and inoperative vehicles among others.
6. Site Improvements
Site improvements are an important component of new development and include water, sewer,
circulation, and other infrastructure needed to make development feasible. New residential
construction will occur either as infill, where infrastructure is already in place, or in hillside areas,
                                              City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                  November 2013
                                                                                                         56
where adequate facilities will be required. The City of Glendora requires developers to construct
offsite extensions of the public infrastructure (i.e., water, sewer, streets, and storm drain
systems, etc.) needed to serve previously undeveloped property. If the property is adjacent to
existing public infrastructure that has exceeded its useful life, the City requires the developer to
replace the existing aged infrastructure in kind. Large developments are required to fund the
preparation of a traffic impact study to determine what, if any, impacts the development would
have on the City’s existing circulation system. Any mitigations that are recommended by the
study would be funded by the development (e.g., installation or modification of traffic signals).
The City requires the developer to construct all internal streets, sidewalks, curb, gutter, affected
portions of off-street arterials, landscaping along arterials, and other standard conditions. If the
City is planning a capital improvement project to upgrade infrastructure in the vicinity of a new
development, the City may choose to allow the developer to pay a pro-rata share to the City to
assist in funding the project. Developers are required to provide sufficient water rights to serve a
proposed development or to provide an in-lieu fee. The City’s street standards are specified in
Table 34.
                            Table 34: Off-Site Improvement Standards
                             Street Type    Right of Way      Curb to Curb
                            Major                      100’             84’
                            Secondary                80’-84’            64’
                            Collector                    60’            40’
                            Local                        50’            36’
Requiring developers to construct site improvements and/or pay pro-rata shares toward other
infrastructure costs, the provision of public services, as well as needed utility systems will
increase the cost of developing homes and the final sales price of housing. While site
improvements increase housing costs, requiring developers to pay for on- and off-site
improvements is necessary to maintain the high quality of life desired by City residents, and is
also consistent with the City's adopted General Plan goals. Moreover, it is important to ensure
that public services and facilities are in place at the time of need, thus avoiding the overloading
of existing urban service systems.
C. Environmental Constraints
While the City is extensively developed, there are vacant and underutilized lands on which new
development can be accommodated. Many of these, however, are impacted by environmental
constraints. The largest concentration of undeveloped land extends into the hillsides in the
northern portion of the City. These areas are likely to contain constraints on development, such
as steep slopes, endangered or protected flora and fauna, and wild/brush fire potential.
The following are more detailed discussions of the City's environmental constraints and hazards
which affect, in varying degrees, existing and future residential developments.
1. Seismic Hazards
The dominant geologic feature is the Sierra Madre fault zone along the foot of the San Gabriel
Mountains. With few exceptions, geology, soil, and seismic hazards do not restrict development,
but require detailed investigations prior to development. The U.S. Department of Agriculture
maps classify the City's soil as having moderate hazard potential, meaning that some soils are
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                               57

unfavorable to development but construction can take place with special design and planning
features.
2. Flood Hazards
Flood control facilities have been constructed by the Los Angeles County Flood Control District,
which place the developed areas of the City outside of the 100 year flood plain. The major threat
of flooding is from dam failure by earthquake, seiche, or structural fault. Big Dalton and San
Dimas are two dams which serve the City. In case of dam failure, the County Flood Control
District has established an Emergency Plan to evacuate residents to Citrus College, the nearest
major shelter.
The City’s floodplain administrator reviews all base flood data available from other federal or state
agencies and uses it to identify flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Glendora.
Any proposed building in a flood-prone area is required to be designed (or modified) to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Construction materials must also be resistant
to flood damage.
3. Fire Hazards
The most serious threat of fire in the City occurs at the interface between hillsides and the urban
areas. The hillside areas contain large quantities of combustible plants which subject structures
within close proximity to potentially extreme fire hazards. Certain areas of the city are designated
as a fire hazard severity zone due to geographical, topographical, and climatic conditions. These
conditions include: large, natural growths of chaparral and other volatile weeds and vegetation,
exposure to hot, high-velocity winds during the “Santa Ana” conditions common to Southern
California, steep terrain making access difficult for fire-fighting personnel and equipment, and
generally lower water pressure availability for fire suppression purposes. These areas are subject
to a much higher incident of fire hazards than any other areas of the city and certain changes and
modifications in the state mandated uniform construction regulations are necessary for the
protection of life and property in these areas.
Structures in the fire hazard severity zone are required to have fire-resistant protection of exterior
walls and openings, unenclosed underfloor areas, and automatic sprinkler systems. Wood-shingle
and wood-shake roofs are also prohibited in the fire hazard severity zone.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                                58

4. HOUSING RESOURCES
The extent of housing needs in a community often exceeds the resources available. The City of
Glendora must pull together limited resources and use them efficiently in order to address the
current and projected housing needs of its residents. This section of the Housing Element
provides an overview of resources available to the City.
A. Availability of Sites for Housing
Through its various land use policies, the City provides development potential for a range of
housing opportunities.
1. Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
State Housing Element law requires that a local jurisdiction accommodate a share of the
region’s projected housing needs for the planning period. This share, called the Regional
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA), is important because State law mandates that jurisdictions
provide sufficient land to accommodate a variety of housing opportunities for all economic
segments of the community. Compliance with this requirement is measured by the jurisdiction’s
ability in providing adequate land to accommodate the RHNA. The Southern California
Association of Governments (SCAG), as the regional planning agency, is responsible for
allocating the RHNA to individual jurisdictions within the region.
The RHNA is distributed by income category. For the 2013 Housing Element update, the City of
Glendora is allocated a RHNA of 6868 units as follows:
        Extremely Low Income (up to 30 percent of AMI): 89 units9 (13 percent)
        Very Low Income (31 to 50 percent of AMI): 92 units (13 percent)
        Low Income (51 to 80 percent of AMI): 106 units (15 percent)
        Moderate Income (81 to 120 percent of AMI): 115 units (17 percent)
        Above Moderate Income (more than 120 percent of AMI): 284 units (41 percent)
This income distribution includes an “impaction correction” factor to allocate a higher proportion
of lower income households to Glendora than the regional average in order to balance the
income distribution across the region. The City must ensure the availability of residential sites
at adequate densities and appropriate development standards to accommodate these units.
8   The RHNA allocation includes 40 additional units that were not included in the Final RHNA Allocation Plan
    adopted by SCAG. These 40 units were transferred to the City of Glendora from the County of Los Angeles as
    part of the Annexation Agreement for the former Monrovia Nursery site effective September 17, 2013.
9   The City has a RHNA allocation of 181 very low income units (inclusive of extremely low income units). Pursuant
    to new State law (AB 2634), the City must project the number of extremely low income housing needs based on
    Census income distribution or assume 50 percent of the very low income units as extremely low. According to
    2006-2008 CHAS data, of the City’s 2,815 extremely low and very low income households, approximately 49
    percent were extremely low income while 51 percent were very low income) as shown in Table 5. Therefore the
    City’s RHNA of 181 very low income units may be split accordingly into 89 extremely low (49 percent) and 92
    very low income (51 percent) units. However, for purposes of identifying adequate sites for the RHNA, State law
    does not mandate the separate accounting for the extremely low income category.
                                               City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                      November 2013
                                                                                                             59

2. Residential Capacity for the 2013-2021 Housing Element Planning Period
The City’s approach to meeting its RHNA involves demonstrating residential capacity through
pending projects as well as an inventory of vacant and underutilized sites. Pending projects are
those proposed developments that have been approved by the City but will not be permitted
prior to adoption of the Housing Element in October 2013.
To identify adequate sites for the RHNA for this Housing Element cycle, the City began with the
sites inventory contained in the 2008-2014 Housing Element. Sites that are no longer available
are deleted from the inventory. Additional feasible sites are included in this inventory based on
current market conditions.
Methodology for Developing the Residential Sites Inventory
For the purposes of this inventory, vacant land refers to parcels with no development.
Underutilized land refers to parcels that are developed below the potential use or capacity of the
site. Sites were identified and deemed appropriate for inclusion in the sites inventory when a
property, or group of contiguous properties, met one or more of the following criteria:
    1) Property is vacant
    2) Property contains commercial or industrial buildings that are vacant or are experiencing
         high tenant turnover rates
    3) Property contains buildings that are in a state of disrepair or have outlived their utility
    4) Property has been the subject of code enforcement actions due to property maintenance
         issues
    5) Property contains residential units where the number of existing dwelling units (including
         mobile homes) is less than 60% of expected number of units if the property were to
         redevelop
    6) Property has been previously identified as appropriate for redevelopment with residential
         or mixed-use development through a planning effort (i.e. specific plan or overlay zone)
    7) Property has been identified by developers as viable for redevelopment with residential
         or mixed-use development
Pending Projects
The Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) approved the annexation of 72 acres of the
former Monrovia Nursery site into the City of Glendora in September 2013. The Glendora City
Council previously approved a 121-unit single-family residential subdivision on the property, with
construction expected to begin in early 2014. All 121 units are expected to be market rate.
A second project, located on the northeast corner of Route 66 and Glendora Avenue within the
Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan, was approved by the City Council and is expected to begin
construction in late 2013. This mixed-use project will include 256 market rate multi-family units
as well as commercial space.
Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan
Future residential development will occur primarily in the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area
where increased densities and various incentives offered by the City can facilitate and
encourage a range of housing options. The Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area is considered
the core commercial corridor within the City of Glendora and encompasses approximately 287
acres. A majority of the properties identified in the sites inventory are located within the Specific
Plan area. While the Plan provides for numerous opportunities for redevelopment, the sites
                                        City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                                 60

chosen for the inventory are those with the most near-term development potential. The
estimated realistic net capacity of these sites is 1,353 units, including density incentives. Based
on the allowable density of these parcels, all 1,353 units can be counted towards the City’s
lower-income RHNA. Within the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan, the Route 66 Residential
(CRR) district allows for standalone multi-family residential projects. The CRR district does not
require residential units to be developed as part of a mixed use project. The residential sites
inventory for the 2013-2021 Housing Element has identified three sites (Sites 17-19), totaling
eight acres and with a realistic capacity of 162 units, within the CRR district of the Route 66
Corridor Specific Plan.
Existing Conditions
Existing uses on the identified sites include older mobilehome/trailer parks, single-family homes,
small apartment complexes, low-profile office and retail uses, as well as some auto repair uses,
among other uses. In 2008, the City facilitated the construction of an 87-unit affordable housing
development (Elwood Family Apartments) in the Specific Plan area by removing/relocating
some existing older and dilapidated mobilehomes.
A number of these sites have also been identified as having redevelopment potential because of
the existing building/blight conditions on site. Examples of existing blight include:
       Structurally unsound construction
       Existence of hazardous conditions
       Building and other City code violations
       Lack of fire protection water
       Lack of access for persons with disabilities and emergency vehicles
       Rainwater buildup, flooding, and inadequate street drainage
       Incompatible adjacent land uses
       Asbestos and lead-based paint hazards
Many of the sites within the Specific Plan area also contain antiquated building structures and
site configurations that make the expansion of existing uses or accommodation of new/modern
uses difficult without substantial investments for improvements by the property owners. For
example, many old auto repair shops have existing hazardous conditions that must be rectified
if expansion is pursued. Also, because most properties in the Specific Plan area were built prior
to 1990, many structures are not ADA compliant. Some buildings require major modifications to
meet ADA requirements that may be cost prohibitive given the current use or may prove
infeasible due to space limitations. Most of the businesses are independently owned, small
businesses so redevelopment of these properties would not involve the strategic planning of
major corporations. Given the incentives and opportunities offered by the Specific Plan,
property values in this area have increased and the City has been fairly successful in advancing
redevelopment activities until the recent recession. When market conditions improve, the City
expects redevelopment interest in the area to revive. The City expects construction of a 256-unit
mixed-use project within the Route 66 plan area (on the northeast corner of Route 66 and
Glendora Avenue) to begin in late 2013.
                                         City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                               61

Estimating Net Realistic Capacity
The City’s Zoning Code offers a range of incentives to facilitate lot consolidation and mixed
use/residential development within the Specific Plan area (see discussions on development
incentives in Section 3, Housing Constraints). In estimating the capacity of these underutilized
sites, the City uses several scenarios:
    (1) Development at 80 percent of the maximum density permitted, accounting for internal
         circulation, landscaping, and parking/setback requirements;
    (2) Development with lot consolidation incentive (15 additional units per acre), at 80 percent
         of the total density allowed;
    (3) Development with mixed use incentive (10 additional units per acre), at 80 percent of the
         total density allowed; and
    (4) Development with both lot consolidation and mixed use incentives (25 additional units
         per acre), at 70 percent of the total density allowed.
All of the development applications in the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan thus far have
received at least one density bonus incentive due to lot consolidation and/or mixed use
developments. As shown in Appendix B, all of the sites chosen for the inventory within the
Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area will qualify for one or more density incentive.
Recent developments in the City have achieved a range of densities. Townhome projects
typically range from 12 to 19 units per acre. A mixed use project achieved the maximum
allowable density and received additional density bonuses for mixed use and lot consolidation,
resulting in an overall density of 55 units per acre. These project densities were determined by
the housing type and market preference, but also demonstrate that a project can reach the
allowable density.
Other Vacant and Underutilized Sites
Only a handful of the sites identified in the residential sites inventory are located on vacant and
underutilized parcels outside of the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area. These sites were
selected using the methodology described previously and total approximately 28 acres.
Collectively, these sites have the potential to accommodate 313 housing units, the vast majority
of which (277 units) can be counted towards the City’s lower income RHNA based on the
allowable density of the parcels. Detailed information on the existing conditions of these sites
can be found in Appendix B.
Estimating Net Realistic Capacity
As in the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area, the City offers various density incentives in
certain other portions of Glendora to encourage redevelopment. For example, the Grand-
Foothill Multi-Family Residential Overlay Zone provides density incentives for both lot
consolidation and green building:
        Lot Consolidation Density Bonus: New residential development projects in the
         Overlay Zone that utilize the consolidation of lots to achieve the required
         minimum lot size can be granted a five dwelling unit per acre density bonus.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                              62

         Environmental Stewardship and Energy Efficiency Density Bonus: New
          residential development projects in the Overlay Zone that obtain LEED Silver
          certification from the U.S. Green Building Council (or its equivalent) can be
          granted a five dwelling unit per acre density bonus.
One of the sites included in the residential sites inventory (Site No. 24) is located within the
Grand-Foothill Multi-Family Residential Overlay Zone and qualifies for both of the density
incentives offered.
Summary of Residential Capacity
Table 35 provides a summary of the City’s residential capacity for the 2013-2021 Housing
Element planning period.
                 Table 35: Residential Capacity for the 2013-2021 Housing Element
                                                                                                 Feasible
                                                                                        Net        for
                                                          Actual       Potential
Land Use Designation/ Project             Acreage                                    Realistic    Lower
                                                         Density*       Units
                                                                                       Units     Income
                                                                                                  Units
Pending Projects
Former Monrovia Nursery Site                  94.20         3.0                ---          121
Northeast corner of Route 66
                                               4.73        54.1                ---          256
and Glendora Avenue
Subtotal                                      98.93          --                ---          377
                                                                                                 Feasible
                                                                                        Net        for
                                                        Maximum        Potential
Land Use Designation/ Project             Acreage                                    Realistic    Lower
                                                         Density*       Units
                                                                                       Units     Income
                                                                                                  Units
Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan
Town Center Mixed Use (TCMU)                  29.24        55.0            1,582            945     Y
Barranca Gateway (BG)                          9.10      35.0-45.0           354            246     Y
Route 66 Residential (CRR)                     8.09        45.0              363            162     Y
Subtotal                                      46.43          --            2,299         1,353
Lower Income Units                            46.43          --            2,299         1,353
Other Vacant and Underutilized Sites
Low Density                                    8.76         3.0               25             16
Low/Medium Density                               5.8      5.0-6.0             31             20
Village Mixed Use                              0.28        30.0                 8             5     Y
High Density Residential                      12.97        30.0              389            272     Y
Subtotal                                      27.81          --              453            313
Lower Income Units                            13.25          --              397            277
* Including applicable density incentives
                                               City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                   November 2013
                                                                                                     63

  3. Comparison of Sites Inventory and RHNA
  The City can realistically accommodate 2,043 net housing units through pending projects and its
  residential sites inventory. This capacity is more than adequate to accommodate the City’s
  2013-2021 RHNA of 686 units, and actually leaves the City with an excess capacity of 1,357
  units (Table 36). While the City does have a shortfall of sites for meeting its moderate income
  RHNA, the surplus of sites for lower income units more than makes up for this deficit.
                            Table 36: Adequacy of Sites in Meeting RHNA
                                    Extremely
                                                                                Above
                                    Low/Very           Low        Moderate                         Total
                                                                               Moderate
                                       Low
RHNA                                        181            106           115           284               686
Residential Capacity (Table 35)
Pending Projects                                             0             0           377               377
Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan                          1,353             0               0           1,353
Vacant and Underutilized Sites                             277             0             36              313
Total Sites Capacity                                     1,630             0           413             2,043
Sites Capacity vs. RHNA                                 +1,343          -115         +129             +1,357
  4. Availability of Infrastructure and Services
  As noted earlier, the City expects much of its future residential growth to occur in the Route 66
  Corridor Specific Plan area. As a public improvement plan, this Specific Plan anticipates the
  potential impacts of new development by identifying the full range of infrastructure
  improvements that would be necessary to meet long-term infrastructure needs. The Route 66
  Corridor Specific Plan area is located in a part of the City that is served by all utilities (i.e., water,
  sewer and storm drains) and other public services (i.e., police, fire, schools and solid waste). All
  of these existing facilities can be readily extended to serve proposed development.
  To determine the impact on water systems, the City performed a water demand analysis for the
  Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan. Peak water usage for the Specific Plan area, following project
  implementation, would be approximately 1.41 million gallons per day (mgd), representing an
  increase of 432,783 gallons per day (gpd) over existing conditions. Since this increase in
  demand is not equivalent to, or greater than, the amount of water required for a 500-dwelling
  unit project (750,000 gpd), the impact on Glendora’s water infrastructure is less than significant.
  However, the City is also taking the following mitigation measures:
         The Zone 1, 6- and 8-inch diameter pipelines within Route 66, between Barranca and
          Lorraine Avenue, shall be up-sized to a minimum 14-inch pipeline to serve domestic
          demands and meet current capacity requirements per the City’s Water Master Plan.
         The Zone 2, 8-inch diameter pipelines within Route 66, from Lorraine Avenue east to
          Amelia Avenue, shall be upsized to 14-inch or dual 12-inch diameter pipelines to achieve
          the anticipated 5,000 gpm fire flow requirements of the “Route 66 Commercial” land use
          district.
         The pipeline in Lorraine Avenue shall be upsized to a minimum 16-inch line for the
          looped system within Zone 1.
  An analysis of the City’s wastewater system was conducted as well. The analysis estimated
  sewer flows by land use district to provide an understanding of potential flow differences
                                             City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                              November 2013
                                                                                                       64

between existing conditions and proposed conditions within the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan
area. The existing average wastewater flow for the planning area is 0.79 mgd and the average
wastewater flow for the proposed conditions is only 1.06 mgd, a 34 percent increase. Build-out
of the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan would not result in the generation of wastewater that
would exceed the capacity of any of the City’s wastewater lines. City staff has also indicated
that the existing wastewater collection system is adequate for serving the proposed
development in the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area. However, to ensure that wastewater
capacity is not exceeded, the City plans to install flow monitors, in order to determine with
certainty whether existing trunk sewers require upsizing or realigning, at the following locations:
        Elwood Avenue and Route 66;
        East end of Mauna Loa Avenue;
        Glendora Avenue and Route 66;
        Baseline Road and Glendora Avenue;
        Grand Avenue and Route 66;
        Baseline Road and Grand Avenue; and
        Barranca Avenue and Baseline Road.
Impacts on any of the City’s other infrastructure systems are also expected to be minimal. The
proposed demolition and construction activities, in addition to increased residential and
commercial land uses, in the Specific Plan area are expected to increase the volume of solid
waste generated. However, the City’s AB 939 waste reduction requirements would reduce the
amount of solid waste produced and reduce overall impacts to a less than significant level. The
establishment of developer impact fees for parks and schools would also minimize impacts on
these public services. The Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for the Route 66 Corridor Specific
Plan has concluded that, even at full residential build-out, there will be no significant impacts on
any of the City’s infrastructure systems.
B. Financial Resources
The City of Glendora has access to a number of funding sources to facilitate the development of
new affordable housing and potentially for the preservation of housing units at risk of converting
to market rate.
1. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Funds
The CDBG program provides funds for a range of community development activities. The
program is flexible in that the funds can be used for a range of activities. The eligible activities
include, but are not limited to: acquisition and/or disposition of real estate or property; public
facilities and improvements; relocation, rehabilitation and construction of housing;
homeownership assistance; and also clearance activities. During FY 2012-2013, Glendora
received only total of $197,117 in CDBG funds, a 35-percent cut from the previous year. This
significant reduction has seriously impacted the effectiveness of the City’s CDBG program.
2. HOME Funds
The HOME program provides federal funds for the development and rehabilitation of affordable
rental and ownership housing for households with incomes not exceeding 80 percent of area
median income. The program gives local governments the flexibility to fund a wide range of
affordable housing activities through housing partnerships with private industry and non-profit
organizations. HOME funds can be used for activities that promote affordable rental housing
and homeownership by low-income households. The City of Glendora does not receive
                                        City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                               65

entitlement HOME funds from HUD. While the City had in the past applied to the State for
HOME funds administered by the Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD),
the City faces a significant challenge in using this funding source in the future. The HOME
program has a 25-percent local match requirement. In the past the City was able to use
Redevelopment Housing Set-Aside funds to meet the local match requirement. With the
dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency, the City has limited ability to meet this requirement.
3. Housing Choice Vouchers (Section 8 Rental Assistance)
The Housing Choice Voucher (Section 8) program is a federal program that provides rental
assistance to very low-income persons in need of affordable housing. The Housing Choice
Voucher program offers a voucher which pays the difference between the payment standard (an
exception to fair market rent) and what a tenant can afford to pay (e.g. 30 percent of their
income). A voucher also allows a tenant to choose housing that may cost above the payment
standard, with the tenant paying the extra cost.
4. Housing Trust Fund
As part of approving a conversion of approximately 27 acres of underutilized commercial
property to a planned residential community, the City negotiated the payment of a one-time in-
lieu housing fee of $2 million to use for the development of affordable housing. As of August
2013, $1.4 million has been used to acquire property at 350 E. Route 66. A project has not yet
been developed on this site. Approximately $225,000 has also been used for consultant costs
and moving assistance related to the wind-down of the City’s Rental Assistance Program. The
remaining $375,000 remains unallocated.
C. Administrative Resources
The following describes active non-profit agencies that may have the capacity to develop,
acquire, and/or manage affordable housing, including housing projects that are at risk of
converting to market-rate housing.
Glendora Housing Investors, LP: Glendora Housing Investors, LP is a limited partnership
made up of Global Premier, SunAmerica, and TELACU. The organization worked with the City’s
former Redevelopment Agency on the construction of the Elmwood Family Apartments, which
was completed in 2008 and has 87 units reserved for extremely low, very low, and low income
families. Global Premier Development, Inc. and its joint venture partners specialize in the
development of low-income housing, under tax exempt bond financing. The company has
already completed dozens of affordable housing projects throughout the state of California,
including several in the San Gabriel Valley. SunAmerica is the nation's leading investor in low-
income housing tax credits. The company has invested in more than 1,200 properties in 49
states, comprising more than 156,000 units of affordable housing, since 1988. TELACU is a
non-profit community development corporation founded in 1968 dedicated to building of quality
affordable homes. TELACU builds, owns and manages affordable housing available for senior
citizens and physically challenged individuals. The organization has already developed
thousands of affordable units in cities throughout Southern California, including Alhambra,
Baldwin Park, Hawthorne, Los Angeles, Montebello, Monterey Park, Moreno Valley, National
City, Pasadena, Pacoima, and Whittier.
                                       City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                         November 2013
                                                                                            66

D. Opportunities for Energy Conservation
Energy-related housing costs can directly impact the affordability of housing. While state
building code standards contain mandatory energy efficiency requirements for new
development, the City and utility providers are also important resources to encourage and
facilitate energy conservation and to help residents minimize energy-related expenses.
City Incentives
The Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan provides opportunities for energy conservation with its
emphasis on mixed-use development. Compact development encourages pedestrian activity
and transit use while reducing automobile use and travel time. Electrical and water-delivery
systems are more efficient in higher-density mixed-use communities than low-density suburbs.
Mixed-use areas also allow for the possibility of district energy systems (where a central plant
supplies heating and cooling to groups of buildings). This type of system maximizes energy
efficiency, because commercial and residential structures typically utilize these services at
different times of the day.
The City also offers an Environmental Stewardship and Energy Efficiency Density Bonus in its
Grand-Foothill Multi-Family Residential Overlay Zone. New residential development projects in
the Overlay Zone that that obtain LEED Silver certification from the U.S. Green Building Council
(or its equivalent) can be granted a five dwelling unit per acre density bonus.
Utility Provider Programs
Southern California Edison participates in the California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE)
program, which offers income-qualified customers a discount of 20 percent or more on their
monthly electric bill. The Multifamily Energy Efficiency Rebate Program offers property owners
and managers incentives on a broad list of energy efficiency improvements in lighting, HVAC,
insulation, and window categories. These improvements are to be used to retrofit existing
multiple-family properties of two or more units. Edison also operates the Energy Savings
Assistance program, which helps income-qualified households conserve energy and reduce
their electricity costs. Southern California Edison pays all the costs of purchasing and installing
energy-efficient appliances and equipment, which are free to eligible customers. Services
include weatherization, energy efficient lighting and cooling, and refrigerator replacement. And,
finally, Edison has an Energy Assistance Fund (EAF) in place, designed to help low-income
customers pay their electric bills. A maximum of $100 is available to income-qualified customers
once every 12-month period.
The Southern California Gas Company offers various rebate programs for energy-efficient
appliances to its customers. The Comprehensive Mobile Home Program provides qualifying
mobile home customers with no-cost energy conservation evaluations, installations of low-flow
showerheads and faucet aerators, and gas energy efficiency improvements, such as duct test
and seal of HVAC systems. The Energy Savings Assistance Program offers no-cost energy-
saving home improvements and furnace repair or replacement services for qualified limited-
income renters and homeowners. The Gas Company also operates the Gas Assistance Fund
(GAF), which helps low-income households pay their gas bills through a one-time grant, not
exceeding $100. Southern California Gas participates in the state’s CARE program, which
provides a 20 percent discount on the monthly gas bills of income-eligible households. In
addition, the Gas Company participates in the Medical Baseline Allowance Program. Customers
with a qualifying medical condition are eligible for a free medical baseline allowance 0.822
therms per day. Under this program additional gas usage is billed at the baseline rate, which is
                                         City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                             67

the lowest rate for residential customers. In addition to The Gas Company’s programs,
customers may qualify for other energy assistance programs. The Low-Income Energy
Assistance Program (LIHEAP) is a federally funded energy assistance program that offers
income-qualified households assistance with paying their utility bill. Customers may also benefit
from the LIHEAP Weatherization Assistance Program to help make their homes more energy
efficient.
                                     City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                          November 2013
                                                                                           68

5. HOUSING PLAN
Sections 2 through 4 identified housing needs in Glendora as well as the various constraints
and resources to meeting those needs. The Housing Plan evaluates the City's accomplishments
from the 2008-2014 Housing Element, and sets forth the City's goals, policies, programs, and
objectives to address housing needs from 2013 to 2021.
A. Evaluation of Past Accomplishments
In order to develop a meaningful housing plan, it is important to review the progress and
effectiveness of programs adopted in the 2008-2014 Housing Element. (The Housing Element
planning period was originally set for July 1, 2008 through June 30, 2014, but this planning
period was amended to end on October 15, 2013). Coupled with a reassessment of housing
needs identified in Section 2 and input from the community, it is possible to determine where
modifications to housing programs are needed in order to meet local housing needs. This section
generally evaluates the accomplishments since the last Housing Element as the basis for new
goals, policies, and programs later in this section. Appendix C provides a progress report of each
program with respect to its implementation.
As part of the 2008-2014 Housing Element, Glendora set forth five goals: (1) housing and
neighborhood conservation; (2) assisting in the provision and development of housing; (3)
providing adequate sites to achieve diversity; (4) removing governmental constraints; and (5)
promoting equal housing opportunity. These broad goals were designed to encourage the
following: housing preservation, production, and assistance.
With respect to the first goal, the City implemented its code enforcement program to encourage
the upkeep of property, residential structures, and neighborhoods. The City provided various
grants and loans to encourage the improvement and repair of homes as well as an annual
housing conditions survey to monitor progress toward their goals. Code enforcement efforts
were largely successful.
With respect to housing production, the 2008-2014 RHNA set forth a construction target of 342
units. Of this total, new housing was required to be facilitated at the following affordability levels:
65 units for extremely low income households; 66 for very low income households; 86 for low
income households; and 126 for moderate income households.
Besides the two major goals of housing conservation/improvement and housing production
identified earlier, the City also instituted a number of programs to assist lower income
households and persons with special needs. These programs included: (1) rental assistance to
special needs households; (2) handicap access and other services to special needs
populations, and lastly, (3) a fair housing program.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                             November 2013
                                                                                                  69
B. Housing Goals and Policies
This section of the Housing Element contains a brief overview of the key issues from the Needs
Assessment as well as the goals and policies that Glendora intends to implement to address
these housing needs. In addressing the City's housing needs, the City's goals and policies are
designed to: (1) Conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock;
(2) Assist in the development of housing for lower and moderate income households; (3) Identify
adequate sites to encourage the development of a variety of types of housing for all income
levels; (4) Address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove governmental
constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing; and, (5) Promote
housing opportunities for all persons.
Within the aforementioned general framework, the City has developed the following goals and
policies to encourage the preservation, production, maintenance, and improvement of housing
within the Glendora community.
1. Conserve and Improve the Condition of the Existing Affordable Housing Stock
Housing and neighborhood conservation are important to maintaining and improving quality of
life. While the majority of housing in Glendora is in good condition, some of the older housing
units show signs of deterioration. Efforts to improve and revitalize housing must address existing
conditions, but also focus on encouraging preventive efforts to ensure that housing stock quality
is maintained. The policies listed below address the issue of housing and neighborhood
conservation.
GOAL 1.0:       Assure the quality, safety, and habitability of existing housing and the
                continued high quality of residential neighborhoods.
Policy 1.1      Continue to monitor and enforce building and property maintenance codes in
                residential neighborhoods.
Policy 1.2      Continue to provide City services designed to maintain the quality of the housing
                stock and the neighborhoods.
Policy 1.3      Continue to promote the repair, revitalization, and rehabilitation of residential
                structures that have fallen into disrepair.
Policy 1.4      Support the preservation and maintenance of historically and architecturally
                significant buildings and neighborhoods.
Policy 1.5      Preserve the unique environmental aspects of the community, including
                hillsides, canyons, and other environmental amenities.
2. Assist in the Development of Housing for Lower and Moderate Income Households
Providing affordable housing is essential for a healthy community. In addition to a diverse mix of
housing types, it is necessary to make available housing for residents of all income levels.
Seeking funding from varied sources increases the opportunities for development of affordable
housing units. The City actively works with both non-profit and for-profit developers in the
production of affordable for-sale and rental housing.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                             70
GOAL 2:        Assist in the provision of housing that meet the needs of economic
               segments of the community.
Policy 2.1    Use density bonuses and other incentives to facilitate the development of new
              housing for extremely low, very low, and low income households.
Policy 2.2    Address the housing needs of special populations and extremely low income
              households through emergency shelters, transitional housing, supportive housing,
              and single-room occupancy units through land use policies and zoning standards.
Policy 2.3    Promote the use of energy conservation features in the design of residential
              development to conserve natural resources and lower energy costs.
3. Identify Adequate Sites to Accommodate a Variety of Housing for All Income Levels
A major element in meeting the housing needs of all segments of the community is the provision
of adequate sites of all types, sizes and prices of housing. Persons and households of different
ages, types, incomes, and lifestyles have a variety of housing needs and preferences that
evolve over time and in response to changing life circumstances. Providing an adequate supply
and diversity of housing accommodates changing housing needs of residents. The Glendora
General Plan and Zoning Ordinance establish where housing may locate. To provide adequate
housing and maximize use of limited land resources, new development should be constructed at
appropriate densities that maximize the intended use of the land.
GOAL 3:        Provide suitable sites for housing development which can accommodate a
               range of housing by type, size, location, price, and tenure.
Policy 3.1    Implement land use policies that allow for a range of residential densities and
              products, including low-density single-family uses, moderate-density townhomes,
              and higher-density apartments, condominiums, and units in mixed-use
              development.
Policy 3.2    Encourage development of residential uses in strategic proximity to employment,
              recreational facilities, schools, neighborhood commercial areas, and
              transportation routes.
Policy 3.3    Encourage compatible residential development in areas with recyclable or
              underutilized land.
Policy 3.4    Maintain development standards, regulations and design features which
              encourage a variety of housing types appropriate for the neighborhoods in which
              they are located.
                                        City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                         November 2013
                                                                                           71
4. Address and Remove Governmental Constraints to the Maintenance, Improvement,
     and Development of Housing
Market factors and government regulations can significantly impact the production and
affordability of housing. Although market conditions are often beyond the direct influence of any
jurisdiction, efforts can be directed at ensuring the reasonableness of land use controls,
development standards, permit-processing, fees and exactions, and governmental requirements
to encourage housing production.
GOAL 4:          Where appropriate, mitigate unnecessary governmental constraints to the
                 maintenance, improvement, and development of housing.
Policy 4.1       Periodically review the City's regulations, ordinances, fees/exactions to ensure
                 they do not unduly constrain the production, maintenance, and improvement of
                 housing.
Policy 4.2       Offer regulatory incentives and concessions for affordable housing, such as relief
                 from development standards, density bonuses, or fee waivers where deemed to
                 be appropriate.
Policy 4.3       Provide for streamlined, timely, and coordinated processing of residential projects
                 to minimize holding costs and encourage housing production.
Policy 4.4       Support infill development at suitable locations and provide, where appropriate,
                 incentives to facilitate their development.
5. Promote Housing Opportunities for All Persons
Ensuring fair and equal housing opportunity is an important goal. Whether through mediating
disputes, investigating bona fide complaints of discrimination, or through the provision of
education services, the provision of fair housing services is an important tool to ensure fair and
equal access to housing. The following policies are designed to continue implementation of
applicable fair housing laws.
GOAL 5:          Ensure fair and equal housing opportunity for all persons regardless of
                 race, color, religion, sex, marital status, familial status, ancestry, national
                 origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, source of income, or other
                 arbitrary factors.
Policy 5.1       Provide fair housing services to residents and assure that residents are aware of
                 their rights and responsibilities with respect to fair housing.
Policy 5.2       Discourage discrimination in the sale, rental, or occupancy of housing on the basis
                 of state or federal protected classes.
Policy 5.3       Implement appropriate action items identified in the City's Analysis of
                 Impediments to ensure fair and equal access to housing.
                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                              November 2013
                                                                                               72
C. Housing Programs
The goals and policies contained in the Housing Element address Glendora's housing needs
and are implemented through housing programs administered by the City's Planning, Public
Works, and Police Departments. In drafting these goals and policies, Section 65583 of the
Government Code requires the Housing Element to address five major areas:
      Conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock;
      Assist in the development of housing for low and moderate income households;
      Identify adequate sites to encourage the development of a variety of types of housing for
       all income levels;
      Address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove governmental constraints
       to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing; and
      Promote housing opportunities for all persons.
This section describes the programs that Glendora will implement to address these areas. The
housing programs described as follows contain existing, modified and new programs needed to
address the housing needs identified, in Sections 2 through 4. Below is a summary of each
program, the eight-year quantified objective, the proposed funding source, and the agency
responsible for implementing the program.
1. Conserve and Improve Existing Affordable Housing
Program 1: Code Enforcement
The enforcement of existing property maintenance codes is a primary means to preserve
housing and the quality of neighborhoods. The Code Enforcement Division is responsible for
enforcing City ordinances related to property maintenance, building conditions, and other
issues. Administered by the City of Glendora Police Department, the City continues its code
enforcement activities throughout the community.
Timeframe and Objectives:
     Continue code enforcement activities and connect households in need with City
       rehabilitation programs.
Funding Sources:               General funds
Responsible Agency:            Glendora Police Department
Relevant Policies:             Policy 1.1, Policy 1.2
Program 2: Preservation of Assisted Housing Developments
Glendora Gardens is identified as a project at risk of potential conversion to market-rate housing
due to expiration of the affordability covenants or available funding for subsidies. However, the
developer, Forrest City Enterprises, and HUD have assured City staff that Glendora Gardens has
no plans to convert to market-rate.
Timeframe and Objectives:
     Monitor status of existing and future affordable housing projects, including Glendora
       Gardens.
                                         City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                          November 2013
                                                                                             73

       Upon receipt of Notice of Intent to convert from property owners, coordinate with the Los
        Angeles County Housing Authority to connect tenants of at-risk units to the Section 8
        Housing Choice Voucher program.
Funding Sources:               Proposition 1C and HUD mark-to-market funds
Responsible Agency:            Planning
Relevant Policies:             Policy 1.2
2. Assist in the Provision of Affordable Housing
Program 3: Housing Choice Vouchers (Section 8)
The Housing Choice Vouchers (formerly known as Section 8) program offers rent subsidies to
extremely low and very low income households. The Voucher program pays the difference
between the fair market rent of a unit and the affordable housing cost (i.e., 30 percent of
income) of the voucher recipient. As of March 2013, 42 households in Glendora were receiving
Housing Choice Vouchers from the Los Angeles County Housing Authority.
Timeframe and Objectives:
      Continue to participate in the Housing Choice Vouchers program administered by the
        Housing Authority of the County of Los Angeles.
      Advertise program through brochures, newsletter, and City website.
      Monitor the use and availability of vouchers annually, especially monitor for the opening
        of the voucher waiting list for accepting new applicants.
      Support County efforts to petition for additional funding from HUD.
Funding Sources:               HUD Section 8 funds
Responsible Agency:            Housing Authority of the County of Los Angeles
Relevant Policies:             Policy 2.1, Policy 2.4
Program 4: Energy Conservation
The City is committed to creating healthy interior environments, using natural resources wisely
and preserving natural resources. To demonstrate this commitment, in 2011, the City adopted,
and now implements, the CalGreen building code. The City has also established an
architectural Green Building Program for the William Lyon Homes Arboreta Specific Plan area.
All homes in the Specific Plan area are subject to the green building program. Under this
program, the builder is required to educate homebuyers about the green building components
included in their new home and in the overall community by way of sales office displays and as
part of sales brochure documents. Developers are required to provide all components of the
green program as it is written. The Green Building Program’s design guidelines include the
following water and energy conservation measures:
       Automatic zone irrigation systems
       Rain gauges, rain sensors and moisture sensors
       Low flow water fixtures
       High efficiency water heaters
       Hot water re-circulating pumps
       Natural cross ventilation in all primary rooms
       High performance HVAC
       Energy Star appliances
       Insulated glass—dual pane seal systems
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                            74

       Fluorescent lighting in all units
       Environmentally preferable materials for exterior elevations
       Recycled content carpets,
       Low formaldehyde insulations or alternative cotton/cellulose,
       Water based wood finished optional,
       Natural lighting by maximizing window locations
       Recycle at minimum fifty percent of all construction, demolition and land clearing
        materials
Currently the Program is self-governing; monitoring implementation and measuring results is the
responsibility of the builder.
The City now also offers density incentives for green building efforts in certain portions of
Glendora. New residential development projects in the Grand-Foothill Multi-Family Residential
Overlay Zone that obtain LEED Silver certification from the U.S. Green Building Council (or its
equivalent) can be granted an Environmental Stewardship and Energy Efficiency Density Bonus
of five dwelling units per acre. In addition, the City is demonstrating its commitment to energy
and resource conservation by encouraging mixed-use, compact development in its Route 66
Corridor Specific Plan area.
Timeframe and Objectives:
      Promote density incentives for green building to developers.
      Continue to explore additional ways to promote energy conservation and sustainability.
Funding Sources:
Responsible Agency:             Planning; Public Works
Relevant Policies:              Policy 2.5
Program 5: Affordable Housing Development
The primary funding source for affordable housing in Glendora was the City’s Redevelopment
Housing Set-Aside funds, which will generate no future revenue due to the dissolution of
redevelopment agencies in California. The City will approach affordable housing (including
housing for extremely low income households) through regulatory incentives such as affordable
housing density bonuses, lot consolidation and mixed use bonus, green building bonus, fee
waivers/deferrals, and expedited review (see also Program 7). The City will work with various
non-profit agencies and other qualified developers to pursue appropriate funding. City
involvement may include:
       Streamlined review of project application;
       Provision of demographics and other background data for preparation of funding
        applications;
       Review and comment on draft funding applications; and
       Provision of letters of support.
Timeframe and Objectives:
      Provide information on incentives available to facilitate affordable housing development.
Funding Sources:                Department budget
Responsible Agency:             Planning
Relevant Policies:              Policy 2.3
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                            75

3. Provide Adequate Sites for a Variety of Housing
Program 6: Residential Sites Inventory
The City has a Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) of 686 units, including 181
extremely low/very low income, 106 low income, 115 moderate income, and 284 above
moderate income units for the period of 2013 through 2021. The City is committed to ensuring
adequate capacity in its residential sites inventory to meet its RHNA.
Timeframe and Objectives:
     Update the inventory of vacant and underutilized sites annually to ensure adequate sites
       are available to accommodate the remaining RHNA.
     Provide sites inventory to interested developers.
     Monitor the development trends in the City, particularly on the sites identified in this
       Housing Element. If a shortfall in sites is identified due to development of non-residential
       or non-mixed-use developments on these sites, replenish the City’s residential sites
       inventory with alternative sites.
     Monitor development trends in the City to determine if the incentives offered are
       adequate to facilitate mixed use developments and lot consolidation given current market
       conditions. Develop additional incentives as necessary.
Funding Sources:               Departmental budget
Responsible Agency:            Planning
Relevant Policies:             Policy 3.1
Program 7: Development Incentives
The City will promote the use of various development incentives to facilitate and encourage
residential and mixed use development, particularly affordable housing (including housing for
extremely low income households), throughout the City. Incentives include:
      State Density Bonus for Affordable Housing.
      Lot consolidation incentives in the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area: Increased floor
       area ratio (FAR) bonuses of up to 15 percent and residential density bonuses of up to 15
       units per acre.
      Mixed use incentives in the BG, GMU and TCMU zoning subdistricts of the Route 66
       Corridor Specific Plan area:
            o Increased FAR bonuses of up to 15 percent and density bonuses of up to ten units
               per acre;
            o The number of off-street parking spaces required may be reduced by the greater
               of the number of spaces:
                    Five spaces; or
                    If the parcel is within 400 feet of a public parking lot or garage, ten spaces
                       or 25 percent of the otherwise required number of spaces, whichever is
                       greater.
            o A 10 percent reduction of required parking spaces for all new development may
               be approved by the Planning Director if 50 percent or more of required off-street
               parking is located within an on-site parking structure.
      Nonconforming Lot Ordinance: This Ordinance facilitates development by allowing parcels
       that do not meet the minimum lot size or dimensions of the zone to be fully developed
       provided that other development standards are fully met.
                                         City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                               76

        Environmental Stewardship and Energy Efficiency Density Bonus within the Grand-
         Foothill Multi-Family Residential Overlay Zone: New residential development projects in
         the Overlay Zone that obtain LEED Silver certification can be granted a density bonus of
         five dwelling units per acre.
        In addition to density bonuses, the City offers the following reduction of site development
         standards as development incentives on a case-by-case basis:
             o Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private outdoor living area.
             o Increased maximum building height and/or stories.
             o Reduced onsite parking standards, including the number or size of spaces and
                 garage requirements.
             o Reduced minimum building separation requirements.
             o Reduced street standards, e.g., reduced minimum street widths
             o Waived, reduced, or deferred planning, plan check, construction permit, and/or
                 development impact fees (e.g., capital facilities, park, or traffic fees).
Timeframe and Objectives:
      Develop marketing materials (brochures, City website, etc.) to promote incentives.
      Make marketing materials available to interested developers.
      Work with local housing developers to encourage and facilitate the development of
         residential projects with affordable units.
Funding Sources:                 Departmental budget
Responsible Agency:              Planning
Relevant Policies:               Policy 2.2, Policy 3.1, Policy 3.2, and Policy 3.4
4. Remove Governmental Constraints
Program 8: Zoning Ordinance
The Glendora Zoning Ordinance has undergone a number of revisions in recent years to
address a range of housing issues and ensure compliance with State and federal laws. The City
will continue to monitor its policies, standards, and regulations to ensure they work to facilitate
residential development in the community and guarantee equal housing access and
opportunities to its residents.
Timeframe and Objectives:
      Continue to monitor the City's Zoning Ordinance to ensure standards do not unduly
         constrain residential development.
Funding Sources:                 Departmental budget
Responsible Agency:              Planning
Relevant Policies:               Policy 4.1, Policy 4.2, Policy 4.3, and Policy 4.4
5. Further Fair Housing Opportunities
Program 9: Fair Housing
Currently, the City’s Fair Housing Program is funded with CDBG funds and administered through
a contract with the Housing Rights Center (HRC). HRC will provide fair housing services to all
residents who request counseling, resource referral, complaint investigation, and public education
on all forms of housing discrimination.
                                           City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                               November 2013
                                                                                                77

Timeframe and Objectives:
    Promote and publicize fair housing programs and services on City website and through
        brochures at City Hall.
    Continue to contract with a qualified fair housing service provider to provide fair housing
        services to residents.
    Implement recommendations of the Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice.
Funding Sources:                CDBG
Responsible Agency:             Housing Rights Center or other service provider
Relevant Policies:              Policy 5.1, Policy 5.2, and Policy 5.3
D. Summary of Quantified Objectives
Below is a summary of the City of Glendora’s quantified objectives for the 2013-2021 Housing
Element planning period.
                                 Table 37: Quantified Objectives
                           Extremely                                            Above
                                          Very Low         Low       Moderate             Total
                               Low                                             Moderate
New Construction
                                    89              92         106        115        284     686
(RHNA)
Preservation (At-Risk)              52              53           --         --         --    105
Rehabilitation                       --              --          --         --         --       0
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                           78

 
Appendix A: Public Outreach
Service Provider Interviews
Agency: Cory’s Kitchen Foodbank
Contact: Wayne Leamont
In the three years the organization has been working with the City they have received same
amount of funding every year. Over the last few years the organization has experienced an
increase in the number of clientele seeking their services. For the most part the increase has
occurred in a group Wayne classified as under employed families, with a large proportion being
single mothers. The economy is the most noticeable issue affecting their clientele, as people are
continually losing jobs because of downsizing. There’s been somewhat of a drop off in those who
are homeless and seeking their services as these persons are seeking services in areas like
downtown Los Angeles. He suggested that this is an issue that needs to be looked at more as the
services available downtown cannot effectively serve such an increase in demand and in turn the
quality of services is declining. The City could facilitate help through focusing on the development
of transitional housing. This type of housing is greatly needed and effective to get people off of
the streets and into organized housing where access to services is readily available. These types
of facilities would serve clientele such as homeless veterans, which have also increased as a
group. Specifically, Wayne detailed that the City could aid their organization by, for example,
renting them an abandoned building at a very low cost allowing them to fund, refurbish, and
manage it as housing for Veterans. It’s become increasingly apparent to the organization of the
lack of funding available.
Agency: EYE-DAS Foundation
Contact: Steve Slakey
The EYE-DAS Foundation has received CDBG grants for several years and a noticeable
decrease in the amount of funding it has received during that time has occurred. The number of
clientele served by the foundation has stayed the same, while the number of people seeking their
services has increased.
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                             November 2013
                                                                                                A-1

The following list of local service providers, housing developers, and community groups were contacted to participate at the March 19,
2013 study session. Organizations on the list were also contacted to conduct brief interviews.
                                                           Table A-1: Mailing List
       Organization          Contact         Address       City    State Zip Code        Phone                     Email
    A Plus Property                       18809                                                     aplus4propertymanagement@gmail.
                                                        Glendora    CA     91741    (877) 914-6777
    Management                            Hicrest Road                                              com
                         Tom Guiteras,    4440 Von
                                                         Newport                    (818) 784-2800,
    Avalon Bay           Director of      Karman Ave,               CA     92660
                                                          Beach                     Ext.7235
                         Development      Suite 300
    Citrus Valley
                                          504 E. Route
    Association of                                      Glendora    CA     91740                    contactus@cvar.net
                                          66
    Realtors
                                          2000 Avenue
                         Harriet Rapista,
                                          of the Stars
    City Ventures        Director of                   Los Angeles  CA     90067    (310) 947-2416  info@cityventures.com
                                          9th Floor
                         Development
                                          South
    Cory’s Kitchen       Wayne            1418 Arrow
                                                        Irwindale   CA     91706    (626) 305-0392  wleamons@gmail.com
    Foodbank             Leamons          Highway
    East San Gabriel
                                          P.O. Box
    Valley Coalition for Olivia                          Industry   CA     91715    (626) 333-7204  esgvch@aol.com
                                          93256
    the Homeless
    EYE-DAS                               P.O. Box
                         Steve Slakey                   Glendora    CA     91740    (626) 914-3294  sslakey@ulv.edu
    Foundation                            1422
    Glendora Chamber                      224 N.
                                                        Glendora    CA     91741                    info@glendora-chamber.org
    of Commerce                           Glendora Ave
                         Chuck Ochoa -
    Glendora Police                       150 S.
                         Code                           Glendora    CA     91741    (626) 914-8275  cochoa@glendorapd.org
    Department                            Glendora Ave
                         Enforcement
    Glendora Public                       140 S.
                                                        Glendora    CA     91741    (626) 852-4891
    Library                               Glendora Ave
                         Mary Pat
    Glendora Public
                         Dodson,          140 S.
    Library – Glendora                                  Glendora    CA     91741    (626) 852-4891  mdodson@ci.glendora.ca.us
                         Literacy         Glendora Ave
    Reads
                         Coordinator
                                                                            City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                               November 2013
                                                                                                                               A-1

Glendora Rotary
                                    476 S.
Minor Home           Gene Morrill                   Glendora  CA 91741    (626) 963-0814  certautospec@msn.com
                                    Vermont Ave
Repair Program
Housing Authority
                                    700 W. Main
of the County of                                   Alahambra  CA 91801    (626) 262-4510
                                    Street
Los Angeles
                                    3255 Wilshire
Housing Rights       Chancela Al-
                                    Blvd., Ste.   Los Angeles CA 90010    (800) 477-5977  calmansour@hrc-la.org
Center               Mansour
                                    1150
                                    3010 Old
                     Allison Kunz,
                                    Ranch
Olson Company        Vice President               Seal Beach  CA 90740    (562) 370-2263
                                    Parkway,
                     of Development
                                    Suite 100
Operation                           114 N.
Improvement                         Glendora
                     Wes Purkiss                    Glendora  CA 91741    (626) 335-8118  wes@hilltoprealestate.com
Glendora Welfare                    Ave, Suite
Assoc.                              218
Orfalea Family
                     Dr. Ann        1000 W.
Children’s Center                                   Glendora  CA 91741    (626) 914-8501  mallen@citruscollege.edu
                     Michelle Allen Foothill Blvd
at Citrus College
                                    657 E. Arrow
                     Phil Huisman,
Shepherd’s Pantry                   Highway,        Glendora  CA 91740    (626) 852-7630  phuisman@shepherdspantry.com
                     Administrator
                                    Suite J
Southland                           211 N.
                                                    Glendora  CA 91741    (626) 963-4128
Properties                          Glendora Ave
                                    21080 Centre
                                    Pointe           Santa
Williams Homes                                                CA 91350                    info@williamshomes.com
                                    Parkway,         Clarita
                                    Suite 101
YWCA – Meals on                     943 N. Grand                          (626) 960-2995,
                     Don E. Herring                  Covina   CA 91724                    laseniors@rocketmail.com
Wheels                              Ave                                   Ext. 128
YWCA – Wings                        943 N. Grand
                     Lisa Brabo                      Covina   CA 91724    (626) 960-2995  lisabrabo@ywcasgv.org
Program                             Ave
Source: City of Glendora, (2012).
                                                                  City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                     November 2013
                                                                                                                       A-2

City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 November 2013
                                               A-1
City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 November 2013
                                               A-2
City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 November 2013
                                               A-3
City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 November 2013
                                               A-4
City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 November 2013
                                               A-5
Response to Letter from Kristin Parisi Dated March 19, 2013
Pages 1 and 2
While one of the principal goals of Housing Element law is to preserve and conserve affordable
housing in the community, State law specifically allows local jurisdictions to take into
consideration realistic funding resources when establishing specific objectives.
Without redevelopment funds, the City lacks a significant and reliable funding source to sustain
a rent subsidy program. In the past, the City used State HOME funds, along with redevelopment
funds to operate the rent subsidy program at Heritage Oaks. The availability of HOME funds is
contingent upon a successful application to the State for this competitive program, and funding is
not guaranteed. In the past, the City was able to utilize redevelopment staff and funds to
administer the program, and was able to use redevelopment funds to sustain the program in the
event HOME funds were unavailable. However, with the elimination of redevelopment agencies
and loss of redevelopment funds, the City does not have the resources to administer the program,
and does not have a funding source to sustain the program for periods of time when HOME
funds may be unavailable.
Page 3
The City follows the requirements of State law regarding public notice. A notice of the public
hearing regarding the Housing Element was published in the newspaper, which serves to notify
the community at large. In addition, notice was posted on the City’s web site, on the local
government cable channel, and at City facilities.
Page 11
The City has no plan to add 1,353 units on Route 66. The Housing Element simply demonstrates
that the existing Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan could potentially accommodate 1,353 units
based on existing zoning. Whether any new units would be added to the area would depend on
the market and development interest.
Page 13
Currently, 42 households in the City are utilizing Section 8 assistance. Section 8 is a federally
funded program that is administered by the County of Los Angeles, not the City of Glendora.
While limited, it is a source of rent subsidies available to residents through the County of Los
Angeles.
Pages 22-23
A second mobile home park was closed on West Route 66 but was not noted in the text. The text
will be revised to note that two mobile home parks were closed. The numbers presented in Table
11 on page 23 already include the units removed from both locations.
Page 27 Table 15
This table is meant as a general estimate of affordable housing costs based on household income
at the upper end of each income category. Each housing program, depending on funding source,
has a different way of calculating allowable rents or sales prices.
                                        City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                          November 2013
                                                                                            A-6

Page 30
The 47 affordable units at Heritage Oaks were made affordable through an agreement with the
former Redevelopment Agency that is separate from the rental assistance program. An
affordability covenant ensures that the 47 units will remain affordable at least through 2046. The
rent subsidies provided by the City through the rental assistance program were meant to further
subsidize the existing tenants. However, rents at Heritage Oaks are considered affordable for
two-person households.
Page 31
See the response to the first comment from Pages 1 and 2.
Page 42
This is a typographical error; it should read “Heritage Oaks Apartments.”
Page 58
The Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) is not a housing production goal for the City.
Housing Element law only requires that the City demonstrate its ability to accommodate these
units from a land use planning perspective. Therefore, the Housing Element only demonstrates
that under current land use policies, 1,353 units could be accommodated in the approved Route
66 Corridor Specific Plan area.
State law uses density as a measure of feasibility for affordable housing, assuming higher density
offers the opportunity for economies of scale. The Housing Element therefore demonstrates the
potential for affordable housing in higher density zoning districts. There is no requirement under
State law to meet the RHNA with housing production, and specifically, no requirement to build
the units as affordable housing.
Impacts associated with development in this Specific Plan have already been considered and
mitigation measures identified in the Environmental Impact Report prepared for the Specific
Plan. The Housing Element does not provide additional opportunities for housing or alter any of
the City’s current land use policies.
The $2 million was a one-time only payment that the City was able to negotiate with a developer
for converting a commercially zoned property to residential use. The negotiated payment is not
to avoid construction of affordable housing. The City has not established any policy requiring
any developer to provide affordable housing in any part of the City.
Page 63
Impacts associated with development in this Specific Plan have already been considered and
mitigation measures identified in the Environmental Impact Report prepared for the Specific
Plan. The Housing Element does not provide additional opportunities for housing or alter any of
the City’s current land use policies.
Page 65
The Housing Element actually names three agencies (not one): Global Premier, SunAmerica, and
TELACU. However, these agencies are mentioned only because they are agencies with which
                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                             A-7

the City has previously worked. By no means does the Housing Element establish these agencies
as the exclusive parties with which the City would work in the future.
Page 69
Heritage Oaks will remain an affordable housing project through a separate affordability
covenant as noted above. The supplemental rent subsidies to individual tenants ended due to the
loss of redevelopment funds. The City has no control over the State of California’s dissolution
of redevelopment agencies and corresponding loss of redevelopment funds.
                                        City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                         November 2013
                                                                                         A-8

Appendix B: Residential Sites Inventory
The follow tables identify the pending projects, underutilized sites within the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan, and vacant and
underutilized sites outside of the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area. These sites are determined to have near-term redevelopment
potential due to their current uses and location, and overall vision of the community. The series of maps that follow illustrate the
location and clustering of parcels. Pictures of the sites to illustrate existing conditions are included after the maps.
                                                                              City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                November 2013
                                                                                                                              B-1
Table B-1: Pending Projects
                                                                                      Maximum
Site                                General                                                      Potential  Expected
          Location        APN(s)            Zoning   Existing Use         Acreage      Density                          Net Units
No.                                  Plan                                                         Units       Units
                                                                                       (du/ac)
                       8625-011-005
                       8625-011-011
                       8625-011-012
                       8625-011-013
                       8625-012-002
                       8625-012-003
                       8625-012-008
                       8625-015-015
                       8625-015-018
                       8625-015-019
                       8625-016-001
                       8625-016-002
                       8625-016-003         Monrovia
      Former
                       8625-016-004  Low    Nursery
 1    Monrovia                                             --                 94.20         3.0        282        121        121
                       8625-016-005 Density Specific
      Nursery Site
                       8625-016-006          Plan
                       8625-017-048
                       8625-017-049
                       8625-017-050
                       8625-017-051
                       8625-017-053
                       8625-017-055
                       8625-017-056
                       8625-020-020
                       8625-020-023
                       8625-022-013
                       8625-022-015
                       8625-022-018
                                                               City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                November 2013
                                                                                                                    B-2
Table B-1: Pending Projects
                                                                                                                 Maximum
Site                                            General                                                                        Potential  Expected
            Location            APN(s)                         Zoning           Existing Use         Acreage      Density                             Net Units
No.                                               Plan                                                                          Units       Units
                                                                                                                  (du/ac)
                            8639-012-004
                            8639-012-007
                            8639-012-019
                            8639-013-005
                            8639-013-006
        Northeast
                            8639-013-007
        corner of Route                         Route 66
                            8639-013-008
 2      66 and                                  Specific        TCMU                  --                  4.73     55.0(1)(3)        260        256        256
                            8639-013-009
        Glendora                                  Plan
                            8639-013-010
        Avenue
                            8639-013-011
                            8639-013-012
                            8639-013-013
                            8639-013-016
                            8639-013-019
Subtotal                                                                                                 98.93                       542        377        377
Notes:
    1.   Includes Lot Consolidation Density Bonus
    2.   Includes Environmental Stewardship and Energy Efficiency Density Bonus
    3.   Includes Mixed Use Density Bonus
       Site Photos: Pending Projects
       Site #1: Former Monrovia Nursery Site
                                                                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                              November 2013
                                                                                                                                                  B-3
      Site #2: Northeast corner of Route 66 and Glendora Avenue
Table B-2(a): Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan (Remaining Available Sites from the 2008-2014 Housing Element)
                                                                                                       Maximum
Site                                        General                                                                 Potential  Expected
           Location          APN(s)                       Zoning      Existing Use         Acreage      Density                            Net Units
No.                                           Plan                                                                   Units       Units
                                                                                                        (du/ac)
                                            Route 66
       825 W. Route
 6                        8634-010-022       Specific    RT66-BG Used car dealer                2.31       35.0(3)         80         56         56
       66
                                              Plan
                                                                                City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                   November 2013
                                                                                                                                       B-4
Table B-2(a): Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan (Remaining Available Sites from the 2008-2014 Housing Element)
                                                                                                        Maximum
Site                                      General                                                                     Potential  Expected
          Location         APN(s)                      Zoning         Existing Use          Acreage      Density                             Net Units
No.                                         Plan                                                                       Units       Units
                                                                                                         (du/ac)
                        8634-010-015
      707-735 W.
                        8634-010-018      Route 66
      Route 66; 535                                               Commercial
 8                      8634-010-019      Specific    RT66-BG                                    2.15      45.0(1,3)         96         67         67
      Forestdale                                                  buildings
                        8634-010-034        Plan
      Avenue
                        8634-010-035
                                          Route 66
      619-625 W.        8634-018-020                              Commercial
 9                                        Specific    RT66-BG                                    1.58     45.0(1)(3)         71         49         49
      Route 66          8634-018-021                              buildings; motel
                                            Plan
                        8639-020-003
                        8639-020-004                              Restaurant; mobile
                        8639-020-015      Route 66                home park; vacant
      337-507 W.                                       RT66-                                                 15.0-
                        8639-020-017      Specific                land; commercial
 10   Route 66; 532                                    TCMU;                                     9.83     55.0(1)(3)        520        364        267
                        8639-027-001     Plan; High               buildings (9.34 acres
      Parker Drive                                      R-3
                        8639-027-900      Density                 RT66-TCMU,
                        8639-027-901                              0.49 acres R-3)
                        8639-027-902
                        8640-001-025
                        8640-001-028
                        8640-004-036                              Restaurant; motel;
                                          Route 66
      308-432 W.        8640-004-038                   RT66-      vacant land; mobile
 11                                       Specific                                               5.23     55.0(1)(3)        287        200        160
      Route 66          8640-004-040                   TCMU       home park;
                                            Plan
                        8640-004-041                              apartments
                        8640-004-042
                        8640-004-900
                        8640-005-001
                        8640-005-002
                                          Route 66
      202-216 W.        8640-005-003                   RT66-
 13                                       Specific                RV dealer                      1.01     55.0(1)(3)         55         38         38
      Route 66          8640-005-004                   TCMU
                                            Plan
                        8640-005-005
                        8640-005-006
                        8640-005-040
      649-665 S.                          Route 66
                        8640-005-041                   RT66-      Single and multiple
 14   Glendora                            Specific                                               0.66     55.0(1)(3)         36         25         21
                        8640-005-042                   TCMU       family residential
      Avenue                                Plan
                        8640-005-052
                                                                                 City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                     November 2013
                                                                                                                                         B-5
Table B-2(a): Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan (Remaining Available Sites from the 2008-2014 Housing Element)
                                                                                                                  Maximum
Site                                           General                                                                          Potential  Expected
           Location            APN(s)                         Zoning           Existing Use           Acreage      Density                             Net Units
No.                                              Plan                                                                            Units       Units
                                                                                                                   (du/ac)
                           8644-001-023
       650-670 S.                              Route 66
                           8644-001-024                        RT66-       Single and multiple
 15    Glendora                                Specific                                                    0.66     55.0(1)(3)         36         25         21
                           8644-001-025                        TCMU        family residential
       Avenue                                    Plan
                           8644-001-050
                           8644-001-013
                           8644-004-025                                    Auto repair;
                           8644-004-026        Route 66                    commercial
       128-230 E.                                              RT66-
 16                        8644-004-027        Specific                    buildings; single- and          2.23     55.0(1)(3)        122         85         72
       Route 66                                                TCMU
                           8644-004-028          Plan                      multiple-family
                           8644-004-029                                    residential
                           8644-004-030
                           8644-017-033
                                                                           Used car dealer;
                           8644-017-034        Route 66
       712-740 E.                                                          commercial
 18                        8644-017-036        Specific      RT66-CRR                                      4.17     45.0(1)(3)        187        130        101
       Route 66                                                            buildings; mobile
                           8644-017-037          Plan
                                                                           home park
                           8644-017-038
                           8644-017-043        Route 66                    Multiple family
       808-826 E.
 19                        8644-017-044        Specific      RT66-CRR residential; mobile                  3.23     45.0(1)(3)        145        101         40
       Route 66
                           8644-017-045          Plan                      home park
Subtotal                                                                                                  33.06                     1,635     1,140         892
Notes:
    1.  Includes Lot Consolidation Density Bonus
    2.  Includes Environmental Stewardship and Energy Efficiency Density Bonus
    3.  Includes Mixed Use Density Bonus
                                                                                           City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                               November 2013
                                                                                                                                                   B-6
Site Photos: Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan (Remaining Available Sites from the 2008-2014 Housing Element)
Site #6: 825 W. Route 66
Notes: Numerous examples of blight were evident on these parcels, including broken and cracked driveways and in-ground utility boxes. In addition,
a number of ADA violations were found on these parcels including a lack of handicap-accessible restrooms, paths, and parking stalls. Inspections of
the structures on these parcels also revealed the existence of asbestos and lead-based paint hazards.
                                                                               City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                  November 2013
                                                                                                                                         B-7
Site #8: 707-735 W. Route 66
Notes: These parcels have been cited by the City for a number of building and safety violations, including missing valves, and missing utility
barricades. Numerous examples of blight were evident on these parcels, including broken and cracked driveways, and the inappropriate storage of
inoperable vehicles and auto parts. In addition, a number of ADA violations were found on these parcels including a lack of handicap-accessible
restrooms, paths, and parking stalls. Inspections of the structures on these parcels also revealed the existence of asbestos and lead-based paint
hazards.
                                                                                 City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                      November 2013
                                                                                                                                             B-8
Site #9: 619-625 W. Route 66
Notes: These parcels have been cited by the City for a number of building and safety violations, including the construction of structures without City-
approved permits, broken walls, and missing valves. Numerous examples of blight were evident on these parcels, including improper trash and
debris storage, and the lack of landscaping. In addition, a number of ADA violations were found on these parcels including a lack of handicap-
accessible restrooms, paths, and parking stalls. Inspections of the structures on these parcels also revealed the existence of asbestos and lead-
based paint hazards.
                                                                                 City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                     November 2013
                                                                                                                                             B-9
Site #10: 337-507 W. Route 66
                              City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                               November 2013
                                                                             B-10
Notes: These parcels have been cited by the City for a number of building and safety violations, including the construction of structures without City-
approved permits, missing valves, and utility barricades. Numerous examples of blight were evident on these parcels, including broken and cracked
driveways, uplifted sidewalks, improper trash and debris storage, and lack of landscaping. Infrastructure deficiencies were also documented on these
sites, including a lack of fire protection water. In addition, a number of ADA violations were found on these parcels including a lack of handicap-
accessible restrooms, paths, and parking stalls. Inspections of the structures on these parcels also revealed the existence of asbestos and lead-
based paint hazards.
                                                                                    City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                        November 2013
                                                                                                                                              B-11
Site #11: 308-432 W. Route 66
                              City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                               November 2013
                                                                             B-12
Notes: These parcels have been cited by the City for a number of building and safety violations, including missing utility barricades and valves, the
construction of structures without City-approved permits, and exposed plumbing. Numerous examples of blight were evident on these parcels,
including broken and cracked driveways, homeless persons living nearby, and improper trash and debris storage. Infrastructure deficiencies were
also documented on these sites, including a lack of storm drain facilities, exposed gas lines, and a lack of fire protection water. In addition, a number
of ADA violations were found on these parcels including a lack of handicap-accessible restrooms, paths, and parking stalls. Inspections of the
structures on these parcels also revealed the existence of asbestos and lead-based paint hazards.
                                                                                 City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                        November 2013
                                                                                                                                                B-13
Site #13: 202-216 W. Route 66
Notes: Numerous examples of blight were evident on these parcels, including broken and cracked sidewalks and driveways, and open electrical
boxes. Infrastructure deficiencies were also documented on these sites, including a lack of storm drain facilities. In addition, a number of ADA
violations were found on these parcels including a lack of handicap-accessible restrooms, paths, and parking stalls. Inspections of the structures on
these parcels also revealed the existence of asbestos and lead-based paint hazards.
Site #14: 649-665 S. Glendora Ave.
                                                                                City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                        November 2013
                                                                                                                                              B-14
Site #15: 650-670 S. Glendora Ave
                                  City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                   November 2013
                                                                                 B-15
Site #16: 128-230 E. Route 66
                              City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                               November 2013
                                                                             B-16
City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 November 2013
                                               B-17
Notes: These parcels have been cited by the City for a number of building and safety violations, including the construction of structures and addition
of signage without City-approved permits and missing valves. Numerous examples of blight were evident on these parcels, including broken and
cracked driveways, uplifted sidewalks, improper trash and debris storage, and the lack of landscaping. Infrastructure deficiencies were also
documented on these sites, including a lack of storm drain facilities. In addition, a number of ADA violations were found on these parcels including a
lack of handicap-accessible restrooms, paths, and parking stalls. Inspections of the structures on these parcels also revealed the existence of
asbestos and lead-based paint hazards.
Site #18: 712-740 E. Route 66
                                                                                   City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                      November 2013
                                                                                                                                            B-18
Notes: These parcels have been cited by the City for a number of building and safety violations, including the construction of structures without City-
approved permits, missing valves, missing utility barricades, and the existence of on-site storage containers. Numerous examples of blight were
evident on these parcels, including broken and cracked sidewalks and driveways, in-ground utility boxes, storage of inoperable vehicles, improper
trash and debris storage, and the lack of landscaping. Infrastructure deficiencies were also documented on these sites, including a lack of storm drain
facilities and fire protection water. In addition, a number of ADA violations were found on these parcels including a lack of handicap-accessible paths,
and parking stalls. Inspections of the structures on these parcels also revealed the existence of asbestos and lead-based paint hazards.
Site #19: 808-826 E. Route 66
                                                                                   City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                        November 2013
                                                                                                                                            B-19
      Notes: These parcels have been cited by the City for a number of building and safety violations, including the addition of signage without City-
      approved permits and missing valves. Numerous examples of blight were evident on these parcels, including broken and cracked curbs, sidewalks
      and driveways and improper trash and debris storage. Infrastructure deficiencies were also documented on these sites, including a lack of
      emergency vehicles access and fire protection water. In addition, a number of ADA violations were found on these parcels including a lack of
      handicap-accessible restrooms, paths, and parking stalls. Inspections of the structures on these parcels also revealed the existence of asbestos and
      lead-based paint hazards.
Table B-2(b): Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan (New Sites)
                                                                                                              Maximum
Site                                       General                                                                           Potential    Expected
          Location          APN(s)                         Zoning          Existing Use           Acreage      Density                                 Net Units
No.                                          Plan                                                                              Units         Units
                                                                                                                (du/ac)
       Southwest
       corner of         8638-026-010                                  Shopping center;
                                           Route 66
       Glendora          8638-026-026                       RT66-      single-family
 3                                         Specific                                                    2.89      55.0(1)(3)          158         110        110
       Avenue and        8638-026-028                      TCMU        residence; vacant
                                             Plan
       Foothill             (partial)                                  land
       Boulevard
                                           Route 66
       255 S. Vermont    8639-002-001                       RT66-      Industrial buildings;
 4                                         Specific                                                    2.94      55.0(1)(3)          161         112        112
       Avenue            8639-002-019                      TCMU        vacant land
                                             Plan
       310-410 S.                          Route 66
                         8639-016-015                       RT66-      RV storage yard;
 5     Vermont                             Specific                                                    2.18      55.0(1)(3)          119          83         83
                         8639-016-016                      TCMU        industrial building
       Avenue                                Plan
                                                                                       City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                                                                                  B-20
Table B-2(b): Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan (New Sites)
                                                                                                                 Maximum
Site                                            General                                                                        Potential  Expected
            Location            APN(s)                         Zoning           Existing Use         Acreage      Density                            Net Units
No.                                               Plan                                                                          Units       Units
                                                                                                                  (du/ac)
                                                Route 66
        750 W. Route
 7                          8633-017-023        Specific      RT66-BG       Shopping center               3.06       35.0(3)         107         74        74
        66
                                                  Plan
                            8639-017-021        Route 66                    Car wash;
        155-213 W.                                              RT66-
 12                         8639-017-022        Specific                    restaurant;                   1.61     55.0(1)(3)         88         61        61
        Route 66                                                TCMU
                            8639-017-023          Plan                      commercial building
                                                Route 66                    Used car dealer;
        610-622 E.          8644-010-048
 17                                             Specific      RT66-CRR      commercial building;          0.69     45.0(1)(3)         31         21        21
        Route 66            8644-010-049
                                                  Plan                      vacant land
Subtotal                                                                                                 13.37                       664        461       461
Notes:
    1.   Includes Lot Consolidation Density Bonus
    2.   Includes Environmental Stewardship and Energy Efficiency Density Bonus
    3.   Includes Mixed Use Density Bonus
       Site Photos: Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan (New Sites)
       Site #3: Southwest corner of Glendora Avenue and Foothill Boulevard
                                                                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                              November 2013
                                                                                                                                                 B-21
Site #4: 255 S. Vermont Avenue
                               City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                November 2013
                                                                              B-22
Site #5: 310-410 S. Vermont Avenue
                                   City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                    November 2013
                                                                                  B-23
Site #7: 750 W. Route 66
Site #12: 155-213 W. Route 66
                              City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                               November 2013
                                                                             B-24
      Site #17: 610-622 E. Route 66
Table B-3: Other Vacant and Underutilized Sites
                                                                                                 Maximum
Site                                     General                                                             Potential  Expected
           Location         APN(s)                 Zoning       Existing Use         Acreage      Density                          Net Units
No.                                        Plan                                                               Units       Units
                                                                                                  (du/ac)
Above Moderate Income Units
                                                            Single-family
       601 N. Grand                        Low
 20                     8635-002-013                E-6     residence; vacant             5.65          3.0         16         11        10
       Avenue                             Density
                                                            land
       500 block W.
                                           Low
 21    Leadora          8635-002-011                E-6     Vacant land                   3.11          3.0           9         6          6
                                          Density
       Avenue
                        8655-007-900                        Vacant land
                                           Low
       Terminus of S.   8655-007-901              E-3, E-4, (2.49 acres E-3, 0.44
 22                                      /Medium                                          5.80      5.0-6.0         31         20        20
       San Jose Drive   8655-007-902                R-1     acres E-4, and 2.87
                                          Density
                        8655-021-900                        acres R-1)
Subtotal                                                                                 14.56                      56         37        36
Lower Income Units
       200 block N.
                        8638-005-004      Village
 23    Glendora                                   CCAP-T-5  Vacant land                   0.28         30.0           8         5          5
                        8638-005-005    Mixed Use
       Avenue
                                                                          City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                                                               B-25
Table B-3: Other Vacant and Underutilized Sites
                                                                                                                  Maximum
Site                                           General                                                                          Potential  Expected
           Location            APN(s)                         Zoning           Existing Use           Acreage      Density                            Net Units
No.                                              Plan                                                                            Units       Units
                                                                                                                   (du/ac)
                           8635-011-005
                           8635-011-007
                           8635-011-008
                           8635-011-009
                           8635-011-010
                           8635-011-011
                                                               R-3 /
       Northwest           8635-011-013
                                                              Grand-       Industrial buildings;
       corner of Grand     8635-011-014
                                                 High         Foothill     parking lots; Los
 24    Avenue and          8635-011-015                                                                   12.97     30.0(1)(2)        389        272       272
                                                Density      Multifamily   Angeles County
       Foothill            8635-011-017
                                                             Residential   Public Works yard
       Boulevard           8635-011-018
                                                              Overlay
                           8635-011-019
                           8635-011-020
                           8635-011-021
                           8635-011-024
                           8635-011-025
                           8635-013-901
Subtotal                                                                                                  13.25                       397        277       277
Total                                                                                                     27.81                       453        314       313
Notes:
    1.  Includes Lot Consolidation Density Bonus
    2.  Includes Environmental Stewardship and Energy Efficiency Density Bonus
    3.  Includes Mixed Use Density Bonus
                                                                                           City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                               November 2013
                                                                                                                                                  B-26
Site Photos: Other Vacant and Underutilized Sites
Site #20: 601 N. Grand Avenue
Site #21: 500 block W. Leadora Avenue
                                                  City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                   November 2013
                                                                                                 B-27
Site #22: Terminus of S. San Jose Drive
Site #23: 200 block N. Glendora Avenue
                                        City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                         November 2013
                                                                                       B-28
Site #24: Northwest corner of Grand Avenue and Foothill Boulevard
                                                                  City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                   November 2013
                                                                                                                 B-29
City of Glendora | 2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 November 2013
                                               B-30
Appendix C: Review of Past Accomplishments
The following table reviews the City’s achievements under each of the housing programs contained in the 2008-2014 Housing
Element.
                                  Table C-1: 2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
                                                                                2008-2014 Housing Element
   Program Type                Activity
                                                                 Objective                                         Progress
1. Code              Enforcement of existing     Continue code enforcement activities        Administered by the City of Glendora Police
Enforcement          property maintenance         and connect households in needs with        Department, the City continues its code
                     codes                        City rehabilitation program.                enforcement activities, targeting improvement
                                                                                              of the business corridors along Route 66 and
                                                                                              Arrow Highway. Since 2008, 7,016 properties
                                                                                              have been inspected.
                                                                                              Continued Appropriateness: This program
                                                                                              continues to be appropriate and is included in
                                                                                              the 2014 Housing Element.
2. Home              Allows up to $50,000 to be  Assist five households annually for a       Since 2008, the City has provided 28 deferred
Improvement          used for home repairs to     total of 30 households over the             loans through the former Redevelopment
Deferred Loan        single-family detached       planning period.                            Agency for repair and maintenance activities to
Program              homes                       Advertise program through brochures,        qualifying households. The City had to
                                                  newsletters, and City website.              discontinue this program due to the elimination
                                                 Pursue additional State funding.            of the Redevelopment Agency pursuant to
                                                                                              State law.
                                                                                              Continued Appropriateness: Due to lack of
                                                                                              funding, this is not included in the 2014
                                                                                              Housing Element.
                                                                          City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                November 2013
                                                                                                                                        C-1

                               Table C-1: 2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
                                                                             2008-2014 Housing Element
   Program Type             Activity
                                                              Objective                                       Progress
3. Mobile Home    Grants of up to $10,000 to   Assist 10 households annually for a        Since 2008, the City has provided 24 mobile
Repair Grant      make home repairs that        total of 60 households over the            home grants of up to $10,000. This grant
Program           address code violations       Housing Element period                     program was provided through the
                  and/or health and/or safety                                              Redevelopment Agency. The City had to
                  repairs                                                                  discontinue this program due to the elimination
                                                                                           of the Redevelopment Agency pursuant to
                                                                                           State law.
                                                                                           Continued Appropriateness This program has
                                                                                           been canceled and is not included in the 2014
                                                                                           Housing Element.
4. Emergency Home Grants of up to $10,000 to   Assist 10 households annually for a        Since 2008, the City has provided 32
Improvement Grant make emergency repairs        total of 60 households over the            emergency grants of up to $10,000, 25 of
Program                                         Housing Element period                     which were to low income households. This
                                                                                           grant program was provided through the
                                                                                           Redevelopment Agency. The City had to
                                                                                           discontinue this program due to the elimination
                                                                                           of the Redevelopment Agency pursuant to
                                                                                           State law.
                                                                                           Continued Appropriateness: This program has
                                                                                           been canceled and is not included in the 2014
                                                                                           Housing Element.
                                                                       City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                                                                   C-2

                                 Table C-1: 2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
                                                                               2008-2014 Housing Element
   Program Type               Activity
                                                                Objective                                        Progress
5. Preservation of The City will work with the  Annually monitor status of existing and     Glendora Gardens remains an affordable
Assisted Housing   Glendora Gardens property     future affordable housing projects,         project within the City. The Section 8 contract
Developments       owner to maintain the         including Glendora Gardens.                 for this development must be renewed
                   affordability of the units   Work with nonprofit developers to           annually, therefore, the project is again
                                                 pursue acquisition/r rehabilitation of      considered at-risk for the upcoming Housing
                                                 affordable housing. Identify qualified      Element cycle. The City will continue to monitor
                                                 and interested developers in 2009.          the status of Glendora Gardens and take all
                                                Upon receipt of notice to convert from      necessary actions to ensure its continued
                                                 property owners, coordinate with            affordability.
                                                 LACHA to connect tenants of at-risk
                                                 units to the Section 8 Housing Choice       Continued Appropriateness: This program is
                                                 Voucher Program.                            included in the 2014 Housing Element.
                                                Pursue funding from HUD and HCD to
                                                 preserve at-risk project.
6. First-Time      Offers up to $25,000 in a    Re-evaluate program feasibility by          The City and its former Redevelopment
Homebuyer Program  deferred loan to first time   December 2009. If determined to be          Agency have been unable to allocate funding
(FTHB)             low- and moderate-income      feasible, pursue additional State           to assist First Time Home Buyer households.
                   homebuyers. The City will     funding to implement program.               The amount of the subsidy required to assist
                   re-evaluate this program to  Make necessary modifications based          First Time Home Buyer households is
                   consider feasibility and      on feasibility evaluation by March 2010.    significant and both the City and former
                   modifications if necessary.  Develop marketing materials                 Agency did not have the resources to provide
                                                 (brochures, newsletter, City website,       any loans. This program was provided through
                                                 etc.) to advertise program by May           the former Redevelopment Agency. The City
                                                 2010.                                       had to discontinue this program due to the
                                                                                             elimination of the Redevelopment Agency
                                                                                             pursuant to State law.
                                                                                             Continued Appropriateness: This program has
                                                                                             been canceled and is not included in the 2014
                                                                                             Housing Element.
                                                                         City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                               November 2013
                                                                                                                                       C-3

                              Table C-1: 2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
                                                                            2008-2014 Housing Element
   Program Type             Activity
                                                            Objective                                         Progress
7. Tenant Based   Provides assistance in the  Assist 50 households over the              Since 2008, the City has provided rental
Rental Assistance form of vouchers towards     Housing Element planning period.           assistance to 239 recipients through HCD’s
Program           payment of rent             Advertise program through City’s           State HOME Grant funding and 272 recipients
                                               website, newsletter, and brochures.        through Redevelopment Agency funds. With
                                              Pursue additional funding to continue      the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency
                                               program.                                   in February 2012 and requirement to return all
                                                                                          encumbered funds as of January 2011 to the
                                                                                          State, the City no longer has the ability to
                                                                                          continue the TBRA program or maintain its
                                                                                          housing staff.
                                                                                          The City applied to the State for a 2011 HOME
                                                                                          Grant to continue the provision of Tenant
                                                                                          Based Rental Assistance and was awarded
                                                                                          $700,000 which will be expended in FY 2012-
                                                                                          13. Beyond 2013, the future of this program is
                                                                                          uncertain.
                                                                                          Continued Appropriateness: This program is
                                                                                          not included in the 2014 Housing Element.
                                                                      City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                                                                    C-4

                                  Table C-1: 2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
                                                                                   2008-2014 Housing Element
   Program Type                Activity
                                                                  Objective                                           Progress
8. Senior Rental     The City has set aside        Work with the property owner to              During FY 2011-12, the Redevelopment
Assistance Program   funding to maintain 47 units   maintain the affordability of 47 units at    Agency provided rental assistance to 32 senior
at Heritage Oaks     at the Heritage Oaks Senior    the Heritage Oaks Senior Apartment           households at the Heritage Oaks apartment
Senior Apartments    Apartment complex as units     complex affordable.                          complex. With the dissolution of the
                     affordable to very low                                                      Redevelopment Agency in February 2012 and
                     income seniors                                                              requirement to return all encumbered funds as
                                                                                                 of January 2011 to the State, the City no longer
                                                                                                 has the ability to continue this program or to
                                                                                                 maintain its housing staff.
                                                                                                 The City applied to the State for a 2011 HOME
                                                                                                 Grant to continue the provision of rental
                                                                                                 assistance and was awarded $700,000 which
                                                                                                 will be expended in FY 2012-13. Beyond 2013,
                                                                                                 the future of this program is uncertain.
                                                                                                 Continued Appropriateness: This program is
                                                                                                 not included in the 2008 Housing Element.
9. Section 8 Housing Provides rent subsidies to    Continue to participate in the Section 8     The City will assist in the promotion of the
Choice Vouchers      very low-income                Housing Choice Voucher program               Section 8 program administered by the County.
                     households who overpay         administered by the County Housing           There are currently 264 households on the
                     for housing                    Authority.                                   waiting list.
                                                   Advertise program through brochures,
                                                    newsletter, and City website.                Continued Appropriateness: This program is
                                                   Support County efforts to petition for       included in the 2014 Housing Element.
                                                    additional funding from HUD.
                                                                             City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                   November 2013
                                                                                                                                           C-5

                              Table C-1: 2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
                                                                              2008-2014 Housing Element
   Program Type           Activity
                                                             Objective                                        Progress
10. Energy      The City has established an   Investigate the possibility of expanding   In 2011 the City adopted and now implements
Conservation    architectural Green Building   the Green Building Program into other      the CalGreen building code. The City will
                Program for the William        areas of the City by 2010.                 continue to look for additional ways to promote
                Lyon Homes Arboreta           Establish incentives to encourage          energy conservation and sustainability.
                Specific Plan area.            green building by December 2010.
                Requires developers to                                                    Continued Appropriateness: This program is
                provide all components of                                                 included in the 2014 Housing Element.
                the green program as it is
                written and the to educate
                homebuyers about the
                green building components.
                The City is also
                encouraging mixed-use,
                compact development in its
                Route 66 Corridor Specific
                Plan area.
                                                                      City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                                                                   C-6

                                    Table C-1: 2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
                                                                                    2008-2014 Housing Element
   Program Type                  Activity
                                                                   Objective                                         Progress
11. Residential Sites The City will maintain an    Update the inventory of vacant and            During the past few years, the housing market
Inventory             inventory of vacant and       underutilized sites annually to ensure        in Glendora had been rather inactive and
                      underutilized sites to        adequate sites are available to               therefore, many of the sites identified in the
                      accommodate the               accommodate the remaining RHNA.               Housing Element continue to be available.
                      remaining RHNA.              Provide sites inventory to interested
                                                    developers.                                   The following projects have been completed
                                                   Monitor the development trends in the         since adoption of the Housing Element:
                                                    City, particularly on the sites identified
                                                    in this Housing Element. In 2011,             Arboreta (final phases), southwest corner of
                                                    determine the City’s continued ability        Bennett Avenue and Grand Avenue: 34
                                                    to accommodate the remaining RHNA             condominium units
                                                    on sites identified in this Housing
                                                    Element. If a shortfall in sites is           The Fairways, northwest corner of Foothill
                                                    identified due to development of non-         Boulevard and Cataract Avenue: 17
                                                    residential or non-mixed-use                  condominium units
                                                    developments on these sites,
                                                    replenish the City’s residential sites        One project is also underway:
                                                    inventory with alternative sites.
                                                   Monitor in 2011, the development              Glendora Station, 351 S. Glendora Avenue: 53
                                                    trends in the City to determine if the        condominium units
                                                    incentives offered (see Program 12
                                                    below) are adequate to facilitate mixed       Continued Appropriateness: The City will
                                                    use developments and lot                      continue to provide adequate sites to
                                                    consolidation given the market                accommodate its RHNA. This program is
                                                    conditions. Develop additional                included in the 2014 Housing Element.
                                                    incentives as necessary.
                                                                              City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                   November 2013
                                                                                                                                            C-7

                              Table C-1: 2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
                                                                             2008-2014 Housing Element
   Program Type            Activity
                                                             Objective                                         Progress
12. Development The City will promote the     Update the City’s density bonus             The City continues to offer the regulatory
Incentives      use of various development     provisions to be consistent with the        incentives through the Route 66 Corridor
                incentives to facilitate and   State density bonus law within one          Specific Plan to facilitate mixed use and
                encourage residential and      year of the adoption of the Housing         affordable housing development.
                mixed use development,         Element.
                particularly affordable       Develop marketing materials                 However, the housing market collapsed shortly
                housing, in the Specific       (brochures, City website, etc.) to          after the adoption of the Housing Element.
                Plan area:                     promote incentives by December              Similar to most communities across the
                    State Density Bonus       2009.                                       country, the City has experienced a depressed
                     for Affordable Housing   Make marketing materials available to       economy with limited development activities.
                    Lot consolidation         interested developers by December
                     incentives in the Route   2009.                                       The City amended its Density Bonus
                     66 Corridor Specific     Work with local housing developers to       Ordinance to be consistent with State law in
                     Plan area                 encourage and facilitate the                January 2013. City staff continues to work with
                    Mixed use projects        development of residential projects         developers to promote awareness of
                     within the BG, GMU,       with affordable units.                      development opportunities and incentives in
                     and TCMU zoning                                                       the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area.
                     subdistricts of the
                     Route 66 Corridor                                                     Continued Appropriateness: The City will
                     Specific Plan area                                                    continue to offer development incentives to
                    The Nonconforming                                                     encourage mixed use and affordable housing
                     Lot Ordinance                                                         development. This program is included in the
                    Other various                                                         2014 Housing Element.
                     reductions of site
                     development
                     standards as
                     development
                     incentives on a case-
                     by-case basis
                                                                       City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                                                                    C-8

                                Table C-1: 2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
                                                                              2008-2014 Housing Element
   Program Type             Activity
                                                               Objective                                        Progress
13. Housing for   The City will amend its      Amend Zoning Code to address                The City amended the Zoning Code in 2011 to
Extremely Low     Zoning Code to address        provisions for emergency shelters,          permit emergency shelters along Grand
Income Households provisions for transitional   transitional housing, supportive housing,   Avenue and Arrow Highway and along Grand
                  housing, SRO housing, and     and SRO housing, including location         Avenue and Baseline Road.
                  emergency shelters.           allowances, within one year of the
                                                adoption of the Housing Element.            In 2011, the City also amended its Zoning
                                                                                            Ordinance to define and include provisions for
                                                                                            transitional and supportive housing, pursuant
                                                                                            to SB 2.
                                                                                            The City has also amended the Zoning
                                                                                            Ordinance to permit the development of SROs
                                                                                            in the CRR district of the Route 66 Corridor
                                                                                            Specific Plan.
                                                                                            Continued Appropriateness: This program is
                                                                                            completed and not included in the 2014
                                                                                            Housing Element.
                                                                        City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                             November 2013
                                                                                                                                    C-9

                                  Table C-1: 2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
                                                                                   2008-2014 Housing Element
   Program Type               Activity
                                                                   Objective                                          Progress
14. Housing for  The City will amend its          Amend Zoning Code to address                  The City amended the Zoning Code in 2011 to
Persons with     Zoning Code to differentiate      provisions for large and small residential    define small residential care facilities (serving
Disabilities     between small community           care facilities, adopt a Reasonable           six or fewer persons) and permit their
                 care facilities (for 6 or fewer   Accommodation Ordinance, and to               development in all single family and multiple
                 residents) and large              revise the definition of “family” within      family residence zones. Larger community care
                 community care facilities (for    one year of the adoption of the Housing       facilities, convalescent homes, and other
                 more than 6 residents).           Element.                                      similar uses for more than six persons are
                 Small community care                                                            permitted in the Medical Services (MS) Zone
                 facilities will be permitted by                                                 and in the TCMU and CRR subdistricts of the
                 right in all residential zones,                                                 Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan, subject to a
                 pursuant to State law.                                                          conditional use permit.
                                                                                                 The City adopted a formal Reasonable
                                                                                                 Accommodations Ordinance in 2008.
                                                                                                 The City removed its definition of “family” from
                                                                                                 the Zoning Ordinance in 2010.
                                                                                                 Continued Appropriateness: This program is
                                                                                                 completed and not included in the 2014
                                                                                                 Housing Element.
15. Further Fair The City contracts with the      Promote and publicize fair housing            The City continues to provide fair housing
Housing          Inland Fair Housing and           programs and services on City website         services through a third party consultant,
Opportunities    Mediation Board to provide        and through brochures at City Hall.           currently through the Housing Rights Center.
                 fair housing and                 Provide fair housing services to 150          Since 2008, the 168 residents have been
                 landlord/tenant counseling        persons annually.                             assisted with fair housing services and 256
                 services                         Provide tenant/landlord services to 400       residents have been assisted with landlord-
                                                   persons annually.                             tenant disputes.
                                                  Implement recommendations of the
                                                   Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing       Continued Appropriateness: This program is
                                                   Choice.                                       included in the 2014 Housing Element.
                                                                             City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                    November 2013
                                                                                                                                           C-10

                            Table C-1: 2008-2014 Housing Element Accomplishments
                                                                    2008-2014 Housing Element
   Program Type          Activity
                                                     Objective                                   Progress
21. RHNA
Objectives      Very Low-Income                      192 units                                    61 units
                Low-Income                           119 units                                    34 units
                Moderate-Income                      127 units                                     1 units
                Upper Income                         307 units                                   376 units
                Total                                744 units                                   472 units
                                                              City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                               November 2013
                                                                                                             C-11
Appendix D: Housing Element Glossary
Acre: a unit of land measure equal to 43,560 square feet.
Acreage, Net: The portion of a site exclusive of existing or planned public or private road rights-
of-way.
Affordability Covenant: A property title agreement which places resale or rental restrictions on
a housing unit.
Affordable Housing: Under State and federal statutes, housing which costs no more than 30
percent of gross household income. Housing costs include rent or mortgage payments, utilities,
taxes, insurance, homeowner association fees, and other costs.
Annexation: The incorporation of land area into the jurisdiction of an existing city with a
resulting change in the boundaries of that city.
Assisted Housing: Housing that has been subsidized by federal, state, or local housing
programs.
At-Risk Housing: Multiple-family rental housing that is at risk of losing its status as housing
affordable for low and moderate income tenants due to the expiration of federal, state or local
agreements.
California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD): The State
Department responsible for administering State-sponsored housing programs and for reviewing
housing elements to determine compliance with State housing law.
Census: The official United States decennial enumeration of the population conducted by the
federal government.
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG): A grant program administered by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). This grant allots money to cities and
counties for housing rehabilitation and community development activities, including public
facilities and economic development.
Condominium: A building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually, but the
structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all owners on a proportional, undivided
basis.
Density: The number of dwelling units per unit of land. Density usually is expressed per acre,"
e.g., a development with 100 units located on 20 acres has density of 5.0 units per acre.
Density Bonus: The allowance of additional residential units beyond the maximum for which
the parcel is otherwise permitted usually in exchange for the provision or preservation of
affordable housing units at the same site or at another location.
Development Impact Fees: A fee or charge imposed on developers to pay for a jurisdiction's
costs of providing services to new development.
                                        City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                         November 2013
                                                                                             D-1
Development Right: The right granted to a land owner or other authorized party to improve a
property. Such right is usually expressed in terms of a use and intensity allowed under existing
zoning regulation. For example, a development right may specify the maximum number of
residential dwelling units permitted per acre of land.
Dwelling, Multiple-family: A building containing two or more dwelling units for the use of
individual households; an apartment or condominium building is an example of this dwelling unit
type.
Dwelling, Single-family Attached: A one-family dwelling attached to one or more other one-
family dwellings by a common vertical wall. Row houses and town homes are examples of this
dwelling unit type.
Dwelling, Single-family Detached: A dwelling, not attached to any other dwelling, which is
designed for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or
yards.
Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate
living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the unit for the
exclusive use of a household.
Elderly Household: As defined by HUD, elderly households are one- or two- member (family or
non-family) households in which the head or spouse is age 62 or older.
Element: A division or chapter of the General Plan.
Emergency Shelter: An emergency shelter is a facility that provides shelter to homeless families
and/or homeless individuals on a limited short-term basis.
Entitlement City: A city, which based on its population, is entitled to receive funding directly
from HUD. Examples of entitlement programs include CDBG and HOME.
Fair Market Rent (FMR): Fair Market Rents (FMRs) are freely set rental rates defined by HUD
as the median gross rents charged for available standard units in a county or Standard
Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMSA). Fair Market Rents are used for the Section 8 Rental
Program and many other HUD programs and are published annually by HUD.
First-Time Home Buyer: Defined by HUD as an individual or family who has not owned a home
during the three-year period preceding the HUD-assisted purchase of a home. Jurisdictions may
adopt local definitions for first-time homebuyer programs which differ from non-federally funded
programs.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the lot area;
usually expressed as a numerical value (e.g., a building having 10,000 square feet of gross floor
area located on a lot of 5,000 square feet in area has a FAR of 2:1).
General Plan: The General Plan is a legal document, adopted by the legislative body of a City or
County, setting forth policies regarding long-term development. California law requires the
preparation of seven elements or chapters in the General Plan: Land Use, Housing, Circulation,
Conservation, Open Space, Noise, and Safety. Additional elements are permitted, such as
Economic Development, Urban Design and similar local concerns.
                                          City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                            D-2
Group Quarters: A facility which houses unrelated persons not living in households (U.S.
Census definition). Examples of group quarters include institutions, dormitories, shelters,
military quarters, assisted living facilities and other quarters, including single-room occupancy
housing, where 10 or more unrelated individuals are housed.
Growth Management: Techniques used by a government to regulate the rate, amount, location
and type of development,
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA): The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act requires larger
lending institutions making home mortgage loans to publicly disclose the location and
disposition of home purchase, refinance and improvement loans. Institutions subject to HMDA
must also disclose the gender, race, and income of loan applicants.
HOME Program: The HOME Investment Partnership Act, Title II of the National Affordable
Housing Act of 1990. HOME is a federal program administered by HUD which provides formula
grants to States and localities to fund activities that build, buy, and/or rehabilitate affordable
housing for rent or home ownership or provide direct rental assistance to low-income people.
Homeless: Families and individuals whose primary nighttime residence is a public or private
place not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation (e.g., the street,
sidewalks, cars, vacant and abandoned buildings). Sheltered homeless are families and persons
whose primary nighttime residence is a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter (e.g.,
emergency, transitional, battered women, and homeless youth shelters; and commercial hotels
or motels used to house the homeless).
Household: The Census Bureau defines a household as all persons living in a housing unit
whether or not they are related. A single person living in an apartment as well as a family living
in a house is considered a household. Household does not include individuals living in
dormitories, prisons, convalescent homes, or other group quarters. Pursuant to HUD,
households are defined as follows: small-- two to four non-elderly persons; large- with 5 or more
members; or senior - over age 62.
Household Income: The total income of all the persons living in a household. A household
income is often described as very low, low, moderate, and upper incomes based upon
household size and income, relative to the regional median income.
Housing Problems: Defined by HUD as a household which: (1) occupies a unit with physical
defects (lacks complete kitchen or bathroom); (2) meets the definition of overcrowded; or (3)
spends more than 30 percent of income on housing cost.
Housing Subsidy: Housing subsidies refer to government assistance aimed at reducing housing
sales or rent prices to more affordable levels. Two general types of housing subsidy exist.
Where a housing subsidy is linked to a particular house or apartment, housing subsidy is
"project" or "unit" based. In Section 8 rental assistance programs the subsidy is linked to the
family and assistance provided to any number of families accepted by willing private landlords.
This type of subsidy is said to be "tenant based."
Housing Unit: A room or group of rooms used by one or more individuals living separately from
others in the structure, with direct access to the outside or to a public hall.
Income Category: Five categories are used to classify a household according to income based
on the median income for the county. Under state housing statutes, these categories are defined
                                           City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                             D-3
as follows: Extremely Low (0-30 percent Area Median Income or AMI); Very Low (31-50 percent
AMI); Low (51-80 percent AMI); Moderate (81-120 percent AMI); and Above Moderate (over 120
percent AMI).
Manufactured Housing: Housing constructed of manufactured components, assembled partly at
the site rather than totally at the site. Also referred to as modular housing.
Market-Rate Housing: Housing available on the open market without any subsidy of which the
price is determined by the market forces of supply and demand.
Median Income: The annual income for each household size within a region which is defined
annually by HUD. Half of the households in the region have incomes above the median and half
have incomes below the median.
Mobile Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is at least 8 feet in
width and 32 feet in length, is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling unit when connected to the required utilities, either with or without a permanent
foundation.
Overcrowding: A household with more than one person per room, excluding bathrooms,
kitchens, hallways, and porches. Severe overcrowding is defined as households with more than
1.50 persons per room.
Overpayment: The extent to which gross housing costs, including utility costs, exceed 30
percent of gross household income. Severe overpayment exists if gross housing costs exceed
50 percent of gross income.
Parcel: The basic unit of land entitlement. A designated area of land established by plat,
subdivision, or otherwise legally defined and permitted to be used, or built upon.
Physical Defects: A housing unit lacking complete kitchen or bathroom facilities. Jurisdictions
may expand the Census definition in defining units with physical defects.
Project-Based Rental Assistance: Rental assistance provided for a project, not for a specific
tenant. A tenant receiving project-based rental assistance gives up the right to that assistance
upon moving from the project.
Public Housing: A project-based low-rent housing program operated by independent local
public housing authorities. A very low income family applies to the local public housing authority
in the area in which they want to live.
Redevelopment Agency: California Law formerly provided authority to establish a
Redevelopment Agency with the scope and financing mechanisms necessary to remedy blight
and provide stimulus to eliminate deteriorated conditions. The law provided for the planning,
development, redesign, clearance, reconstruction, or rehabilitation, or any combination of these,
and the provision of public and private improvements as may be appropriate or necessary in the
interest of the general welfare by the Agency. Redevelopment law required an Agency to set
aside 20 percent of all tax increment dollars generated from each redevelopment project area
for the purpose of increasing and improving the community's supply of housing for low and
moderate income households. Current law eliminated local redevelopment agencies and the
authority to establish one.
                                            City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                             November 2013
                                                                                            D-4
Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA): The Regional Housing Needs Assessment
(RHNA) is based on projections of population growth and housing unit demand and assigns a
share of the region's future housing need to each jurisdiction within the SCAG (Southern
California Association of Governments) region. These housing need numbers serve as the basis
for the update of the Housing Element.
Rehabilitation: The upgrading of a building previously in a dilapidated or substandard condition
for human habitation or use.
Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program: A tenant-based rental assistance program that
subsidizes a family's rent in a privately owned house or apartment. The program is administered
by local public housing authorities. Assistance payments are based on 30 percent of household
annual income. Households with incomes of 50 percent or below the area median income are
eligible to participate in the program.
Service Needs: The particular services required by special populations, typically including
needs such as transportation, personal care, housekeeping, counseling, meals, case
management, personal emergency response, and other services preventing premature
institutionalization and assisting individuals to continue living independently.
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG): The Southern California
Association of Governments is a regional planning agency which encompasses six counties:
Imperial, Riverside, San Bernardino, Orange, Los Angeles, and Ventura. SCAG is responsible
for preparing the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA).
Special Needs Groups: Segments of the population which have a more difficult time finding
decent affordable housing due to special circumstances. Under California Housing Element
statutes, special needs groups consist of the elderly, disabled, large households, female-
headed households, fameworkers, and the homeless. A jurisdiction may also consider
additional special needs, such as students, military households, etc.
Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land in accordance with the Subdivision
Map Act (California Government Code Section 66410 et seq.).
Substandard Housing: Housing which does not meet the minimum standards contained in the
State Housing Code (i.e. does not provide shelter, endangers the health, safety or well-being of
occupants). Jurisdictions may adopt more stringent local definitions of substandard housing.
Supportive Housing: Housing with a supporting environment, such as group homes or Single
Room Occupancy (SRO) housing and other housing that includes a supportive service
component such as those defined below.
Supportive Services: Services provided to residents of supportive housing for the purpose of
facilitating the independence of residents. Some examples are case management, medical or
psychological counseling and supervision, child care, transportation, and job training.
Tenant-Based Rental Assistance: A form of rental assistance in which the assisted tenant
may move from a dwelling unit with a right to continued assistance. The assistance is provided
for the tenant, not for the project.
Transitional Housing: Transitional housing is temporary (often six months to two years) housing
for a homeless individual or family who is transitioning to permanent housing. Transitional
                                          City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           November 2013
                                                                                           D-5
housing often includes a supportive services component (e.g. job skills training, rehabilitation
counseling, etc.) to allow individuals to gain necessary life skills in support of independent living.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD): The cabinet level department
of the federal government responsible for housing, housing assistance, and urban development
at the national level. Housing programs administered through HUD include Community
Development Block Grant, HOME and Section 8, among others.
Zoning: A land use regulatory measure enacted by local government. Zoning district
regulations governing lot size, building bulk, placement, and other development standards vary
from district to district, but must be uniform within the same district. Each city and county adopts
a zoning ordinance specifying these regulations.
                                           City of Glendora | 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                            November 2013
                                                                                                D-6
                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
Chapter 2
Land Use Element
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The primary purpose of the Land Use Element is to delegate general distribution and extent of
various land uses within the city of Glendora, which will shape the way it develops and
redevelops over the next 20 years. The Land Use Element includes decisions about type,
intensity and general distribution of uses of land for housing, commercial, business, industry,
open space, public, and other uses. It functions as a tool for the public official by creating a
framework to provide public facilities and services and to direct new development in the
community. It is also the basis for short-range and long-range capital improvement programs. It
functions as a guide to the public citizen by defining expectations of neighborhood type,
shopping and service facility type and location, time and distances to work and other necessary
activities regarding the land.
The essential components of the Land Use Element are the General Plan Land Use Map (Exhibit
LU-7) and the goals and policies intended guide future development based on analysis of existing
conditions and future needs. The Land Use Map is a graphic representation of the goals and
policies expressed by all of the General Plan elements. Users are advised to refer to the text
when as well as the diagram when evaluating proposed development and capital improvement
projects.
2.0 AUTHORITY FOR ELEMENT
The State of California Government Code Section 65302 (a) requires that a General Plan include:
        “…a Land Use Element which designates the proposed general distribution and
        general location and extent of the uses of the land for housing, business, industry,
        open space including agriculture, natural resources, recreation and enjoyment of
        scenic beauty, education, public buildings and grounds, solid and liquid waste
        disposal facilities and other categories of public and private uses of land.
        The Land Use Element shall include a statement of the standards of population
        density and building intensity recommended for the various districts and other
        territory covered by the plan.”
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    1                                  Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
3.0 SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
The City of Glendora is an urbanized city with most of the available flat land developed. The
planning area, which includes unincorporated County areas within the sphere of influence is
approximately 20 square miles (12,800.26 acres) of which, approximately 19.59 square miles
(12,540 acres) are within the City limits. There are three blocks of land, located in the western
portion of the city, under County jurisdiction and not included in the City’s planning area
acreage.
The City is almost completely developed with only 0.3 percent of developable land remaining
vacant.
The fully developed state of the City means that most services are sufficiently available to new
growth occurring or expected to occur on underutilized parcels and in redevelopment areas
within the City.
Land use designations for the 2025 Community Plan have been re-examined from the 1992 Plan
to accommodate current market demands, community needs, city goals and environmental
restraints in Glendora. Table LU-1, Existing Land Use (2006), quantifies the amount of acreage,
both developed and vacant, currently devoted to each land use within the City. The two
predominant land uses in the City include residential and open space. Currently developed
residential lands account for approximately 42 percent of the total City land, while open space
uses account for approximately 37 percent of the City. The open space uses include the San
Gabriel Mountains, located in the northern portion of the planning area and the South Hills
located south of Freeway I-210. Collectively, these two areas account for over 4,000 acres of
recreation and open space uses within the City limits.
3.1      RESIDENTIAL LAND USES
The majority of developed land area within the City (approximately 42 percent) is developed as
residential. Most of the existing residential uses are single-family homes developed in the 1960s
through the 1980s when Los Angeles County was experiencing the most residential building
permit activity. Except for one remaining 90-acre underutilized parcel used as a wholesale
nursery and undeveloped property in the foothills, no significant residential single-family land
remains available for development. With a strong demand for high end housing, new
development is occurring in the hillside areas, which are typically more difficult to develop. A
significant amount of higher density infill development is planned within the Route 66 Corridor
Specific Plan area as the City implements new land use policies that take advantage of planned
transit infrastructure and create more pedestrian oriented land uses near the colleges and in the
downtown Village.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    2                               Land Use Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              Table LU-1
                                       Existing Land Use (2006)
       Land Use Designation                Existing       Vacant     Total Acres    Percent of
                                          Developed                                    Total
                                             Acres                                     Acres
CITY LIMITS
Residential
Hillside Very Low Residential                  1,883.77       23.24      1,907.01         15.21
Low Density Residential                        1,087.43         3.13     1,090.56           8.70
Low/Medium Density Residential                 1,874.07         0.21     1,874.28         14.95
Medium Density Residential                       106.81         2.40       109.21           0.87
Medium/High Density Residential                  133.68         0.76       134.44           1.07
High Density Residential                         125.05         0.14       125.19           1.00
                     Total Residential         5,210.81       29.88      5,240.69         41.79
Mixed Use
Village Mixed Use                                 38.31         0.19        38.50           0.31
                     Total Mixed Use              38.31         0.19        38.50           0.31
Commercial
General Commercial                                96.80         0.34        97.14           0.77
Regional Commercial                              114.56         0.00       114.56           0.91
                    Total Commercial             211.36         0.34       211.70           1.69
Industrial
Light Industrial                                  28.81         1.33        30.14           0.24
General Industrial                                39.55         0.00        39.55           0.32
                      Total Industrial            68.36         1.33        69.69           0.56
Other
Civic/Institutional                              346.31         0.51       346.82           2.77
Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan                  286.86         0.07       286.93           2.29
Utility and Flood Control ROW                    267.39         0.00       267.39           2.13
Street and Freeway ROW                         1,382.24         0.00     1,382.24         11.02
Railroad ROW                                      51.59         0.00        51.59           0.41
                           Total Other         2,334.39         0.58     2,334.97         18.62
Open Space
Conservation Open Space                        4,304.86         0.00     4,304.86         34.33
Open Space                                       339.38         0.00       339.38           2.71
                      Total Open Space         4,644.24         0.00     4,644.24         37.04
             TOTAL – CITY LIMITS              12,507.47       32.32     12,539.79        100.00
SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
Unincorporated Los Angeles County                260.47
               TOTAL – SPHERE OF                 260.47
                          INFLUENCE
                                TOTAL         12,800.26
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      3                             Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
Hillside Very Low, Low Density, and Low/Medium Density Residential
Approximately 38.86 percent of the City’s land is designated as Hillside Very Low, Low
Density, and Low/Medium Density Residential (refer to Table LU – 1). The majority of
residential single-family development occurred following World War II, particularly in the
decades of the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, when the Los Angeles area was growing the fastest.
During the 1992 Plan update process, larger single -family subdivisions were built; however, this
was not the case with the 2025 Community Plan process. These three types of residential uses
are located throughout the City.
Glendora is fortunate to have very stable residential neighborhoods. Residents have expressed
the desire to maintain the character of the neighborhoods and want to ensure that new additions
or new development is consistent with the character of the neighborhood. In recent years, the
trend for single-family homes is for increased square footage. However, Glendora has not
experienced “mansionization” of either existing or proposed homes.
The only significant development potential for residential uses is in the foothills (Hillside Very
Low Residential), as no significant vacant or underutilized parcels are available in the City for
Hillside Very Low, Low Density, or Low/Medium Density Residential for development. In
2001, the City created a citizen’s committee to address desirable development/priorities in the
remaining developable hillside areas. The committee noted that proper planning and sensitivity
to environmental constraints, such as slope, drainage and views, are important in the foothills
area. In the 1992 General Plan, the open space designation permitted residential uses. A new
designation has been developed for the 2025 Community Plan, Hillside Very Low Residential, to
separate open space and residential uses, and to adequately address these issues and incorporate
requirements appropriate for foothill conservation while allowing development.
Medium, Medium/High and High Density Residential
Medium Density Residential, Medium/High and High Density development is dispersed
throughout the City interior, primarily along more intense land uses, major and secondary
arterials and between lower density residential and non-residential uses. Densities range from 6
to 30 units per acre, which can consist of single- and multiple- family attached housing,
duplexes, townhouses, apartments and patio homes. Currently, a mere 3.3 percent of
developable land is designated toward these residential uses.
The adoption of the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan in 2004 responds to the known need for
intensified residential development in the City to accommodate the growing demand for a variety
of housing types and choices. The 2025 Community Plan acknowledges the adoption of the
specific plan and has created a separate land use designation just for the Route 66 Corridor
Specific Plan.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    4                                Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
3.2     MIXED LAND USES
Two areas of the City fall under this category: the downtown Village and Route 66. As noted
above, in 2004, the City adopted a Specific Plan for the Route 66, which identified a variety of
new land use categories for the seven districts in the plan area. With the 2025 General Plan, a
new land use designation has been developed (Village Mixed Use) for the area surrounding the
downtown Village. The Village Mixed Use designation accounts for 0.19 percent of the City
total, while the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan accounts for 2.2 percent.
3.3     COMMERCIAL LAND USES
Commercial development makes up approximately 211 acres of land in the City, which
represents about 1.7 percent of the total land area (refer to Table LU-1). Under the 1992 General
Plan, commercial uses within the City had been classified into six land use designations, which
include commercial, city center, planned redevelopment, regional shopping center, business park
and medical facilities. With the 2025 Community, these six designations have been condensed
into two new categories: general commercial and regional commercial.
General and Regional Commercial
General Commercial uses are primarily concentrated in centers along major arterials and
freeways, such as Grand Avenue and Foothill Boulevard, North Glendora Avenue, East Route
66, and East Arrow Highway. Grocery or major retail stores are the anchors for these centers
with a variety of service and commercial uses in the same center such as restaurants, dry –
cleaning and others. Regional Commercial uses are concentrated in the southeastern portion of
the City along Lone Hill Avenue and Gladstone Street. The uses within this designation consist
of regionally serving big box retail and automobile sales.
3.4     INDUSTRIAL LAND USES
Industrial areas are located throughout the City, with some concentration in the western and
southeastern portions of the City, particularly near Foothill Boulevard and Grand Avenue, Arrow
Highway and Grand Avenue, and Auto Centre Drive east of the I-210 Freeway. Approximately
68 acres of land are designated for industrial uses with the City, (refer to Table LU-1). This
includes both the light industrial and general industrial designations.
Light industrial uses may include business parks, corporate and office uses, warehousing, and
distribution. General industrial uses may include manufacturing, processing, assembly,
fabricating, warehousing, and distribution. The industrial sites are situated to provide easy
access to truck routes and major transportation routes including freeways and rail. Most of the
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     5                               Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
industrial sites can accessed from Route 66 in the western portion of the City and from the I-210
Freeway in the southeast corner of the City.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                   6                                Land Use Element
                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
3.5      OPEN SPACE LAND USES
In the 1992 General Plan, the Open Space designation included parks and recreational facilities,
open space, wilderness and residential uses. With the 2025 Community Plan, these uses have
been separated into three categories: Hillside Very Low Residential, Conservation Open Space,
and Open Space.
Conservation Open Space
This Conservation Open Space designation includes over 4,300 acres of open space and
wilderness area under the ownership or authority of the National Parks Department, City of
Glendora, citizens, and the Nature Conservancy. This use encompasses approximately 34
percent of total land within the City (refer to Table LU-1). This designation includes privately
and publicly owned, undeveloped that will remain in a natural state, and will protect areas with
scenic value, environmental sensitivity, sensitive habitats and/or a passive recreational value.
Currently, campsites, trails, and open space are provided in this area for Glendora residents.
It is intended that future improvements or development activities in these areas will be limited to
those activities that support the preservation of passive recreational activities, such as soft trails
and other facilities supporting passive recreational uses.
Open Space
The Open Space designation includes public and privately open space areas, including parks,
recreational facilities, and golf courses. This use encompasses approximately 339 acres in the
City (refer to Table LU-1).
Parks and Recreation Facilities
The City of Glendora provides a variety of park and open space facilities and programs for its
residents. The City currently services nine parks, which includes 5.8 leased acres at Sandburg
Middle School. Glendora has a joint ownership agreement with the school districts, which
allows the city to use recreational areas during off school hours.
The range of passive and active recreational parks and wilderness parks provide residents with
playing courts, athletic fields, picnic areas, youth and community centers and a variety of trails
throughout the community. The La Fetra Center provides various daily activities, recreation,
special interest classes, human services and events for seniors. The Timothy Daniel Crowther
Teen and Family Center contains a gymnasium, computer lab, game room and provides youth
activities, programs in addition to events and classes for citizens of all ages. Aquatic facilities
and swim related programs are accessible through the joint use agreement at Glendora High
School and also through an agreement with Citrus College.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     7                                 Land Use Element
                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
Golf Course
Golf Courses Oaks Municipal Golf Course is the one golf course located in the City of Glendora.
The facility provides a three-par, nine-hole golf course with practice green, driving range and pro
shop on 18 acres of joint-use land. The site provides open public access of on-site tennis courts
and racquetball courts with the adjacent park (Dawson Park).
Trails
Trails in Glendora consist of biking, hiking and equestrian trails. There are 15 identified trail
systems in the planning area categorized as hiking, multi-purposes or equestrian uses. Most of
the trails are located in the Wilderness Parks, at the base of the Angeles National Forest, within
the city limits, but trails also exist in City parks and other public right-of-way areas.
3.6     COMMUNITY FACILITIES
Civic and Government Facilities
The City Hall complex is located at 116 East Foothill Boulevard, on the southeast corner of
Foothill Boulevard and Glendora Avenue. Within City Hall, the following services or
departments are located: City Manager, City Clerk, Personnel, Finance, Community Services,
Planning and Redevelopment, and Public Works. Additional facilities located on the complex
include the Police Department and the Glendora Public Library.
The United States Post Office is located just southwest of City Hall on Glendora Avenue.
Library
The Glendora Public Library is a 28,000 square-foot two-story building located at 140 South
Glendora Avenue. As of April 2006, the Library collection size is at 145,484 volumes, with new
shelving space required annually to accommodate growth. Although the facility has the
approximate availability of 160,000 volumes, materials must be removed to accommodate new
arrivals and floor space is quickly reaching capacity.
There are two study rooms available, top floor is a community room and staff lounge, the Library
is responsible for the plaza outside of the forum and there is a used book store area run by
volunteers. Additionally, there are 15 public computers with Internet access and six for other
uses. The Library provides over 200 children’s programs and 100 young adult and adult
programs, a wide range of reading and cultural enrichment resources, Internet and library
electronic resources, collection development and maintenance, outreach and adult literacy
programs via Friends Foundation support.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       8                                 Land Use Element

                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                    LAND USE ELEMENT
With the assistance of approximately 200 volunteers of all ages, contributing almost 10,000
hours of total time per year, the Library responds to an average of 1,000 visitors each day, 6 days
a week, it checks out 160 items an hour and responds to 50,000 information/reference questions
annually.
Schools
Two school districts, Glendora Unified and Charter Oaks Unified, exist within the City of
Glendora. The 13 schools are comprised of nine elementary schools, two middle schools and
two high schools. There are an additional two school districts that supplement these facilities,
Azusa Unified to the northwest and Bonita Unified to the northeast, along with five private
schools.1
Citrus Community College, a two-year public facility, is located south of Foothill Boulevard
between Barranca Avenue and Citrus Avenue. It offers an Associate of Arts Degree and has an
average enrollment of over 12,000 a semester.
Churches
There are 41 churches located throughout the City of Glendora.2 Churches are currently located
in all residential land use designations and the Village Mixed Use designation.
Cemeteries
Two cemeteries are located in the City: Oakdale Cemetery and Fairmount Cemetery. The
Oakdale Cemetery is located in the southwestern portion of the City south of Gladstone Street
and west of Grand Avenue. The Fairmont Cemetery is a locally designated Historic Landmark
and is located in the western portion of the City east of Citrus Avenue and south of Leodora
Avenue.
3.7      OTHER USES
Utility and Flood Control Rights-of-Way
The Utility and Flood Control Designation is intended to designate those areas in the City that
are developed for utility and flood control use. Power line rights-of-way and flood control
channels are included in this designation. Because of these types of uses, other development is
limited, though recreational or open space uses are also appropriate with the approval of the
1
  Private School Directory. 2005. http://www.allprivateschools.org/private-schools-glendora-ca.html
2
  Mapquest search
Glendora Community Plan 2025                          9                                       Land Use Element
                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             LAND USE ELEMENT
agency owning the property and the City. These uses comprise approximately two percent of the
total land in the City.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                10                             Land Use Element
                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
3.8     HISTORIC RESOURCES
A 1989 survey completed by the City’s Historic Preservation Committee identified over 500
potential historic resources. The Historic District includes over 100 properties is Eligible For
Listing in the National Register, and 26 local historic landmarks. Only one resource, the
Glendora Bougainvillea, is listed on the National Register and the California Register.
Undesignated resources are increasingly becoming a difficult resource to manage as homeowners
propose additions that may diminish the historic character or quality. These potential resources
tend to be located in the Original Town of Glendora area of the City, which is clustered around
the downtown and includes a significant number of multiple-family zoned properties.
3.9     VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED LAND
Exhibit LU-1, Vacant and Underutilized Land, graphically depicts the location of sites in the City
that are either vacant or have been identified as underutilized. The acreage total of the sites is
shown in Table LU-2, Vacant and Underutilized Land (2006).
Vacant land refers to parcels with no development. Underutilized land refers to parcels that are
developed below the potential use or capacity of the site. In some cases underutilized land can
consist of parcels that have a large portion of the site in non-building uses, such as excessive
surface parking or outdoor work or storage areas, a high percentage of vacant structures, a low
floor area ratio (FAR), dilapidated or otherwise physically impaired buildings, or inefficient or
functionally obsolete structures.
Vacant Land
The City of Glendora is almost entirely developed and only 0.3 percent remains vacant. The
approximately 32 vacant acres are scattered throughout the City.
Underutilized Land
There are approximately 1,545 acres in the City that are underutilized. Approximately 1,171 of
these acres are located in the foothills and include hillside residential lands that would not fulfill
a large amount of the City’s development needs. The remaining 373 acres of underutilized land
are located throughout the City, and include lands designated for residential, village mixed use,
general commercial, civic/institutional, and Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan uses.
As previously mentioned there are a limited number of vacant or underutilized parcels in the City
suitable for residential, commercial or industrial infill development. Factors that contribute to
the suitability of these parcels include size, orientation, shape, location, property value and
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     11                                 Land Use Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
Municipal Code regulations. In addition, threats to public health and safety, such as former
service station sites, also affect the infill potential of underutilized sites.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                        12                        Land Use Element
                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                LAND USE ELEMENT
                         See Exhibit LU-1:Vacant and Underutilized Land
Glendora Community Plan 2025                  13                      Land Use Element
                                                                                                      ANGELES NATIONAL                                                                                          ANGELES NATIONAL
                                                                                                           FOREST                                                                                                    FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PARCELS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EXHIBIT LU - 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VACANT PARCELS
                                                                                                                          Sierra Madre Avenue                                                                                                               VR - Vacant Residential
                                                                                      Citrus Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VC - Vacant Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VI - Vacant Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     UNDERUTILIZED PARCELS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UE4, UE5, UE6 (visual)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UE7(20K), UE7(200K), UE7(800K)
                                                                                                                                                                                          Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UR1 - Underutilized R1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                     Foothill Boulevard                                                                     UR2 - Underutilized R2
                                                                                                                             Grand Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UR3 - Underutilized R3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            URHR - Underutilized Rural Hillside Residential
                                                                                                                                                  Glendora Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CITY LIMITS
                                                                                                                                                                                              Route 66
                                                                                                        Barranca Avenue
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/vacant_underutilized_parcels.mxd August 31, 2006 AK JM
                                                                                            AZUSA                                           &
                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                            g
                                                                                                                                                                                                            &
                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                            g
                                                                                                                                                                                                &
                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SAN DIMAS
                                                                                                                                                                    Gladstone Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                                                       East Arrow Highway
                                                                                                                                                COVINA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0    1,200   2,400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Feet
                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            Table LU-2
                             Vacant and Underutilized Land (2006)
                    Land Use Designation               Vacant    Underutilized
              CITY LIMITS
              Residential
              Hillside Very Low Residential                23.24      1,171.52
              Low Density Residential                       3.13        154.53
              Low/Medium Density Residential                0.21        106.04
              Medium Density Residential                    2.40          1.11
              Medium/High Density Residential               0.76         32.63
              High Density Residential                      0.14         24.43
                                  Total Residential        29.88      1,490.26
              Mixed Use
              Village Mixed Use                             0.19          6.24
                                  Total Mixed Use           0.19          6.24
              Commercial
              General Commercial                            0.34          0.88
              Regional Commercial                           0.00          0.00
                                Total Commercial            0.34          0.88
              Industrial
              Light Industrial                              1.33          0.00
              General Industrial                            0.00          0.00
                                   Total Industrial         1.33          0.00
              Other
              Civic/Institutional                           0.51         45.31
              Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan               0.07          2.11
              Utility and Flood Control ROW                 0.00          0.00
              Street and Freeway ROW                        0.00          0.00
              Railroad ROW                                  0.00          0.00
                                       Total Other          0.58         47.42
              Open Space
              Conservation Open Space                       0.00          0.00
              Open Space                                    0.00          0.00
                                 Total Open Space           0.00          0.00
                         TOTAL – CITY LIMITS               32.32      1,544.80
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     14                         Land Use Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
4.0 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER PLANS
The Land Use Element provides the basic guidelines for physical development within the City of
Glendora. These guidelines create a comprehensive method of land use designations and
generalized land use patterns that set policy regarding how the City will develop and achieve its
goals in the future. In addition to this document, there are other planning tools that work in
conjunction with the Land Use Element to implement and achieve established policies and goals.
These tools include the City’s zoning ordinance, specific plans, redevelopment plans and
development agreements.
4.1      ZONING ORDINANCE
The Zoning Ordinance is a tool cities use to implement their General Plans. The Zoning
Ordinance translates the long-term goals and policies of the plan into the guidelines used for
everyday land use decisions. While the General Plan provides long-range and broad land use
designations for the city, zoning provides specific development requirements such as density,
height, size, set backs and development character.
The City’s Zoning Ordinance (Title 21, Glendora Municipal Code) establishes land use zones
that create compatible grouping of similar and interrelated land uses. Each zone classification
has a uniform regulation that applies to properties situated within the identified area. Similar to
the General Plan, the Zoning Ordinance includes a zoning map to define the boundaries of each
zoning district. It is important to remember that zoning is a tool for implementing the City’s
General Plan and, because Glendora is a general law city, Government Code § 65860 requires
that it be consistent with the General Plan.
4.2      SPECIFIC PLANS
As provided in the City’s Zoning Ordinance (Title 21, Glendora’s Municipal Code), an area
specific plan is an instrument for guiding, coordinating and regulating the development of
property within a defined area. It is a special set of development standards, which includes a
supplemental map, applicable to a particular geographical area within the city. Specific plans are
authorized in Article 8, Chapter 3 of the State Planning and Zoning Law. The law grants the
adopted specific plan priority over the City’s Zoning Ordinance, but it must remain consistent
with the General Plan as a tool for implementation of provisions and policies.
Specific plans grant the City authority to consider and create detailed and precise plans prepared
by landowners, developers, and public agencies. It allows the flexibility to create specific zoning
for a particular area such as a downtown or an area with environmental constraints, and results in
unique and imaginative designs. The specific plan establishes a land use pattern, circulation
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    15                                Land Use Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
system, open space and other features, as necessary, to ensure the area is also well integrated into
the community.
As of April 2006, five adopted Specific Plans exist in Glendora. These include the Glendora
Commercial Specific Plan, The Village on the Green Specific Plan, Route 66 Corridor Specific
Plan. Diamond Ridge Specific Plan, and Arboreta Specific Plan. All are illustrated in Exhibit
LU-2, Specific Plans.
Glendora Commercial Specific Plan
The approximately 50-acre plan area is located west of the I-210 Foothill Freeway/Auto Center
Drive interchange and northwest of the convergence of the Foothill and San Bernardino
freeways. The Glendora electorate through the initiative process approved the specific plan in
1998.
The project site is configured in a rectangular shape and bounded by Lone Hill Avenue to the
east, Gladstone Street to the south, the AT & SF railroad tracks/right-of-way to the northeast and
by the Glendora Sports Park and Los Angeles County Flood Control District (LACFCD)
facilities to the north/northwest.
The purpose of the Glendora Commercial Specific Plan is to assist in the development of the site
in a manner that will benefit local shoppers, the general public, and the city of Glendora. The
specific plan encourages efficient land use and ensures compatibility between existing and
proposed land uses. (Refer to Glendora Municipal Code § 21.08.010)
Objectives of the Glendora Commercial specific plan include the following:
        Augment the city’s economic base by providing a variety of tax-generating uses.
        Allow for the development of the site in a manner that will provide a productive
         mix of commercial opportunities.
        Provide guidelines and procedures to govern development and the installation of
         the infrastructure that supports it.
        Ensure the consistent and rational development of the site in accordance with
         established functional and aesthetic standards.
        Establish a well-balanced and carefully planned collection of specialized and
         general retail outlets that can take advantage of the site’s established accessibility.
        Create employment generating opportunities for the citizens of Glendora and
         surrounding communities.
        Expand the retail and service options for local consumers by providing daytime
         and nighttime shopping opportunities in a safe and secure environment.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       16                                Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                LAND USE ELEMENT
       Recognize the location of school and residential uses along the south side of
        Gladstone Street, and provide appropriate project access and design to minimize
        impacts on these uses.
       Implement the Glendora General Plan.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                   17                                Land Use Element
                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             LAND USE ELEMENT
                              See Exhibit LU-2:Specific Plans
Glendora Community Plan 2025              18                Land Use Element
                                                                                                            ANGELES NATIONAL                                                                         ANGELES NATIONAL
                                                                                                                 FOREST                                                                                   FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SPECIFIC PLANS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EXHIBIT LU - 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LEGEND
                                                                                                               Sierra Madre Avenue                                                                                                     SPECIFIC PLANS
                                                                       Citrus Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ARBORETA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DIAMOND RIDGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GLENDORA COMMERCIAL CENTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VILLAGE ON THE GREEN
                                                                                                                                                                               Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ROUTE 66
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                                                          Foothill Boulevard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CITY LIMITS
                                                                                                                  Grand Avenue
                                                                                                                                       Glendora Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                   Route 66
                                                                                          Barranca Avenue
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/SpecificPlans.mxd August 31, 2006 AK JM
                                                                                  AZUSA                                          &
                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                 g
                                                                                                                                                                                                 &
                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                 g
                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                     g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SAN DIMAS
                                                                                                                                                         Gladstone Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                                            East Arrow Highway
                                                                                                                                     COVINA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   1,200    2,400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Feet
                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
The Village on the Green Specific Plan
The Village on the Green specific plan area is located at the northwestern intersection of
Amelia Avenue and Route 66, in the northeast area of the City. The 17.2-acre site was
developed in 2000, and is surrounded by a variety of urban and recreational development
including commercial, industrial, golf course, church, and multi-family residential land
uses.
The Village on the Green Specific Plan envisioned the creation of an amenity- and family-
oriented community providing new mid-range residential housing opportunities in the City
of Glendora. The specific plan provides for a planned residential community of 55 single-
family homes with a variety of residential products and architectural styles. The
development incorporates design concepts that recall the historic Glendora foothill
character, featuring local architectural themes and materials, and the majority of existing
oak and palm trees retained, transplanted, or replaced on-site. Common park and
landscape areas are provided within the site, with heavily planted landscape areas along
Amelia Avenue and Route 66.
The Village on the Green Specific Plan is designed to:
       Establish specific land use and density under the Glendora General Plan planned
        redevelopment designation;
       Provide a comprehensive land use plan that designates the distribution of land uses
        and roadways within the community;
       Provide regulations and standards which allow flexibility for creative site design
        and development, while assuring quality and value;
       Assure a compatible interface with surrounding land uses;
       Provide for preservation of natural features including preservation of the majority
        of existing oak trees and grading which minimizes alteration of existing land
        forms;
       Establish the required infrastructure for development of the proposed residential
        community, including the completion of the area storm drain system and
        eliminating annual flooding of the Glendora Country Club 5th fairway and lake;
        and
       Provide development regulations and procedures to control future improvements
        by individual homeowners.
The objectives of The Village on the Green Specific Plan include the following:
       Buffer residential areas from non-residential land uses.
       Have infill development that is consistent with land use designations.
       Have development that maintains or upgrades the quality of the surrounding area.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    19                              Land Use Element
                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
        Have community-wide maintenance and improvement of private and public property.
        Minimize the impact of traffic on residential neighborhoods.
        Mitigate significant traffic impacts.
        Provide right-of-ways as necessary.
        Costs necessary for circulation system improvements are incurred by development.
        Maintain level of service (LOS) “C” or better on roads and intersections.
        Facilitate aesthetic improvements to, and maintenance of, the transportation corridors.
        Provide park acreage, which meets the standards of the community services department.
        Reduce the impact of development on natural resources.
As previously noted, the specific plan area is fully developed. Route 66 along the southern
boundary of the site is currently improved with pavement and a public walkway, without curb
and gutter, within the existing right-of-way. Amelia Avenue along the eastern boundary of the
site is improved with pavement only within the existing right-of-way. Surrounding uses include
the Glendora Country Club to the north, Los Angeles County Fire Station No. 86 and the
Glendora Greens 60-unit condominium development across Amelia Street to the east. The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints and National Hot Rod Association (NHRA)
properties exist to the west, and commercial development across Alosta Street to the south. The
Wild Rose condominium development exists southeast of the site in the City of San Dimas.
Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan
The Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area is located in the central area of the City. The Route 66
Corridor represents the primary east-west commercial arterial through the City. The plan area
contains approximately 287 acres generally located along Route 66 from Barranca Avenue on
the west to Amelia Avenue on the east (refer to Exhibit LU-3, Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan
Land Use Map).
The Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area incorporates seven land use zoning subdistricts, which
include Barranca Gateway, Grand Avenue Gateway, Town Center Mixed Use, Route 66 Service
Commercial, Central Route 66 Residential, Lone Hill Gateway and Glendora Technology,
Commerce and Office. The following is a general summary of the zoning subdistricts. More
detailed descriptions of the districts can be found in Glendora Municipal Code § 21.10.030.
Sub-Districts
Barranca Gateway. The Barranca Gateway district is intended to serve as the western
gateway into the City.
Grand Avenue Gateway. The Grand Avenue mixed-use gateway district is intended to enhance
Grand Avenue’s function as a primary commercial/retail district within the City.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      20                              Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
Town Center Mixed Use. The town center mixed-use district is intended to provide for a
complimentary mix of land use and development types that are compatible with and reinforce
pedestrian activity and transit utilization.
Route 66 Service Commercial. The Route 66 service commercial district is intended to provide
for a variety of smaller-scale commercial, office and light industrial/manufacturing uses.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    21                               Land Use Element
                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             LAND USE ELEMENT
               See Exhibit LU-3:Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan Land Use Map
Glendora Community Plan 2025               22                              Land Use Element
                                                                                            Sierra Madre Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ROUTE 66 CORRIDOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SPECIFIC PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LAND USE MAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                                                               Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                        Foothill Boulevard                                                                              EXHIBIT LU - 3
                                                                                                Grand Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LAND USE DISTRICTS
                                                                                                                                                                                  Route 66                                    Barranca Gateway                           20.42
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Central Route 66 Residential               19.43
                                                                          Barranca Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Glendora Technology/Commerce/Office        28.36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Grand Avenue Gateway                       36.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lonehill Gateway                           20.73
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Route 66 Service Commercial                61.25
                                                                                                                     Glendora Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Town Center Mixed Use                      97.67
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TOTAL                                     238.89
                                                                                                                                                                                             &
                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                               &
                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                               g
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/LandUseDistricts.mxd August 31, 2006 AK JM
                                                                                                                                                                   &
                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                   g
                                                                                                                                       Gladstone Street                                           SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                 DIMAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                             East Arrow Highway
                                                                                                                   COVINA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        800    1,600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Feet
                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
Route 66 Residential. The Route 66 residential district is intended to contribute to the mix of
housing choices offered to Glendora residents, and provide consistency with the Glendora
General Plan 1998—2003 Housing Element.
Lone Hill Gateway. The Lone Hill gateway district is intended to serve as the eastern gateway of
Glendora’s Route 66 Corridor.
Glendora Technology, Commerce and Office. The Glendora technology, commerce and office
district is intended to serve as a primary employment center within the City.
Primary objectives of the specific plan are to:
        Establish incentives to encourage private investment in the Route 66 Corridor.
        Establish land use districts that create unique character areas within the Route 66
         Corridor.
        Establish land use districts that encourage high quality development responsive to
         market demands and Glendora community objectives.
        Establish land use regulations that support increased pedestrian activity in key
         focus areas.
        Coordinate land use planning with transportation and infrastructure planning.
        Develop incentives to encourage the reuse of underutilized land.
        Provide specific requirements that enhance public amenities for new development,
         rehabilitation, and redevelopment.
        Maximize neighborhood retail development opportunities to capture demand and
         compliment other land uses.
        Allow a mix of residential land uses.
        Allow for mixed-use, residential, and commercial development.
        Allow a mix of land uses to capitalize on the market potential from neighboring
         college and university.
        Encourage office and business park development.
        Ensure improved pedestrian mobility, safety, and comfort.
        Ensure potential transportation impacts of the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan are
         identified and mitigated to the greatest extent feasible.
        Ensure vehicular traffic level of service (LOS) within the Route 66 Corridor
         Specific Plan area does not exceed adopted citywide standards.
        Establish a correlation between compact, mixed-use development in high activity
         locations and access to existing and planned transportation modes.
        Introduce traffic calming techniques to improve pedestrian-orientation, aesthetics,
         and safety.
        Ensure infrastructure capacity within the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan area
         meets future demands.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       23                               Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
       Establish methods and strategies for the conservation of resources, including water
        use and drought tolerant landscaping.
       Establish a “sense of place” through quality site design, architectural design and
        public improvements and in the context of the historic character of Glendora.
       Establish a streetscape program using signage, street furniture, entry statements,
        and other visual amenities that conveys the traditional character of Glendora,
        withstands the test of time, is cost-effective, and achieves a stronger community
        image and identity.
       Create gateway design treatments that establish entry statements at key high
        activity locations.
       Adopt design guidelines that are applicable to new development, rehabilitation, and
        redevelopment.
       Establish a tier-review process for discretionary development application review to
        streamline the approval process.
       Utilize Environmental Impact Report as the primary tiering clearance document to
        streamline additional project-level environmental reviews.
       Incorporate incentive-based standards, such as fee assistance for plan check and
        density/intensity bonuses for the provision of specified amenities, mixed use
        development, or high quality residential design.
       Integrate design guidelines within the design review process to streamline
        discretionary review.
The Route 66 Corridor specific plan provides a comprehensive set of plans, guidelines and
regulatory standards in addition to administrative and implementation programs designed to
provide high-quality development within the land use districts, including residential,
commercial, office, and light industrial/manufacturing uses.
Existing development within the plan area consists of residential, commercial, and light
industrial uses. Uses along the Route 66 Corridor are typically characterized by small businesses
serving the local community. Due to its access to the I-210 Freeway, larger retail businesses are
located along Grand Avenue. Development of the Route 66 Corridor at the intersections of
Barranca Avenue, Glendora Avenue, and Lone Hill Avenue is generally limited to neighborhood
commercial retail development.
Diamond Ridge Specific Plan
The Diamond Ridge Specific Plan project area is located in the southeastern portion of the City.
The approximately 29-acre site is bounded by Gladstone Street to the south, Valley Center
Avenue to the west, the Louie Pompei Memorial Sports Park to the north, and the Glendora
Marketplace to the east.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     24                              Land Use Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
The specific plan will guide and regulate all future development within the site and supporting
improvements to include:
       Identification and distribution of land uses
       Preliminary siting and configurations of primary Specific Plan components;
       Location and design of supporting infrastructure
       Establishment of Development Standards; and
       Administration and processing of the Specific Plan.
The objectives of the Specific Plan are to:
       Augment the City’s economic base by providing a variety of tax generating uses;
       Allow for the development of site in a manner which will provide a productive use of
        commercial opportunities;
       Provide guidelines and procedures to govern development and the installation of
        infrastructure that supports it;
       Ensure the consistent and rational development of the site in accordance with established
        and functional and aesthetic standards;
       Establish a well-balanced and carefully planned collection of specialized and general
        retail outlets which can take advantage of the site’s established accessibility;
       Create employment generating opportunities for the citizens of Glendora and surrounding
        communities;
       Expand the retail and service options for local consumers by providing daytime and
        nighttime shopping opportunities in a safe and secure environment;
       Recognize the location of school and residential uses along the south side of Gladstone
        Street and provide appropriate project access and design to minimize impacts on these
        uses;
       Provide efficient access to the project site in a manner that reduces impacts to
        surrounding residential neighborhoods; and
       Implement the Glendora General Plan.
The Specific Plan provides for up to 360,000 square feet of retail/commercial/service uses. The
development concept for the Specific Plan envisions complimentary retail and services uses,
including a 3,000-seat movie theater, a fitness club, restaurants, and other various retail/service
uses, along with a three-story parking structure.
Arboreta Specific Plan
The Arboreta Specific Plan project area is located in the western portion of the City, on property
currently occupied by Rain Bird Corporation. The project site occupies approximately 27.6
acres, and is located between Grand and Barranca Avenues, and between Bennett Avenue and
the Atchison-Topeka & Santa Fe (AT&SF) railroad on the north and south, respectively.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     25                                 Land Use Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
The Specific Plan proposed infill development with a mix of single-family detached and attached
homes. The Specific Plan provides for 80 single-family detached residential units, 75 triplex-
style units, a 1.4-acre passive park, and 5.8 acres to be dedicated to the City for a sports park.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     26                                 Land Use Element
                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                LAND USE ELEMENT
The objectives for the Specific Plan are to:
       Implement the applicable General Plan policies.
       Transform the existing manufacturing/R&D sues into an aesthetic living environment.
       Provide for single-family detached and attached housing opportunities responsive to local
        and regional needs.
       Establish zoning standards and implementation mechanisms applicable solely to the
        proposed project.
       Provide a mix of housing types and open space amenities.
4.3     REDEVELOPMENT PLANS
The State Legislature under the Community Redevelopment Law (CRL) of the State of
California allows the adoption of a redevelopment plan by a City. Redevelopment plans are
intended to revitalize and rehabilitate blighted areas. Redevelopment plans are required to be
consistent with the City’s general plan and are one of the more powerful tools cities have to
implement the goals and policies set forth in the general plan.
Four redevelopment projects currently exist within Glendora (refer to Exhibit LU-4,
Redevelopment Project Areas). These projects date back to 1974 and have been amended over
the course of time, as needed. These areas serve as a separate tool than zoning and are not to be
confused with the zoning classification of planned redevelopment zone (PR) (Municipal Code §
21.06.020). The redevelopment projects encompass approximately 1,300 acres of industrial,
commercial and residential land use issues. Redevelopments made after January 1, 1976 are
applicable to housing production provisions of CRL § 33413.
Redevelopment Plan Objectives
The City of Glendora Redevelop Agency uses the process of redevelopment to eliminate and
mitigate visual, economic, physical, social and environmental blight within the City. Specific
objectives were established by the Redevelopment Agency in 1974 and have since been
continued through Implementation Plans as projects and activities are on-going and do not
undertake sudden change or direction.
Redevelopment Project No. 1 Area
Originally adopted in 1974, this area has been amended two times, July 1976 and February 1979.
The area, located in the southeast section of the City and portion of the Foothill Freeway (I-210),
is generally in an east/west direction, along I-210 and northerly at Amelia Avenue to the
intersection of Route 66 and Amelia Avenue. The project area encompasses 997 acres, including
the 1976 Amendment of 520 acres.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     27                               Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                LAND USE ELEMENT
                          See Exhibit LU-4:Redevelopment Project Areas
Glendora Community Plan 2025                  28                     Land Use Element
                                                                                              Sierra Madre Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            REDEVELOPMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PROJECT AREAS
                                                                                                                                                               Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                        Foothill Boulevard                                                                      EXHIBIT LU - 4
                                                                                                 Grand Avenue                                                                                     Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      REDEVELOPMENT AREAS IN GLENDORA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Project Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City Limit
                                                                                                                                                                                Route 66
                                                                            Barranca Avenue                          Glendora Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                           &
                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                           g
                                                                                                                &
                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                g
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/RedevelopmentAreas.mxd August 31, 2006 AK JM
                                                                                                                                                                   &
                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                   g
                                                                                                                                       Gladstone Street                                         SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                               DIMAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                             East Arrow Highway
                                                                                                                    COVINA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0   800    1,600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Feet
                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                LAND USE ELEMENT
The July 1976 Amendment added territory to the area and is therefore applicable to the housing
provisions. The 1979 Amendment made a technical change and did not add additional territory.
Initially, the redevelopment area plan was set to expire December 26, 2009. However, it was
determined that the blighted conditions granted a five-year extension through the “Napolitano”
Ordinance No. 1705 pursuant to CRL § 33333.6(f)(2).
The City of Glendora’s primary purpose in establishing this area was to combat the significant
amount of physical, economic, and social blight present within the Project and Amendment Area.
The focus of the plan is to eliminate blighting influences that include incompatible uneconomic
land uses, nuisances and vandalism that occurs on vacant and unlighted areas of property, to
remedy incompatibility stagnant and unproductive land conditions; to provide adequate streets,
drainage facilities and public utilities; and to establish and enforce criteria for building design,
land use and traffic patterns.
Redevelopment Project No. 2 Area
Originally adopted in 1976, Redevelopment Project No. 2 is located in the central section of the
City, near the intersection of Grand Avenue and Foothill Boulevard, and includes Glendora’s
central business district (CBD). Redevelopment Project No. 2 encompasses 35 acres and has had
three technical Amendments over the course of three decades: 1979, 1986 and 1992.
Initially the project was scheduled to expire on November 9, 2011. However, due to the
persistence of blighted conditions, and the need for additional revenues to remedy the situation,
the project was extended an additional five years under the same authority as Redevelopment
Project No. 1.
The primary purpose for Redevelopment Project No. 2 was to remedy the non-productivity of
vacant commercial uses within the Project Area, particularly within the CBD, with the lack of
certain public infrastructure and conditions. In addition, the purpose was to remedy the non-
conforming uses that have resulted in an inadequate, stagnant, and under-productive CBD, which
has prohibited the area from functioning at its potential. Additionally, the Dalton Wash, which
bisects the project area, creates unmanageable and economically non-viable parcels in need of
special attention.
Redevelopment Project No. 3 Area
Originally adopted in November of 1976, this project area encompasses approximately 304
acres. The project area is located along Route 66 and almost passes through the entire City of
Glendora in an east/west direction. It is generally bounded on the eastern two-thirds by the
Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe (AT&SF) railroad, on the west by Barranca Avenue, on the south
by the commercial area of Route 66, and on the east by Lone Hill Avenue.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     29                                Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
The three Amendments (1979, 1984 and 1991) were all of a technical nature and therefore did
not increase the project territory. Originally drafted to expire November 9, 2011, the recognition
of the persistence of blighting conditions validated additional revenues and a five-year extension
pursuant to the “Napolitano” Ordinance No. 1706.
The primary reasons for site selection as a redevelopment area included economic dislocation,
structural deterioration and general disuse due to poor planning that has resulted in a serious
physical, social and economical burden on the community.
Redevelopment Project No. 4 Area
Originally adopted in November 1982, Redevelopment Project No. 4 is the most recent for the
City of Glendora and has no Amendments to date. The project area encompasses 3.1 acres in a
central section of the City on Whitcomb Avenue, between Wabash and Minnesota Avenues.
Project No. 4 was initially drafted to expire on November 29, 2012; however, the expiration was
extended by ten years pursuant to “Napolitano” Ordinance No. 1706.
Structures located within the publicly owned project site were in a state of disrepair due to
deferred maintenance and lack of use. This state caused the area to become a site for vandalism
and abuse and an economic burden on the community necessitating rehabilitation.
Redevelopment Project No. 5 and Merged Project Areas
In July 2006, the Redevelopment Agency created Redevelopment Project Area No. 5.
Boundaries of the Project Area encompass approximately 133.8 acres in seven sub-areas
throughout the City. Each of the sub-areas abuts one of the existing Project Areas. The Agency
also merged three existing Project Areas (No. 1 through No. 3 ) and Project Area No. 5 into one
Project Area. It also established the authority to acquire non-residential real property through
eminent domain in all four areas. The merger included merging the limits on the total tax
increment that may be collected from each existing Project Area, and by doing so the total tax
increment that may be collected in the Merged Project Area will be $349.9 million.
(Editor’s Note – Project Area No. 5 is in litigation – please contact the Redevelopment Agency
for additional information)
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     30                              Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
4.4     DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Development agreements are authorized by State law to enable a city to enter into a binding
contract with a developer in order to define for the city the type, character, and quality of
development and guarantee the developer that the necessary development permits will be issued
regardless of changes in regulations that may occur in the future.
This ensures that a developer of a multi-phased project who has based project financing on
conditions negotiated with the City at a particular time would not be adversely affected by
subsequent change in regulations that might otherwise effect the project. This, in turn, enables
the City to obtain additional contributions and benefits from the developer.
Glendora has currently entered into one development agreement for the Arboreta Specific Plan in
2005. This agreement acts as an implementation tool for the adopted specific plan, providing the
developer-vested rights to proceed with the land use plan and development standards for the
project area.
4.5     PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
The City of Glendora places an emphasis on the adequate maintenance of property in order to
maintain basic community standards. The code enforcement program focuses on property
maintenance and the mitigation of public nuisances, but also incorporates other city programs
that encourage residential and commercial improvement and rehabilitation. The City’s codes
and ordinances implement community policies, which are expressions of community values and
serve to insure public health, safety and welfare.
4.6     CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM
The capital improvements program is a multi-year schedule of public physical improvements that
include streets, water and sewer lines, public buildings, and park and recreation facilities. The
scheduling is based on studies of fiscal resources available and the improvements needed over a
five-year time period. An effective program can ensure that plans for community facilities are
carried out; allow improvement proposals to be tested against policies; better schedule
improvements that require more than one year to construct; provide an opportunity to purchase
land before costs increase; and improve the integrated scheduling of related projects. Because
most capital improvements involve the outlay of substantial funds, the City is usually unable to
pay for such facilities through appropriations in the annual operating budget. Therefore, a
variety of financing methods prescribed by State law are used to pay for capital improvements
over a longer period of time than a single year. Most of the techniques involve financial
instruments, such as bonds, in which the City borrows money from investors, both institutional
and individual, and pays the principal and interest over a number of years. The use of these
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    31                             Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
instruments depends on such factors as bond ratings, interest rates, and outstanding debt
obligation.
In addition to the Citywide Capital Improvements Program (CIP), a separate CIP has been
developed for the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan. With respect to water system related
improvements, they are made possible by a voter-approved bond measure.
4.7     HILLSIDE STRATEGY
In 2001, the Glendora City Council accepted applications and appointed members for an “Ad
Hoc Committee to Preserve the Foothills” in order to proactively address development issues in
Glendora regarding the San Gabriel Mountains and South Hills. The purpose of the Committee
is to inform the City Council of community concerns and assist in the submittal of a report that
addresses management and recommendations of the foothills area. The Recommended Hillside
Strategy is the final document in the Hillside Study process and predicted adoption of the
strategy will result in modification of existing Community Plan implementation tools that are
cognoscente of hillside constraints and encourage development that minimized impacts on the
natural environment and maintains public health and safety.
Hillside Study Area
The foothills consist of approximately 6,520 acres and are located in the northern part of the
City, at the base of the San Gabriel Mountains. The South Hills are located north of and adjacent
to the Foothill Freeway (I-210) and contain approximately 580 acres (refer to Exhibit LU-5,
Hillside Study Area/Ownership Map).
The study offers recommendations for City actions, which include, policy revisions,
modifications of zoning regulations, and new design guidelines to be considered in order to more
effectively manage the identified hillside issues. The four basic components include the
following items.
       Preservation component in which a goal is to acquire land for permanent open space
        preservation, to be managed by the City, the Glendora Community Conservancy, and/or
        other appropriate land conservancy. Another goal of the preservation component is to
        protect private land as permanent open space with the cooperation of the property owner.
       Reasonable limitations on hillside development density and character in order to protect
        sensitive environmental features; ensure public safety; address infrastructure, utility, and
        public service needs; and safeguard the City’s visual resources. The development polices
        and recommendations are intended to steer development towards the lower hillside slopes
        by decreasing the allowable densities as slopes increase, and by avoiding ridgelines,
        canyons, streams, channels, and habitat corridors. Policies were developed for:
Glendora Community Plan 2025                   32                                Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                               LAND USE ELEMENT
                      See Exhibit LU-5:Hillside Study Area/Ownership Map
Glendora Community Plan 2025                   33                      Land Use Element
                                                                                           ANGELES NATIONAL                                                                                               ANGELES NATIONAL
                                                                                                FOREST                                                                                                         FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HILLSIDE STUDY AREA /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OWNERSHIP MAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EXHIBIT LU - 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Unincorporated Land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ownership
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Angeles National Forest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Including Private Landholdings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          within the Forest)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Owned Property
                                                                           Citrus Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Developed Lots
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Glendora Conservancy - Private Partnership
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Glendora Coservancy - Owned Property
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LA County Flood Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Recently Recorded Subdivisions with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          On-Going Development
                                                                                                                                                                          Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                                     Foothill Boulevard                                                                   Undeveloped Private Lots
                                                                                                               Grand Avenue                                                                                  Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Limit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hillside Study Area
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/HillsideStudyArea.mxd August 31, 2006 AK JM
                                                                                                                                                                                           Route 66
                                                                                             Barranca Avenue                      Glendora Avenue
                                                                                 AZUSA                                        &
                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                              g
                                                                                                                                                                                                      &
                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                      g                             Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LSA Hillside Study Map 10/28/02
                                                                                                                                                                              &
                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                              g
                                                                                                                                                    Gladstone Street                                       SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          DIMAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0   800 1,600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Feet
                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
            o   Slope Criteria
            o   Maximum Potential Density Limits
            o   Comparison of Recommended Density to Existing Density
            o   Other Constraints on Density
            o   Clustered Development
            o   Location of Permitted Development
            o   Lot Coverage and Other Provisions
            o   New City Roadway Standards for Hillsides
       Design guidelines for new development in order to minimize or eliminate impacts on
        Glendora’s hillsides, proposed guidelines include:
            o   Site Design and Grading
            o   Protection of Flora and Fauna
            o   Access
            o   Architecture
            o   Landscaping
            o   Walls, Fences and Lighting
            o   Infrastructure and Utilities
       A component that includes recommendations to revise existing City documents, which
        include the Open Space Designation, Hillside Study Area General Plan and Zoning
        Residential Designation and Tree Preservation Ordinance, in order to provide better
        organization and prevent ambiguity.
5.0 DESCRIPTION OF THE LAND USE PLAN
5.1     DEVELOPMENT OF THE 2025 COMMUNITY PLAN
The limited amount of vacant land, low allowable density levels of existing vacant land,
geographic constraints, and the pressure for new development on the remaining vacant and
underutilized parcels in the City has created a need to revisit the uses established in the 1992
General Plan, which was prepared over a decade ago. Properties that are considered
underutilized include low intensity commercial and industrial uses that have been under pressure
for change from market forces, as well as the City’s own desire to seek quality infill
development. High residential land values in the community have also resulted in growth
pressures on remaining undeveloped hillside property, which has necessitated the need to pay
special attention to planning in the foothills.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     34                             Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                               LAND USE ELEMENT
Given that the City is over 99 percent developed, this Community Plan Update focused on
several key areas in the City, which have been identified as Focus Areas. In total, nine focus
areas were identified with four of those areas in the foothills (refer to Exhibit LU-6, Focus
Areas).
Glendora Community Plan 2025                 35                              Land Use Element
                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             LAND USE ELEMENT
                              See Exhibit LU-6:Focus Areas
Glendora Community Plan 2025               36            Land Use Element
                                                                                                                  ANGELES NATIONAL                                                                                          ANGELES NATIONAL
                                                                                                                       FOREST                                                                                                    FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FOCUS AREAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EXHIBIT LU - 6
                                                                                        I                                                                                                                                   F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A    Focus Areas
                                                                                                                     Sierra Madre Avenue                                                                                                          G
                                                                    Citrus Avenue
                                                                                            A                                                                                                                                                                            CITY LIMITS
                                                                                    A
                                                                                                                                                                                               Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                  D                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                     C                       C                            Foothill Boulevard
                                                                                                                          Grand Avenue
                                                                                                                                                   Glendora Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Route 66
                                                                                                Barranca Avenue
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/FocusAreas.mxd August 31, 2006 AK JM
                                                                               AZUSA                                                     &
                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        g
                                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                     g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SAN DIMAS
                                                                                                                                                                         Gladstone Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                                                            East Arrow Highway
                                                                                                                                                 COVINA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0   1,200   2,400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Feet
                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
In developing the preferred land use plan, a number of alternatives were developed for each
focus area based upon the site’s opportunities and constraints, and input received from the
community at workshops in 2003 and 2004. Background information detailing the location of
the focus areas, acreage, existing general plan and zoning designations, surrounding land uses,
site opportunities and constraints, and preliminary alternative concepts is provided in Technical
Appendix x.
The nine focus areas are:
       Area A (Monrovia Nursery Site)
       Area B (Rain Bird Site)
       Area C (Foothill Boulevard/Grand Avenue)
       Area D (Downtown Village)
       Area E (Kaiser Property)
       Area F (Ferguson Property)
       Area G (Gordon Property)
       Area H (NJD Property)
       Area I (Northern Foothill Properties)
During the preparation of the Community Plan Update, two significant remaining undeveloped
or underutilized properties were entitled: Focus Area B – Rain Bird Property and Focus Area E
– Kaiser Property.
5.2     OVERVIEW OF THE LAND USE PLAN
The graphic depiction of the City of Glendora official policy relative to land use is presented on
Exhibit LU-7, General Plan Land Use Map. This diagram illustrates the general pattern and
relationship of the various land uses in Glendora in 2025.
An acreage calculation of the land use policy is presented in Table LU-3, General Plan Land Use
in 2025. The acreages of the various land uses on the General Plan Land Use Map are presented,
along with number of dwelling units and the amount of non-residential square footage.
The approximate population density for each land use designation is determined by multiplying
the average household size. According to the 2000 Census, the City’s person per household
number was 2.88. In 2006, the California Department of Finance estimated the City’s persons
per household number to 3.014, which has slightly increased over the 2005 estimate of 3.011.
Utilizing the 2006 California Department of Finance estimate of 3.014, in 2025, the City of
Glendora population estimate would range from 37,826 persons (based upon 12,550 dwelling
units) to 72,770 persons (based upon 24,144 dwelling units).
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    37                                 Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
Potential dwelling unit and population growth is significantly affected by zoning policies in the
implementation of Community Plan 2025. A review of historical development trends indicates
that buildout potential is significantly lower than the figures used for the sake of determining the
maximum dwelling unit analysis described above. The state estimates the City’s population at
52,199 as of January 1, 2006. The number of corresponding dwelling units estimated to support
the state’s estimated population for Glendora is 17,336 dwelling units which is well below the
number of maximum units under the analysis.
Development of vacant and underutilized parcels will continue to increase the number of
dwelling units within the City. In 1990 the Federal Census indicated a population for Glendora of
47,828. The 2000 Federal Census indicated a population of 49, 415 persons. Between 1990 and
2006, population has grown an average of one-half of one percent per year which is equivalent to
90 units per year. This growth was likely to come primarily from underutilized parcels since no
significant new projects were undertaken. At this rate, the City should reach its “zoning
capacity” for new dwelling units in over 30 years.
Recent redevelopment activity along Route 66 and other projects under development pressure
such as Focus Area A (Monrovia Nursery) and Focus Area B (the Rainbird Project), will result
in a spike of new dwelling units being constructed in the planning area for a short period of time.
However, infill projects taking place on individual underutilized properties are expected to be the
norm under Community Plan 2025.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      38                                Land Use Element

                        GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                Table LU-3: General Plan Land Use in 2025
      Land Use Designation              Acres    Percentage   Potential   Potential    Potential
                                                    of City   DU -          DU -          SF
                                                    Total1    Minimum     Maximum
CITY LIMITS
Residential
Hillside Very Low Residential           1,907.01        15.21        191       1907
Low Density Residential                 1,090.56         8.70      1,200      3,272
Low/Medium Density                      1,874.28        14.95      5,810     11,246
Residential
Medium Density Residential                109.21         0.87        666      1,201
Medium/High Density                       134.44         1.07      1,492      2,017
Residential
High Density Residential                  125.19         1.00      1,890      3,130
                   Total Residential    5,240.69        41.79    11,249      22,772
Mixed Use
Village Mixed Use                          38.50         0.31         72        144      209,633
                   Total Mixed Use         38.50         0.31         72        144      209,633
Commercial
General Commercial                         97.14         0.77                          1,480,996
Regional Commercial                       114.56         0.92                          1,746,582
                 Total Commercial         211.70         1.69                          3,227,578
Industrial
Light Industrial                           30.14         0.24                            459,514
General Industrial                         39.55         0.32                            602,979
                     Total Industrial      69.69         0.56                          1,062,493
Other
Civic/Institutional                       346.82         2.77
Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan           286.93         2.28      1,228      1,228    4,432,309
Utility and Flood Control ROW             267.39         2.13
Street and Freeway ROW                  1,382.24        11.02
Railroad ROW                               51.59         0.41
                          Total Other   2,334.97        18.61
Open Space
Conservation Open Space                 4,304.86        34.33
Open Space                                339.38         2.71
                  Total Open Space      4,644.24        37.04
               Total – City Limits     12,507.47       100.00    12,550      24,144    8,932,013
SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
Unincorporated Los Angeles Co.            260.47
     Total – Sphere of Influence          260.47
   TOTAL – CITY & SPHERE               12,800.26
                 OF INFLUENCE
1. Excludes Sphere of Influence Area
DU = Dwelling Unit; SF = Square Feet
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      39                              Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
5.3     IMPLICATIONS OF THE LAND USE PLAN
As previously noted, approximately 99 percent of the developable land in the City is developed.
Thus, future development in the City is anticipated to occur in the Focus Areas, as well as within
the Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan. This future growth in both dwelling units and square feet is
shown on Table LU-4, General Plan Growth Over 2006 Existing Conditions.
                                            Table LU-4
                     General Plan Growth Over 2006 Existing Conditions
                     Land Use Designation             Dwelling       Square Feet
                                                        Units
              CITY LIMITS
              Residential
              Hillside Very Low Residential                1,186
              Low Density Residential                         344          -121,263
              Low/Medium Density Residential                  160
              Medium Density Residential                      184           -58,303
              Medium/High Density Residential                 133
              High Density Residential                        165
              Mixed Use
              Village Mixed Use                               240            20,058
              Commercial
              General Commercial                                             12,197
              Regional Commercial                                           347,700
              Industrial
              Light Industrial                                               20.277
              General Industrial
              Other
              Civic/Institutional                                            94,125
              Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan                 537         1,876,552
              Utility and Flood Control ROW
              Street and Freeway ROW
              Railroad ROW
                                           TOTAL          +2,949         +2,191,343
Glendora Community Plan 2025                   40                               Land Use Element
                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
5.4     DESCRIPTION OF THE LAND USE PLAN
Land use designations describe the type and intensity of development allowed in a given area.
While terms like “residential,” “commercial” or “industrial” are generally understood, State
General Plan law requires a clear and concise description of the land use categories that are
depicted on Exhibit LU-7, General Plan Land Use Map, at the end of this element.
Additions and modifications have been made to the City’s 2010 General Plan land use
designations, as determined appropriate to achieve current and applicable goals and policies.
This Land Use Element and General Plan Land Use Map contain the following 16 land use
designations:
       Hillside Very Low Residential
       Low Density Residential
       Low/Medium Density Residential
       Medium Density Residential
       Medium/High Density Residential
       High Density Residential
       Village Mixed Use
       General Commercial
       Regional Commercial
       Light Industrial
       General Industrial
       Civic/Institutional
       Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan
       Utility and Flood Control Rights-of-Way
       Conservation Open Space
       Open Space
5.4.1 General Plan Land Use Map
The General Plan Land Use Map should be used as general guide for the identification of the
location of various land uses in the City and in combination with the written goals and policies in
the element. The General Plan Land Use Map (Exhibit LU-7) indicates the location of the land
use designations within the City. Copies of the General Plan Land Use Map may be obtained
from the City’s Planning and Redevelopment Department.
5.4.2 Land Use Intensity/Density
State general plan law requires the Land Use Element to indicate the maximum building
intensities/densities allowed in the City. Sixteen land use designations exist within the Land Use
Element and each contains different allowable uses, intensity/density standards and description
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     41                               Land Use Element

                       GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                    LAND USE ELEMENT
for the corresponding areas (refer to Table LU-5, Land Use Designations and Density/Intensity
Standards).
                                                 Table LU-5
                       Land Use Designations and Density/Intensity Standards
                                              Residential             Residential
                 Land                           Density                 Density                 Floor
                  Use                          (DU/AC)                 (DU/AC)                  Area
             Designation                      Minimum                 Maximum                  Ratio
CITY LIMITS
Residential
Hillside Very Low Residential                               0.1                        1
Low Density Residential                                     1.1                        3
Low/Medium Density Residential                              3.1                        6
Medium Density Residential                                  6.1                       11
Medium/High Density Residential                            11.1                       15
High Density Residential                                   15.1                      25*
Mixed Use
Village Mixed Use                                            15                       30         Up to 1.00
Commercial
General Commercial                                                                               Up to 0.50
Regional Commercial                                                                              Up to 0.50
Industrial
Light Industrial                                                                                 Up to 0.35
General Industrial                                                                               Up to 0.35
Other
Civic/Institutional
Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan             See Specific Plan        See Specific Plan     See Specific Plan
Utility and Flood Control ROW
Street and Freeway ROW
Railroad ROW
Open Space
Conservation Open Space
Open Space
DU = Dwelling Units
*In the Grand-Foothill Multi-Family Residential Overlay Zone the residential density maximum may reach up to 30
dwelling units per acre.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                          42                                    Land Use Element
                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
The term “intensity” refers to the degree of development based on building characteristics such
as height, bulk, floor area ratio, and percent of lot coverage. Intensity is primarily used to
describe non-residential development levels.
In a land use context, the term “density” is a measure of the desired population or residential
development capacity of the land. Residential density is described in terms of number of
dwelling units per gross acre of land (DU/AC). A dwelling unit is a building or a portion of a
building used for human habitation and may vary considerably in size measured by square
footage (SF) from small apartments at 400-500 square feet to large single-family homes
exceeding 5,000 SF. For purposes of calculating population, and average number of persons per
acre or dwelling unit for all types and sizes of dwelling units is assumed.
5.4.3 Land Use Designations
Land use designations for the 2025 Glendora Community Plan have been modified from the
previous General Plan to represent current issues and goals for the City. Designations consist of
16 categories within the uses of residential, mixed use, commercial, industrial, other and open
space. Designations are described in detail below.
Residential
Residential development makes up 5,240.69 acres of land in the city, which represents about
41.79 percent of the total land (refer to Table LU-3). Residential is concentrated throughout the
City becoming less dense as one moves away from the City center. Residential areas provide
access to schools, parks and other community services while it provides a variety of housing
types for City residents and families.
Hillside Very Low Density Residential. The Hillside Density Residential Designation is
intended for hillside areas that provide a transition between the steeper hillside areas and the
relatively flat areas at the base of the hillsides. This designation allows for the development of
single-family residential development on lots of at least one acre in size. The preservation of
natural hillside features is strongly encouraged within this land use designation. Residential
development within this designation should consider drainage, minimum slope modification,
view preservation and other environmental factors.
Zoning districts compatible with the Hillside Density Residential designation include RHR and
Estate zoning designations with at least 80,000 square feet up to 200,000 square feet.
Low Density Residential. Low Density Residential Designation is intended for the transitional
areas between hillside areas and higher density single-family residential areas. Low Density
Residential allows for the development of single family residential on lots ranging from 10,500
to 30,000 square feet. Non-residential uses that complement and serve the surrounding
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      43                              Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
residential neighborhood typically include schools, parks, churches, libraries and public
facilities.
Zoning districts compatible with the Low Density Residential designation include E-5, E-6, and
E-7.
Low/Medium Density Residential. Low/Medium Density is the most intensive designation for
single-family residences and encompasses the majority of the non-hillside areas. This
designation allows for the development of the smallest detached single-family residential lots.
Typical lots range in size from 7,500 to 8,500 square feet in size.
Zoning district compatible with the Low/Medium Density Residential designation include R-1
and E-3.
Medium Density Residential. Medium Density Residential Designation allows for multiple and
single family attached housing and is a transitional between the detached single-family areas and
the higher density multiple family areas. This designation is found along major and secondary
arterials, near more intensive land uses, and in other areas suitable for medium density housing.
Medium Density allows for a variety of housing types including small-lot single family,
apartments, duplexes, condominiums and townhouses.
Zoning district compatible with the Medium Density Residential designation include GA and
LGA.
Medium/High Density Residential. Medium/High Density allows for multiple and single
family attached housing and is transitional between the lower density attached housing areas and
the higher density multiple family areas. This designation is found along major and secondary
arterials, near more intensive land uses, and in other areas suitable for medium/high density
housing. Medium/High Density allows for a variety of housing types including apartments,
duplexes, townhouses and patio homes.
Zoning district compatible with the Medium/High Density Residential designation include R-2.
High Density Residential. High Density is the most intensive residential land use designation.
This designation is found along major and secondary arterials and is transition between the other
residential land uses and the more intensive non-residential land uses. Develop at this density
requires consideration of internal and external circulation, the relationship of buildings and units
to each other, and the provision of common open space and private outdoor living areas.
Zoning district compatible with the High Density Residential designation include R-3.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    44                                 Land Use Element
                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
Mixed Use
Village Mixed Use. The Village Mixed Use Designation is intended to preserve and enhance the
unique character of the Village area and to encourage a mix of complimentary development.
Encouraged development includes professional offices, public/quasi-public facilities, retail
businesses, small-lot single family and multiple family residential developments. The
development of well-designed mixed use development is strongly encouraged.
To encourage the development of a high quality downtown environment that respects and
contributes to the historic downtown character of the area, development must emphasize
vehicular access and parking, pedestrian circulation and amenities, and high quality design.
Zoning district compatible with the Village Mixed Use designation include Village Mixed Use.
Commercial
General Commercial. The General Commercial designation is intended for general commercial
uses. These include retail businesses, professional offices, automotive services, and other similar
businesses. Development may take the form of single or multi-tenant establishments, including
shopping centers. Development in this designation must address proper site design including
access, parking, landscaping, architectural design and signage.
Zoning district compatible with the Mixed Use designation include C-1, C-2, and C-3.
Regional Commercial. The Regional Commercial designation is intended to encourage the
development of regionally-serving commercial development. This designation is intended to
capture the a regional market share of commercial and retail demand through the establishment
of larger-scale retail uses provide direct access and visibility from major transportation routes.
The intended uses within this designation include major department stores, specialty retail
outlets, restaurants, offices, automobile dealerships, hotel and other complementary uses.
Developments in this designation generate a high volume of traffic because of the regional draw
and therefore, Regional Commercial designated area are located near the freeways and oriented
away from residential uses. Buildings can be a mix of one- to two - story structures with parking
structures to accommodate the needs of the businesses.
Zoning district compatible with the Regional Commercial designation include only the Specific
Plan zoning designation.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     45                              Land Use Element
                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
Industrial
Light Industrial. The Light Industrial designation is intended to encourage general industrial
uses which are compatible with surrounding land uses and which would not degrade the
character of adjacent neighborhoods. This designation is intended to serve business parks,
research, and development, technology centers, corporate and office uses, “clean” industry and
support retail uses, auto truck and equipment sales, warehousing and distribution. High quality
site and architectural design is strongly encouraged within this designation.
Zoning districts compatible with the Light Industrial designation include M-1A.
General Industrial. The General Industrial designation is intended for more intensive industrial
uses, such as manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, processing, trucking, warehousing and
distribution, equipment, and servicing. Uses include industrial research, assembly, and testing of
electronics, instruments, and office and related machinery, wholesaling, warehousing,
administrative offices, and regional or home offices of industry.
Zoning districts compatible with the Light Industrial designation include M-1.
Other
Civic/Institutional. The Civic/Institutional designation includes educational uses, such as
primary and high schools, colleges, universities hospitals, and governmental facilities. These
uses often become focal points for the community and in doing so, are maintained and necessary
to support not only the education of the children and adults, but also the cohesiveness and
integrity of the surrounding neighborhoods.
Zoning districts compatible with the Civic/Institutional designation include and single-family
residential designation.
Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan. The Route 66 Corridor Specific Plan designation allows for
the implementation of a complimentary mix of land uses, consistent with the policies and
regulations contained within the Specific Plan that governs land uses within a particular area.
The Specific Plan land use designation provides for tailored development standards, design
guidelines and other policy and regulatory elements that guide future land use and improvements
(refer to Glendora Municipal Code § 21.10).
Utility and Flood Control Rights-of-Way. The Utility and Flood Control designation is
intended to designate those areas in the City that are developed for utility and flood control use.
Power line rights-of-way and flood control channels are included in this designation. Because of
these types of uses, other development is limited to recreational or open space uses with the
approval of the agency owning the property and the City.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    46                                Land Use Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
Open Space
Conservation Open Space. The Conservation Open Space designation includes areas that are
publicly owned, undeveloped and will remain in a natural state. This designation is intended to
protect areas with high scenic value, environmental and habitat sensitivity and passive
recreational facilities. A large portion of this designation exists in the Angeles National Forest
within the foothills.
It is intended that future improvements or development activities in these areas would be limited
to those activities that support the preservation of passive recreational activities, such as soft
trails and other facilities that support passive recreational uses.
Zoning districts compatible with the Parks and Open Space designation include OS-N (Open
Space – Natural), and E-7 over 200,00 square feet.
Open Space. The Open Space designation includes public and privately owned open space
areas such as parks, golf courses, and cemeteries. The Open Space designation generally
contains active and passive recreational facilities available for public use. Open space areas
provide amenities in the community for individual and group activities and promote the overall
health and welfare of citizens. Uses appropriate within this designation include traditional parks,
community gardening, agriculture and golf courses.
Zoning districts compatible with the Parks and Open Space designation include OS-N (Open
Space – Natural), and E-7 over 200,00 square feet.
5.4.4 General Plan/Zoning Relationship
The relationship between the General Plan land use designations and zoning districts is shown in
Table LU-6, Relationship of General Plan Land Use Designations with Zoning. This table
indicates how properties should be zoned to be consistent with the General Plan Land Use Map.
As presented in the table, there are 16 General Plan land use designations and 30 zoning
categories. Following the Community Plan Update, the City will undertake an update of the
Zoning Code.
Overlay Zones
The City has from time to time chosen to adopt overlay zones to place additional development
standards and requirements on certain areas to ensure proper development. Overlay zones
include Civic Center District Overlay Zone (CC), the Downtown District Overlay Zone (DD),
the Grand-Foothill Multi-Family Residential Overlay Zone (GF), the Special Height Overlay
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       47                            Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
Zone (H), Mobile Home Park Overlay Zone (MHP), and the Historic District Overlay zone
(separately identified for each project).
The Mobile Home Park Overlay zone is provided to address existing mobile home parks which
may currently have a MHP overly zone or are eligible to obtain a MHP overlay zone designation
to recognize the existing use.
5.4.5 Nonconforming Lots
In 2000, the City of Glendora completed a nonconforming lot study that identified lots in the
City that did not meet minimum lot area, width and depth standards in the Zoning Code.
Nonconforming lots were found throughout the City and within a variety of zone districts. Of
the approximate 16,000 parcels within the planning area, roughly one-half (8,030) are
nonconforming lots. The purpose of the study was to ensure legal non-conforming lots retained
development rights under the City's zoning and land use policies. Due to the extent of legal non-
conforming lots found within the planning area, the City determined that it was necessary to
provide clear set of development policies for continued development of legal, non-conforming
lots for the on-going preservation of substantial private property rights.
Policies implemented clarified that development on nonconforming lots could proceed so long as
it complied with the current development standards of the underlying zone in which property was
located (except for lot size). Properties that could not meet the requirements of the underlying
zone could apply for relief subject to a discretionary review process under the City's
Nonconforming Lot Development Plan Review regulations. Policies have been carried forward
in the Community Plan 2025 to ensure continued development of legal non-conforming lots.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    48                             Land Use Element
                                            GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                        Table LU-6
                              Relationship of General Plan Land Use Designations and Zoning
                           General Plan Land Use Designations and Zoning
            Land Use Designations
                              Residential Uses                                                        Commercial               Mixe                Industrial                       Open                   Other
                                                                                                        Uses                   d Use                                                Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Utility
                                                      Medium Density
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                                               Light Industrial
          Hillside Very                 Low/ Medium                    Medium/ High                                            Village Mixed
                                                                                      High Density
                                                                                                                                                                               Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Route 66        Flood
                          Low Density
                                                                                                     General      Regional                                                                                 Civic/
                                                                                                                                                                                              Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                  General                                                   Corridor
          Low Density                   Density                        Density                       Commercial   Commercial   Use                                Industrial   Open Space                  Institutional    Specific Plan
Zoning
 RHR                                                                                                                                                                                                        
E3                                                                                                                                                                                                          
E4                                                                                                                                                                                                          
E5                                                                                                                                                                                                          
E6                                                                                                                                                                                                          
E6
(12.5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
E7 (20)                                                                                                                                                                                                     
E7
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
(200)
E7 (30)                                                                                                                                                                                                     
E7 (40)                                                                                                                                                                                                     
E7
                                                                                                                                                                                                         
(500)
E7 (80)                                                                                                                                                                                                     
E7
                                                                                                                                                                                                         
(800)
R1                                                                                                                                                                                                          
R2                                                                                                                                                                                                         
R3                                                                                                                                                                                                          
R4                                                                                                                                                                                                           
GA                                                                                                                                                                                                          
IP                                                                                                                                                                                                          
LGA                                                                                                                                                                                                         
C1                                                                                                     
C2                                                                                                     
C3                                                                                                     
CM                                                                                                                                             
M1                                                                                                                                                                 
M1A                                                                                                                                                                 
MS                                                                                                                                                                                                           
OSN                                                                                                                                                                                          
Glendora Community Plan 2025                                                                                               49                                                                                            Land Use Element
                                           GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                                LAND USE ELEMENT
                          General Plan Land Use Designations and Zoning
           Land Use Designations
                             Residential Uses                                                        Commercial               Mixe                Industrial                       Open                   Other
                                                                                                       Uses                   d Use                                                Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Utility
                                                     Medium Density
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                              Light Industrial
         Hillside Very                 Low/ Medium                    Medium/ High                                            Village Mixed
                                                                                     High Density
                                                                                                                                                                              Conservation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Route 66        Flood
                         Low Density
                                                                                                    General      Regional                                                                                 Civic/
                                                                                                                                                                                             Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                 General                                                   Corridor
         Low Density                   Density                        Density                       Commercial   Commercial   Use                                Industrial   Open Space                  Institutional    Specific Plan
Zoning
PD                                                                              
PR                                                                                                                                                                                                               
B                                                                                                                                                                                            
U                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
CC                                                                                                                            
DD                                                                                                                            
H                                                                                                                                                                                                      
CCAP                                                                                                                          
GF                                                                                   
SP                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
6.0 PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS, GOALS AND
    POLICIES
LAND USE BALANCE - EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION
Planning Consideration: Future land use planning should acknowledge the need to improve the
distribution of land uses citywide, and that balanced and equal access to opportunities for all
residents are considered. The existing distribution of land uses provide a challenge to
establishing an equitable distribution of land uses citywide. Currently, the 210 Freeway creates a
physical and functional barrier between the northern and southern portions of the City.
Goal                             LU-1:                                Balanced open space, residential and commercial development
                                                                      citywide.
Policies                         LU-1.1                               Establish an equitable distribution of commercial and employment
                                                                      opportunities between the northern and the southern portions of the
                                                                      City.
                                 LU-1.2                               Evaluate the potential for the future development South Hills as a
                                                                      mixture of open space, residential and commercial uses.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                                                                                              50                                                                                            Land Use Element
                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
              LU-1.3       Consider opportunities for open space acquisition.
              LU-1.4       Establish open space conservation areas and identify compatible uses
                           such as natural resource conservation, hiking and passive recreation.
              LU-1.5       Consolidate hillside residential land uses into one land use designation
                           and implementing zone.
              Program: Create new hillside residential land use designation with the following
                           priorities:
                        1. habitat preservation
                        2. public safety
                        3. reducing visual impacts
                        4. density, placement and design of structures
              Program:         Establish one hillside residential implanting zone including
              development standards for preservation of habitat, density, grading, reduction of
              visual impacts and location of structures.
              Program:         Measure topography of a parcel using actual (“natural”) slope
              instead of average slope.
              Program:         Permit grading for structures on slopes of 35% or less but allow
              land feature anomalies less than 100 feet in length (as measured along a contour
              line) and less than 15 feet in height to be graded. (such anomalies shall not total
              more than 150 cubic yards in volume per parcel, as measured after subdivision, if
              applicable).
              Program:         Allow grading for trails, utility infrastructure, and other associated
              items that are not structures to exceed the 35% slope for roads or driveways only
              if it is necessary in order to serve a dwelling unit on an existing lot of record.
              Program:         Use new slope categories and corresponding required acres per
              dwelling unit to determine maximum density potential of a parcel:
                 Existing Actual Slope (Percent)               Acres required per dwelling unit
                                   0 to 19                                        1
                                  20 to 24                                        2
                                  25 to 29                                        3
                                  30 to 34                                        4
                                  35 to 39                                        6
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     51                                 Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                               LAND USE ELEMENT
                                40 to 44                                      8
                                45 to 49                                     10
                                50 to 54                                     13
                                55 to 59                                     16
                              60 and over                                    19
              Program:       Specify new hillside development application requirements and
                             procedures associated with new slope analysis computer software
                             such as contour interval standard to be used and whether the City
                             or the applicant should provide the slope assessment of a parcel
                             when an application is made.
              Program:       City documents should advise that maximum permitted density is
                             not guaranteed but rather is dependant on other physical factors
                             such as:
                                 1. The need for mitigation or avoidance of impacts to
                                     biological habitats
                                 2. Availability of on-site and off-site access
                                 3. The proposed site design, grading, and type of construction
                                 4. Site-specific physical characteristics
                                 5. The ability of the proposed project to avoid impact on other
                                     nearby properties
              Program:       Addition of a policy mandating and defining “rural” (which would
                             apply to all hillside development, including clustered development)
                             to applicable City documents.
              Program:       To control the spacing of clustered development, a minimum lot
                             size of one acre is required for all properties located within the
                             hillside residential land use area.
              Program:       Prepare a map that defines and identifies “ridgelines” and
                             “canyons.”
              Program:       Require that tentative subdivision and parcel maps prevent the
                             creation of new parcels in which a structure would be required to
                             be placed on or within 50 vertical feet of a mapped ridgeline or on
                             a slope over 35%.
              Program:       On existing lots of record, allow one dwelling unit on or within 50
                             feet of a mapped ridgeline only if earth bermed or earth sheltered
                             (exception if previous grading precludes).
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    52                              Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
              Program:         For existing lots of record, if there is no buildable area with a 35%
                               or less slope, require that the development of a dwelling unit meet
                               special standards.
              Program:         Restrict any other construction or installation associated with
                               development if located within 50 feet of a mapped ridgeline, if it
                               would be discernable from “key community vantage points.”
              Program:         Prevent location of dwelling units within mapped canyon bottoms,
                               riparian areas, and significant streams or channels.
              Program:         For earth berm or earth shelter construction allow required
                               setbacks to be reduced.
              Program:         Allow a reduction in the required setback(s) of any dwelling if it
                               would reduce impacts on critical habitat areas, public viewshed or
                               landform alteration.
              Program:         Alter the existing City roadway standards to reduce the road width
                               and extent of improvements (e.g., curbs, gutters, and sidewalks)
                               required within the hillside residential land use designation.
              Program:         Implement design guidelines for new hillside residential
                               development as outlined in the Recommended Hillside Strategy,
                               dated October 25, 2002.
Goal          LU-2         Equitable geographic distribution of land uses.
Policies      LU-2.1       Ensure the coordination of economic development, redevelopment and
                           land use planning.
LAND USE BALANCE - MIX OF LAND USES
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora is a predominantly residential community.
Future land use planning should consider the development of a more balanced land use pattern,
including a complimentary mix of retail, commercial, residential and entertainment uses.
Goal          LU-3:        Integrated mixed use development.
Policies      LU-3.1       Establish development standards and design guidelines for mixed use
                           development in the city’s primary activity nodes.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     53                                 Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                LAND USE ELEMENT
              LU-3.2       Encourage the development of mixed use through flexible land use
                           regulations
              LU-3.3       Encourage the development of infill residential development within
                           mixed use projects.
Goal          LU-4:        Integrated commercial and residential development.
Policies      LU-4.1       Provide for increased densities and mixed use development standards
                           to encourage the expansion of residential development opportunities
                           within the Village.
              LU-4.2       Provide for expanded infill residential opportunities in appropriately
                           designated areas in the City.
Goal          LU-5:        Expanded residential development opportunities.
Policies      LU-5.1       Provide for increased densities and mixed use development standards
                           to encourage the expansion of residential development opportunities
                           within the Village.
              LU-5.2       Provide for expanded infill residential opportunities in appropriately
                           designated areas in the City.
LAND USE BALANCE - HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
Planning Consideration: Limited ownership and rental housing opportunities for a variety of
income levels exist within the City. A diverse inventory of housing opportunities should afford
first-time homebuyers, elderly, and low- to moderate-income residents an opportunity to live in
Glendora. The establishment of a broader range of housing densities that support the expansion
of housing opportunities throughout the City should be a consideration in future land use
decisions.
Goal          LU-6:        Expanded opportunities for affordable housing.
Policies      LU-6.1       Establish regulatory mechanisms and incentives for the development
                           of quality affordable housing opportunities.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    54                              Land Use Element
                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
              LU-6.2       Encourage land use planning that provides for affordable housing
                           development through the implementation of the City of Glendora
                           Housing Element of the General Plan.
Goal          LU-7:        A diverse range of housing choices.
Policies      LU-7.1       Provide opportunities for the development of housing at variety of
                           affordability levels and densities the respond to the various needs of
                           future residents.
LAND USE BALANCE - EMPLOYMENT NODES
Planning Consideration: The City envisions a healthy mix of centralized employment-
generating land use mix, arranged in several modes throughout the community that support a
diverse and stable employment base. The City’s current land use patterns within existing
commercial corridors do not maximize opportunities in creating strong nodes of employment.
Goal          LU-8:        Expansion of employment-generating land uses.
Policies      LU-8.1       Expand employment generating land use land uses along the Route 66
                           corridor.
              LU-8.2       Evaluate the potential for development of portions of the South Hills
                           area for commercial development.
              LU-8.3       Consider land use policy modifications along the Arrow Highway
                           corridor to enhance retail, commercial and other employment uses.
              LU-8.4       Encourage the development of the Grand Avenue corridor for
                           employment generating land uses, including a mixture of retail, office
                           and professional uses.
Goal          LU-9:        Attraction of high tech businesses and industry.
Policies      LU-9.1       Provide for flexible land use development regulations and standards
                           that provide for the specialized facilities needs of high technology
                           business and industry.
              LU-9.2       Establish an economic development marketing plan for the attraction
                           of high tech industry.
              LU-9.3       Ensure the City of Glendora periodically evaluates the specific
                           development requirements of high tech businesses.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     55                             Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED LAND
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora’s relatively built-out nature requires a
comprehensive strategy for the utilization of limited vacant and underutilized parcels.
Redevelopment and reuse of these sites should consider such factors as the compatibility with
adjacent uses, design quality, density/intensity and rehabilitation.
Goal           LU-10:      Quality infill development.
Policies       LU-10.1     Ensure the design and development of infill projects compliments
                           existing development in terms of scale, character, and pedestrian
                           quality.
               LU-10.2     Encourage the development of viable infill development within the
                           Route 66 Corridor through the assembly of parcels.
               LU-10.3     Evaluate the potential for developing a Specific Plan for the Arrow
                           Highway Corridor to maximize infill development opportunities.
               LU-10.4     Provide for a thorough evaluation of vacant and underutilized sites
                           within the City of Glendora, including South Hills, Monrovia Nursery,
                           San Jose Park, and the Rainbird property.
Goal           LU-11:      Rehabilitation and enhancement of existing land uses.
Policies       LU-11.1     Identify regulatory mechanisms that encourage redevelopment and
                           improvement of existing properties, including:
                              Development incentives/bonuses
                              Redevelopment agency participation
                              Façade rehabilitation programs
                              Code enforcement
               LU-11.2     Provide for a comprehensive review of all City-owned property to
                           determine redevelopment potential.
               LU-11.3     Evaluate development standards for South Grand Avenue and Foothill
                           Boulevard and revise standards, encourage revitalization,
                           intensification and density.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     56                             Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
                LU-11.4    Ensure that the evaluation of redevelopment and enhancement of
                           existing land uses considers the preservation of open space and natural
                           resources, including hillside areas.
PRESERVATION OF NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora considers the preservation of neighborhood
character a primary means in preserving the character of the community as a whole. The City’s
existing neighborhoods are well-established and provide a character and quality that reflect the
stability of the community’s residents. Land use planning should consider the preservation of
neighborhood character in terms of design, scale and extent of development and infrastructure.
Goal            LU-12:     Preservation of existing historic neighborhoods.
Policies        LU-12.1    Provide for regulatory policies, design guidelines and other methods
                           that promote the preservation of historic neighborhoods and
                           established singe-family residential areas.
                LU-12.2    Encourage the restoration and rehabilitation of historic resources.
                LU-12.3    Increase the level of public education regarding Glendora’s historic
                           resources.
                LU-12.4    Introduce provisions within the City’s Municipal Code that would
                           enhance and protect historically significant neighborhoods.
                LU-12.5    Encourage the creation of neighborhood groups and associations for
                           the purpose of neighborhood preservation and enhancement.
                LU-12.6    Ensure that rehabilitation efforts preserve the historical integrity of the
                           original structure.
                LU-12.7    Develop design guidelines to preserve neighborhood character and
                           control mansionization.
Goal            LU-13:     Clearly defined strategies for neighborhood preservation and
                           enhancement.
Policies        LU-13.1    Provide specific policies that maintain uniform setbacks, yard areas
                           and building separations to preserve the integrity of neighborhoods.
                LU-13.2    Establish criteria to identify and/or create neighborhood districts.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      57                               Land Use Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
                LU-13.3    Encourage the participation of residents in the creation of
                           neighborhood preservation and enhancement strategies.
                LU-13.4    Strengthen code enforcement activities within neighborhoods to ensure
                           existing regulations are properly enforced.
                LU-13.5    Evaluate the potential for reducing width of residential streets,
                           providing wider parkways, increasing landscaping and street trees and
                           integrating open space and trails in existing neighborhoods.
                LU-13.6    Evaluate the appropriateness of physical improvement that would
                           increase the level of pedestrian amenities in neighborhoods.
COMMUNITY DESIGN AND CHARACTER – THE VILLAGE
Planning Consideration: The City takes pride in the Village. Although the Village is a
distinctive area within the City, it is perceived as lacking a number of attributes that would more
effectively contribute to a “village” feel. The Village should be evaluated in the context of
density/intensity of development, land use mix, historic significance, and urban design to ensure
that future development and redevelopment is consistent with the community’s vision.
Goal            LU-14:     A complimentary mix of land uses in the Village.
Policies        LU-14.1    Encourage the development of live/work space and mixed use
                           residential uses within the Village area for the promotion of integrated
                           housing and employment opportunities.
                LU-14.2    Establish a land use policy that would allow for increased development
                           intensity and residential density within the Village area.
                LU-14.3    Encourage the creation of nighttime and weekend activity within the
                           Village.
                LU-14.4    Encourage the development of retail and entertainment uses in the
                           downtown area that provide for the needs of local residents and
                           adjacent communities.
                LU-14.5    Encourage the adaptive reuse of existing structures for a variety of
                           commercial and retail uses that respect the existing Village character.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      58                               Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
Goal           LU-15:      A distinctive Village character.
Policies       LU-15.1     Promote the pedestrian utilization of the Village area through
                           incorporation of improved and expanded pedestrian walkways, plazas
                           and other pedestrian-oriented facilities.
               LU-15.2     Promote the use of quality building materials and design elements to
                           compliment the character of the Village.
               LU-15.3     Encourage the expansion of the defined Village area to provide a
                           physical and functional connection with Route 66.
               LU-15.4     Encourage the development of uses and facilities that promote a
                           distinctive Village character such as artist lofts, restaurants, small-
                           scale retail and housing.
               LU-15.5     Encourage the design and utilization of city parking lots to allow for
                           businesses to open onto pedestrian ways behind Glendora Avenue into
                           parking areas.
               LU-15.6     Establish specific design and development standards for uses in the
                           Village.
COMMUNITY DESIGN AND CHARACTER - COMMUNITY GATHERING PLACES
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora is lacking distinct community gathering places
or areas that promote community-based activities. These areas include urban open space,
parkways, plazas, paseos and other community-accessible spaces. Community gathering places
provide a significant contribution to civic pride and civic participation. Therefore, land use
decisions should consider the establishment of community gathering spaces throughout the City.
Goal           LU-16:      Expanded access to community gathering places.
Policies       LU-16.1     Promote the establishment of centrally located and accessible
                           community gathering places.
              LU-16.2      Promote the provision of usable open space as part of infill housing
                           development.
              LU-16.3      Establish more accessibility with the South Hills and Wilderness Park
                           through the provision of pedestrian and bike linkages.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    59                               Land Use Element
                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
               LU-16.4     Encourage the use of temporary vacant land for transitional open space
                           uses.
               LU-16.5     Encourage use of village bus plaza for public events.
               LU-16.6     Encourage the joint-use of facilities for community events and
                           activities.
               LU-16.7     Encourage the use of existing public and private facilities for publicly-
                           accessible activities, such as art show events, craft shows, etc.
               LU-16.8     Encourage the improvement of lighting to improve the usability
                           community gathering places during the evening hours.
Goal           LU-17:      Coordinated planning for civic facilities.
Policies       LU-17.1     Consider the development of usable community open space when
                           planning the development of civic facilities.
               LU-17.2     Evaluate the potential for improving existing civic facilities to
                           accommodate community activities.
COMMUNITY DESIGN AND CHARACTER - SCALE AND CHARACTER
Planning Consideration: Land use planning should consider the scale and character of
development and redevelopment to provide a positive contribution in the future to the physical
quality of the City. The scale and character of development and redevelopment should be
considered within the context of each neighborhood so that existing land use character is not
diminished.
Goal           LU-18:      Compatibility of adjacent land uses.
Policies       LU-18.1     Ensure the preservation of a scale and character of development is
                           sensitive to adjoining uses.
               LU-18.2     Utilize design review to determine the appropriateness of new
                           development prior to approval.
               LU-18.3     Encourage land uses that are complimentary in form and function with
                           existing development.
Goal           LU-19:       Abatement of incompatible uses.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     60                                Land Use Element
                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
Policies      LU-19.1      Enforce land use regulations related to non-conforming land uses.
Goal          LU-20:       Appropriate scale and character of development.
Policies      LU-20.1      Ensure development is designed with a compatible scale.
              LU-20.2      Establish guidelines to provide design direction that encourages
                           pedestrian activity at the street frontage.
              LU-20.3      Encourage the development of usable pedestrian space within future
                           developments, including urban plazas, pocket parks and other
                           pedestrian amenities.
              LU-20.4      Encourage the expansion of street trees to improve the pedestrian scale
                           and character of future development.
              LU-20.5      Encourage the development of pedestrian-friendly development
                           through properly scaled design and amenities.
              LU-20.6      Utilize design guidelines and development standards to ensure walls
                           and fences provide quality design and landscape treatment.
Goal          LU-21:       Preservation of neighborhood character.
Policies      LU-21.1      Establish design guidelines and development regulations that enhance
                           neighborhood quality.
              LU-21.2      Investigate the use of traffic calming measures in existing
                           neighborhoods to reduce speeding and traffic-related hazards.
              LU-21.3      In neighborhoods with long blocks, investigate the potential for the
                           provision of meandering streets to reduce traffic speed and improve
                           pedestrian quality.
              LU-21.4      Investigate the potential for identifying unique neighborhoods where
                           streets could be closed and redeveloped into a system of greenbelts
                           (i.e., neighborhoods with alley access).
Planning Consideration: The creation and preservation of well-defined community “character”
is a primary community goal. Land use planning should acknowledge those community
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     61                             Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
attributes that define Glendora’s character including historic resources, civic facilities,
established neighborhoods, natural resources and other distinctive community features.
Goal           LU-22:      Preservation of important community attributes.
Policies       LU-22.1     Encourage the adaptive reuse of facilities and structures to preserve
                           important community attributes.
               LU-22.2     Establish programs that identify important community attributes that
                           should be preserved.
               LU-22.3     Educate the local residents on the subject of community preservation
                           to help define those important community attributes.
Goal           LU-23:      Distinctive neighborhood identities.
Policies       LU-23.1     Identify transition areas that buffer residential development from non-
                           residential uses through the incorporation of landscaping, open space
                           and other design features.
               LU-23.2     Encourage the development of distinctive features that further define
                           Glendora’s residential neighborhoods.
TOPIC:         REGIONAL CONTEXT
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora is a part of a larger region. The land use
policies adopted by the City of Glendora have an effect on and can benefit from adjacent cities
and the region. Therefore, land use planning should consider the regional and subregional
context to ensure land use, economic and environmental factors provide a positive contribution
to and optimally benefit from adjacent communities and the region.
Goal           LU-24:      Coordinated infrastructure development with land use planning.
Policies       LU-24.1     Ensure the City of Glendora makes diligent efforts in coordinating
                           with adjacent jurisdictions for projects that may have an impact on
                           Glendora’s traffic, infrastructure, water quality or other
                           interjurisdictional topics.
               LU-24.2     Ensure adjacent jurisdictions and other applicable agencies are
                           properly informed on all land use and planning decisions that may be
                           affected by development projects within Glendora.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      62                              Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
               LU-24.3     Provide sufficient analysis of potential infrastructure impacts
                           associated future development and the potential impacts on adjacent
                           jurisdictions.
Goal           LU-25:      Coordinate job creation and attraction in the San Gabriel Valley.
Policies       LU-25.1     Encourage regional cooperation in attracting new employment and
                           industry with the San Gabriel Valley and Los Angeles region.
               LU-25.2     Encourage efforts at addressing the jobs/housing balance within the
                           City and the region.
               LU-25.3     Ensure the City of Glendora’s interests are adequately represented in a
                           regionally significant planning efforts.
TOPIC:         LAND USE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora desires a stronger connection between land use
planning and its relationship to citywide economic development. Economic development relies
heavily on the connection between land use and planning decisions, and therefore should be a
consideration for all land use policy decisions. The City of Glendora should seek to establish a
strong connection between the need to expand and improve its economic base and the type and
distribution of land uses citywide. The establishment of progressive land use and economic
development strategies should be implemented to ensure long-term economic success.
Goal           LU-26:      Integrate economic development activities with land use planning.
Policies       LU-26.1     Establish an economic development strategy for the evaluation of
                           economic development opportunities that provide baseline analysis for
                           and influence future land use planning efforts.
               LU-26.2     Ensure economic development planning is regularly evaluated in the
                           context of changing market factors.
               LU-26.3     Provide the means for determining the costs associated with growth,
                           including infrastructure and other public benefits.
               LU-26.4     Investigate the need for conducting a fiscal impact analysis of costs
                           and benefits of development to be used as a tool in land using planning
                           decisions.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    63                               Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
Goal          LU-27:       Improved commercial tax base in the City.
Policies      LU-27.1      Encourage activities and programs that expand the City of Glendora’s
                           revenue base and improve local retail and non-retail sales tax revenue.
              LU-27.2      Ensure the existing commercial tax base is stable through the
                           preservation and enhancement of existing commercial centers and
                           corridors.
              LU-27.3      Promote the expansion of commercial activities citywide through
                           evaluation of future sites and enhancement of sites for additional
                           development potential.
              LU-27.4      Encourage the development of high volume retail development and
                           restaurants that would benefit from access and visibility to the I-210
                           freeway.
Goal          LU-28:       Establishment of central nodes of commercial and employment
                           activity.
Policies      LU-28.1      Identify commercial development            opportunities     that  would
                           compliment the Village area.
              LU-28.2      Encourage coordination between property owners, business owners
                           and the city to maximize development opportunities.
              LU-28.3      Establish funding mechanisms for the improvement and maintenance
                           of central commercial and employment nodes.
              LU-28.4      Encourage the stabilization and expansion of the City’s existing
                           industrial base through the improvement of older industrial areas.
              LU-28.5      Establish programs to assist under-performing centers in retaining their
                           competitiveness in the regional market.
              LU-28.6      Identify target areas for the expansion of locally-serving and
                           regionally-serving office, professional and industrial uses.
              LU-28.7      Evaluate the potential for establishment of local associations or other
                           groups that encourage local business expansion, retention and
                           attraction.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     64                               Land Use Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 LAND USE ELEMENT
Goal          LU-29:       Expanded retail opportunities.
Policies      LU-29.1      Encourage the expansion of retail development within the primary
                           commercial nodes and corridors in the City through tailored land use
                           regulations, development standards and design guidelines.
              LU-29.2      Evaluate the potential for regional serving retail uses along the I-210
                           corridor.
              LU-29.3      Provide for flexible development regulations that encourage mixed use
                           development that compliments other commercial and non-commercial
                           development.
Goal          LU-30:       Improved relationship with the development/business community.
Policies      LU-30.1      Establish programs and other methods designed to educate community
                           on the importance, need, and value of growth.
              LU-30.2      Cooperate with the Glendora Chamber of Commerce and other local
                           business organizations to encourage economic development.
              LU-30.3      Provide open communication with existing and future businesses to
                           promote business attraction, retention and expansion.
              LU-30.4      Establish programs that encourage the attraction and expansion of
                           business and employment opportunities.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    65                               Land Use Element
                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                               LAND USE ELEMENT
                          See Exhibit LU-7:General Plan Land Use Map
Glendora Community Plan 2025                  66                   Land Use Element
                                                                                                                           ANGELES NATIONAL                                                                                                                                                    ANGELES NATIONAL
                                                                                                                                FOREST                                                                                                                                                              FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Big Dalton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Wilderness Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN LAND USE MAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C.E. Linder
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EXHIBIT LU - 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Equestrian Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              George
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Manooshian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Park
                                                                                                                            St. Lucy's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RESIDENTIAL (UNITS/ACRE)
                                                                                                                           High School                                                                                             Goddard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Middle                                                                                                                                 HILLSIDE VERY LOW DENSITY (0.1 - 1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    School
                                                                                                                                Sierra Madre Avenue                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LOW DENSITY (1.1 - 3)
                                                                         Citrus Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LOW/MEDIUM DENSITY (3.1 - 6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sellers    Willow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Elementary   Springs                                                                                                     MEDIUM DENSITY (6.1 -11)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    School      Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MEDIUM/HIGH DENSITY (11.1 - 15)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cullen
                                                                                                                       Sandburg                                                                                 Elementary
                                                                                                                        School                                                                                    School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HIGH DENSITY (15.1 - 20)
                                                                                                                         Park                                                                                     Ole
                                                                                                                                          La Fetra                                                              Hammer
                                                                                                                      Carl Sandburg      Elementary
                                                                                                                      Middle School                                                                              Park
                                                                                                                                           School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COMMERCIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Finkbiner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GENERAL COMMERCIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           REGIONAL COMMERCIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Foothill Boulevard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VILLAGE MIXED USE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Glendora
                                                                                         Citrus College                                                                                                                                                                           High
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Williams
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                  Glendora Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Glendora Country Club
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GENERAL INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Route 66
                                                                                                    Barranca Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OPEN SPACE
                                                                                                                                              Grand Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                           Big
                                                                                                                                                                           Tree
                                                                                                                         Stanton
                                                                                                                       Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                           Park                                                                                                                                                                                            CONSERVATION OPEN SPACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OPEN SPACE
                                                                                                                         School
                                                                                                                                                              Whitcomb
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/preferred_alternative.mxd August 31, 2006
                                                                                                                                                             High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OTHER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      South Hills Park                                                                                                                                    CIVIC/INSTITUTIONAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       210
                                                                                                                                            210                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ROUTE 66 SPECIFIC PLAN
                                                                                    AZUSA                                                                                  Dawson                                                                                           Louie Pompei Sports Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UTILITY AND FLOOD CONTROL
                                                                                                                 Drendel
                                                                                                                 School                                                    Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                            Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RAILROAD
                                                                                                                                                                            Glenoaks                                                                                                                                                                 SAN DIMAS            PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
                                                                                                                                                                           Golf Course
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           COUNTY AREA OVERLAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gladstone Street                                            Willow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CITY LIMITS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Gladstone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Park            Arrow                 Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          High                   School
                                                                                                                      Oakdale Memorial Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   East Arrow Highway
                                                                                                                                                                            COVINA                                                                                                                                                                               0   1,200 2,400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Feet
                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The purpose of the Noise Element is to provide a framework to limit noise exposure within the City.
Existing and future noise environments and the compatibility of land uses are considered in the
Element, as well as sensitive receptors and generators of stationary noise. Projected noise levels are
included to help guide future land use policy and prevent high noise levels in sensitive areas at
buildout.
Various measures are described in order to mitigate potential noise conflicts. These measures are
designed to lessen impacts from unavoidable noise conflicts within the City of Glendora. The Noise
Element also serves as a guideline for compliance with the State’s Noise Insulation Standards.
2.0 AUTHORITY FOR ELEMENT
California Government Code Section 65302(f) requires that a General Plan include:
“…a noise element which shall identify and appraise noise problems in the community. The Noise Element shall
recognize the guidelines established by the Office of Noise Control in the State Department of Health Services and
shall analyze and quantify…current and projected noise levels for all of the following sources: (1) highways and
freeways; (2) primary arterials and major local streets; (3) passenger and freight on-line railroad operations and
ground rapid transit systems; (4) commercial, general aviation, heliport, and military airport operations, aircraft
over flights, jet engine test stands, and all other ground facilities and maintenance functions related to airport
operation; (5) local industrial plants, including but not limited to, railroad classification yards; (6) other ground
stationary noise sources identified by local agencies as contributing to the community noise environment.”
3.0 SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
The following section outlines existing noise resources within the City of Glendora.
3.1 NOISE SCALES AND DEFINITIONS
Sound pressure level is a measure of the sound pressure of a given noise source relative to a standard
reference value. The reference pressure is typical of the quietest sound that a young person with good
hearing is able to detect. Sound pressure levels are measured in decibels (dB). Decibels are
logarithmic quantities, relating the sound pressure level of a noise source to the reference pressure
level.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                               ▸1◂                                          Noise Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
An important characteristic of sound is frequency. This is the rate of repetition of sound pressure
oscillations (waves) as they reach our ears; frequency is expressed in hertz (Hz). When analyzing the
total noise of any source, the frequency components are sometimes analyzed to determine the relative
amounts of low-frequency, middle-frequency, and high-frequency noise. This breakdown is important
for two reasons:
           Our ear is better equipped to hear mid- and high-range frequencies than lower frequencies.
             Thus, we find mid- and high-frequency noise to be more annoying. High-frequency noise
             is also more capable of producing hearing loss.
           Engineering solutions to a noise problem are different for different frequency ranges. Low-
             frequency noise is generally harder to control.
The normal frequency range of hearing for most people extends from a low frequency of about 20 Hz
to a high frequency of about 10,000 to 15,000 Hz. People respond to sound most readily when the
predominant frequency is in the range of normal conversation, typically around 1,000 to 2,000 Hz.
Several filters have been developed that match the sensitivity of our ear and thus help us to judge the
relative loudness of various sounds made up of many different frequencies. The so-called “A” filter is
the best measure for most environmental noise sources. Sound pressure levels measured through this
filter are referred to as A-weighted levels, and are measured in A-weighted decibels or (dBA). Exhibit
N–1, Common Environmental Noise Levels, provides examples of common environmental noise levels.
The A-weighted filter significantly de-emphasizes those parts of the total noise that occur at lower
frequencies (those below about 500 Hz) and also those at very high frequencies (above 10,000 Hz) the
frequencies that we do not hear as well. The filter has very little effect, or is nearly “flat,” in the
middle range of frequencies (between 500 and 10,000 Hz), where our ears are most sensitive. Because
this filter generally matches our ears’ sensitivity, sounds having a higher A-weighted sound level are
usually judged to be louder than those with lower A-weighted sound levels, a relationship that
otherwise might not be true.
3.1.1 Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)
Cumulative noise metrics were developed to assess community response to noise. They are useful
because they attempt to take into account the loudness and duration of the noise, the total number of
noise events, and the time of day these events occur in one single-number rating scale. They are
designed to account for the known health effects of noise on people. The community noise equivalent
level (CNEL) is a 24-hour, time-weighted energy-average noise level based on dBA that measures the
overall noise during an entire day. Noise that occurs during certain sensitive time periods is penalized
for occurring at these times (by adding decibels to its Leq measurement). On the CNEL scale, noise
between 7:00 AM and 10:00 PM is penalized by approximately five dB, to account for the greater
potential for noise to interfere during these hours, as well as the typically lower ambient (background)
noise levels during these hours. Noise during the night (from 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM) is penalized by
10 dB to attempt to account for our higher sensitivity to noise in the nighttime and the expected
further decrease in ambient noise levels that typically occur in the night.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                         ▸2◂                                     Noise Element

                                        CHAPTER 4 • NOISE ELEMENT
                                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
06/07 • JN 10-102317
                     Common Environmental Noise Levels
                                                        Exhibit N-1

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
3.1.2 Equivalent Noise Level (Leq)
The equivalent sound level, abbreviated Leq, is a measure of the exposure resulting from the
accumulation of A-weighted sound levels over a particular time period (e.g., 1-hour, 8-hour, a school
day, nighttime, or a full 24-hour day). However, because the length of the period can be different
depending on the time frame of interest, the applicable period should always be identified or clearly
understood when discussing the metric. Such durations are often identified through a subscript, for
example, “Leq (24).”
Conceptually, LEQ may be thought of as a constant sound level over the period of interest that contains
as much sound energy as the actual time-varying sound level with its normal peaks and valleys. It is
important to realize, however, that the two signals (the constant one and the time-varying one) would
sound very different from each other if compared in real life. Variations in the “average” sound level
suggested by Leq is not an arithmetic value, but a logarithmic (“energy-averaged”) sound level. Thus,
loud events clearly dominate any noise environment described by the metric.
3.1.3 Day Night Average (Ldn)
Another commonly used noise metric is the day/night average noise level (L dn). The Ldn is a measure
of the 24-hour average noise level at a given location. It was adopted by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) for developing criteria to evaluate community noise exposure. Ldn is based
on a measure of the average noise level over a given time period. The Ldn is calculated by averaging
the Leq for each hour of the day at a given location after penalizing the sleeping hours (from 10:00 PM
to 7:00 AM) by 10 dBA to take into account the increased sensitivity of people to noises that occur at
night. The sound level exceeded over a specified time frame can be expressed as Ln (i.e., L90, L50, L10,
etc.). L50 equals the level exceeded 50 percent of the time; L10, 10 percent of the time; etc.
3.1.4 Other Noise Matrices
People tend to respond to changes in sound pressure in a logarithmic manner. In general, a 1 dBA
change in the sound pressure levels of a given sound is detectable only under laboratory conditions. A
3 dBA change in sound pressure level is considered a detectable difference in most situations. A 5
dBA change is readily noticeable and a 10 dBA change is considered a doubling (or halving) of the
subjective loudness. It should be noted that a 3 dBA increase or decrease in the average traffic noise
level is realized by a doubling or halving of the traffic volume; or by about a 7 mile per hour (mph)
increase or decrease in speed.
For each doubling of distance from a point noise source, the sound level will decrease by 6 dBA. In
other words, if a person is 100 feet from a machine, and moves to 200 feet from that source, sound
levels will drop approximately 6 dBA. For each doubling of distance from a line source, like a
roadway, noise levels are reduced by 3 to 5 decibels, depending on the ground cover between the
source and the receiver.
Noise barriers can provide approximately a 5 dBA CNEL noise reduction (additional reduction may be
provided with a barrier of appropriate height, material, location and length). A row of buildings
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸4◂                                       Noise Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
provides up to 5 dBA CNEL noise reduction with a 1.5 dBA CNEL reduction for each additional row
up to a maximum reduction of approximately 10 dBA. The exact degree of noise attenuation depends
on the nature and orientation of the structure and intervening barriers.
3.2 NOISE STANDARDS
3.2.1 Federal Noise Standards
The United States Noise Control Act of 1972 (NCA) recognized the role of the Federal government in
dealing with major commercial noise sources in order to provide for uniform treatment of such
sources. As Congress has the authority to regulate interstate and foreign commerce, regulation of
noise generated by such commerce also falls under congressional authority. The Federal government
specifically preempts local control of noise emissions from aircraft, railroad and interstate highways.
The EPA offers guidelines for community noise exposure in the publication Noise Effects Handbook – A
Desk Reference to Health and Welfare Effects of Noise. These guidelines consider occupational noise
exposure, as well as noise exposure in homes. The EPA recognizes an exterior noise level of 55 dB Ldn
as a general goal to protect the public from hearing loss, activity interference, sleep disturbance, and
annoyance. The EPA and other Federal agencies have adopted suggested land use compatibility
guidelines that indicate that residential noise exposures of 55 to 65 dB Ldn are acceptable. The EPA
notes, however, that these levels are not regulatory goals, but are levels defined by a negotiated
scientific consensus, without concern for economic and technological feasibility or the needs and
desires of any particular community.
3.2.2 State Noise Standards
The Office of Noise Control in the State Department of Health Services has developed criteria and
guidelines for local governments to use when setting standards for human exposure to noise and
preparing noise elements for General Plans. A noise environment of 50 to 60 CNEL is considered to
be “normally acceptable” for residential uses. The State indicates that locating residential units, parks,
and institutions (such as churches, schools, libraries, and hospitals) in areas where exterior ambient
noise levels exceed 65 CNEL is undesirable. The Office of Planning and Research (OPR)
recommendations also note that, under certain conditions, more restrictive standards than the
maximum levels cited may be appropriate. As an example, the standards for quiet suburban and rural
communities may be reduced by 5 to 10 dB to reflect their lower existing outdoor noise levels in
comparison with urban environments.
In addition, Title 25, Section 1092 of the California Code of Regulations, sets forth requirements for the
insulation of multiple-family residential dwelling units from excessive and potentially harmful noise.
Whenever such units are to be located in such areas, the developer must incorporate into building
design construction features that reduce interior noise levels to 45 dBA CNEL.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸5◂                                         Noise Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Table N-1, Noise and Land Use Compatibility Matrix-California, illustrates the State guidelines
established by the State Department of Health Services for acceptable noise levels for counties and
cities. These standards and criteria will be incorporated into the land use planning process to reduce
future noise and land use incompatibilities. This table is the primary tool that allows the City to
ensure integrated planning for compatibility between land uses and outdoor noise.
3.2.3 CITY NOISE STANDARDS
The City of Glendora maintains a comprehensive Noise Ordinance within the Glendora Municipal Code
that sets standards for noise levels citywide and provides the means to enforce the reduction of
obnoxious or offensive noises.
City Noise Ordinance
Chapter 09.44.050 of the Glendora Municipal Code establishes noise standards and enforcement
procedures. Section 09.44.050, establishes noise standards and enforcement procedures. Table N-2,
Glendora Noise Ordinance Standards, summarizes noise standards established by the City.
The Ordinance is designed to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying sounds generated on one
piece of property from impacting an adjacent property and to protect residential areas from noise
sources, including noise generated by traffic. As shown in Table N-2, between the hours of 7:00 PM
and 7:00 AM, the noise standards are more stringent than during the day hours of 7:00 AM to 7:00
PM.
The Noise environment in Glendora is dominated by vehicular traffic including vehicular generated
noise along Interstate 210 (I-210) and primary and secondary arterials. In addition, a number of other
sources contribute to the total noise environment. These noise sources include construction activities,
power tools and gardening equipment, loudspeakers, auto repair, radios, children playing and dogs
barking. In order to provide a description of the existing noise environment in Glendora, noise
contours were quantified for highway and local street traffic.
3.3 EXISTING NOISE CONDITIONS
Human response to noise varies widely depending on the type of noise, time of day, and sensitivity of
the receptor. The effects of noise on humans can range from temporary or permanent hearing loss to
mild stress and annoyance due to such things as speech interference and sleep deprivation. Prolonged
stress, regardless of the cause, is known to contribute to a variety of health disorders. Noise, or the
lack of it, is a factor in the aesthetic perception of some settings, particularly those with religious or
cultural significance.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                        ▸6◂                                      Noise Element

                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                                             Table N-1
                             Noise and Land Use Compatibility Matrix - California
                                                                      Community Noise Exposure (Ldn or CNEL, dBA)
                  Land Use Category                             Normally Conditionally          Normally             Clearly
                                                               Acceptable        Acceptable Unacceptable Unacceptable
Residential - Low Density, Single-Family,
                                                                  50 - 60           55 - 70       70-75               75-85
Duplex, Mobile Homes
Residential - Multiple Family                                     50 - 65           60 - 70      70 - 75             70 - 85
Transient Lodging - Motel, Hotels                                 50 - 65           60 - 70      70 - 80             80 - 85
Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing
                                                                  50 - 70           60 - 70      70 - 80             80 - 85
Homes
Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters                           NA              50 - 70        NA                65 - 85
Sports Arenas, Outdoor Spectator Sports                             NA              50 - 75        NA                70 - 85
Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                                   50 - 70             NA        67.5 - 75           72.5 - 85
Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation,
                                                                  50 - 70             NA         70 - 80             80 - 85
Cemeteries
Office Buildings, Business Commercial and
                                                                  50 - 70         67.5 - 77.5    75 - 85               NA
Professional
Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture                 50 - 75           70 - 80      75 - 85               NA
NA: Not Applicable
Source: General Plan Guidelines, Office of Planning and Research, California, October 2003.
Normally Acceptable – Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal
conventional construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.
Conditionally Acceptable – New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise
reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional construction, but with
closed windows and fresh air supply systems or air conditioning, will normally suffice.
Normally Unacceptable – New construction or development should be discouraged. If new construction or development does
proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the
design.
Clearly Unacceptable – New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
                                                             Table N-2
                                          Glendora Noise Ordinance Standards
                                                                              Noise Level (dBA)
                         Zone                           Day: 7AM –             Evening: 7PM-       Night: 10PM –
                                                            7PM                      10PM                7AM
          Single Family Residential (R-1)                    55                        50                  45
          Multiple Residential (R-3 and R-
                                                             55                        55                  50
          4)
          Commercial                                         65                        65                  60
          Industrial and Light
                                                             70                        70                  70
          Manufacturing
          Special Zones (MS)                                 55                        50                  45
          Source: Glendora Municipal Code, Chapter 9.44.040 (Ambient noise base levels)
Glendora Community Plan 2025                                     ▸7◂                                               Noise Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Table N-3, Sensitive Receptors illustrate some of the sensitive receptors that are located within the City of
Glendora and can be affected by excess noise levels.
                                                   Table N-3
                                              Sensitive Receptors
                               RECEPTOR                                     LOCATION
           Institutional:
           Hope Lutheran Church                                 1041 E. Foothill Blvd
           Mar Thoma Church of Los Angeles                      134 S. Vista Bonita Avenue
           Grace Episcopal Church                               555 E. Mountain View Avenue
           Church of the Brethren                               150 S. Vermont Avenue
           Glendora Grace Lutheran Church                       804 E. Foothill Blvd.
           United Methodist Church                              201 E. Bennett Avenue
           Church of the Open Door                              701 W. Sierra Madre Avenue
           Reason to Believe                                    731 E. Arrow Highway
           First Christian Church                               300 N. Glendora Avenue
           Cornerstone Bible Church                             400 N. Glendora Avenue
           Glendora Alliance Church                             116 E. Carroll Avenue
           The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints      955 W. Foothill Blvd.
           Christian Science Church                             151 N. Glendora Avenue
           Grace Church of Glendora Preschool                   1515 S. Glendora Avenue
           Cullen Elementary School                             440 N. Live Oak
           La Fetra Elementary School                           547 W. Bennett
           Sellers Elementary School                            500 N. Loraine Avenue
           Stanton Elementary School                            725 S. Vecino Avenue
           Sutherland Elementary School                         1330 N. Amelia
           Williams Elementary School                           301 S. Loraine Avenue
           Goddard Middle School                                859 E. Sierra Madre
           Sandburg Middle School                               819 W. Bennett
           Glendora High School                                 1600 E. Foothill Blvd.
           Whitcomb High School                                 350 W. Mauna Loa
           Arrow High School                                    1505 S. Sunflower
           Washington Elementary                                325 W. Gladstone
           Willow Elementary                                    1427 S. Willow
           Citrus Community College                             1000 West Foothill Boulevard
           Glendora Public Library                              140 S. Glendora Avenue
           Foothill Presbyterian Hospital                       250 S. Grand Avenue
           Huntington East Valley Hospital                      150 W. Route 66
           Arbor Glen Care Center                               1033 E. Arrow Highway
           Emmanuel health Care & Rehabilitation Center         805 W. Arrow Highway
           Foothill Nursing and Rehabilitation Center           401 W. Ada Avenue
           YMCA: Glendora                                       505 N. Grand Avenue
Glendora Community Plan 2025                           ▸8◂                                      Noise Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                                    Table N-3
                                         Sensitive Receptors (Continued)
                                  RECEPTOR                                 LOCATION
              PARKS:
              Dawson Avenue Park (5.44 acres)                   201 Dawson Avenue
              Sandburg School Park (12.19 acres)                Leadora Avenue & Wildwood Avenue
              Big Tree Park (0.34 acres)                        665 S. Santa Fe Avenue
              Gladstone Park (8.37 acres)                       600 E. Gladstone Avenue
              Ole Hammer Park (1.74 acres)                      362 N. Live Oak Avenue
              Finkbiner Park                                    160 N. Wabash Avenue
              George Manooshian School Park                     E. Palm Drive & N. Loraine Avenue
              Willow Springs Park (1.21 acres)                  515 N. Willow springs Lane
              South Hills Park (3.00 acres)                     701 E. Mauna Loa Avenue
              Rainbird Park (4.66 acres)
              C.E. Equestrian Park (2.11 acres)                 1000 N. Glendora Mountain Road
              Centennial Park (0.90 acres)                      725 E. Mauna Loa Avenue
3.3.1 Traffic Noise
Existing Roadway Conditions
Interstate 210 (I-210) traverses the southern portion of the City in an east/west direction. City
roadways are generally comprised of major north/south arterial roadways (i.e., Grand Avenue and
Lone Hill Avenue) and major east/west arterial roadways (i.e., Route 66, Arrow Highway, and Base
Line Road). Posted speed limits range from 35 to 40 miles per hour (mph). Secondary roadways and
collector roads are located throughout the City in a grid pattern. Posted speed limits range from 25 to
40 mph along these roadways.
Traffic Noise Levels
Traffic noise levels can be reliably predicted using formulas that take into account traffic volume,
speed, and percentage of trucks. Existing noise contours were calculated for all of the City’s primary
and major arterials, as well as I-210 that traverse the City, roadways within residential and
commercial uses. Noise generation for each roadway segment was calculated and the distance to the
60, 65, and 70 dBA CNEL contours was determined.
A noise contour is a line behind which the noise level does not exceed a certain value. For instance,
the 60 dBA CNEL contour indicates that the CNEL between the street and the contour line is equal
to, or greater than 60 dBA. This means that the CNEL beyond the contour line, away from the
street, is less than 60 dBA.
Existing modeled traffic noise levels can be found in Table N-4, Existing Traffic Noise Levels for the
approximate location of existing noise contours based on average daily traffic (ADT).
Glendora Community Plan 2025                           ▸9◂                                        Noise Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                                   Table N-4
                                         Existing Traffic Noise Levels
                                                          dBA @ 100 Feet Distance from Roadway Centerline to:
              Roadway Segment                    ADT        from Roadway                (Feet)
                                                              Centerline   60 CNEL      65 CNEL 70 CNEL
Sierra Madre Avenue
Between Live Oak Avenue and Loraine Avenue       5,030           53.3          38          18           8
Between Loraine Avenue and Valley Center
                                                 4,450           52.8          35          16           7
Avenue
Foothill Boulevard
Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue                12,790           59.9         110          35          11
Grand Avenue and Vermont Avenue                 19,250           65.8         451          143         45
Elwood Avenue and Loraine Avenue                11,328           56.4          65          30          14
Loraine Avenue and Valley Center Avenue         12,590           56.8          70          32          15
Valley Center Avenue and Lone Hill Avenue       13,810           57.2          74          34          16
Route 66
Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue                19,145           64.5         330          104         33
Grand Avenue and Vermont Avenue                 20,130           64.7         347          110         35
Vermont Avenue and Glendora Avenue              19,950           64.6         344          109         34
Glendora Avenue and Pasadena Avenue             24,380           65.5         421          133         42
Pasadena Avenue and Elwood Avenue               24,100           65.5         416          132         42
Elwood Avenue and Loraine Avenue                23,820           65.4         410          130         41
Loraine Avenue and Compromise Line Road         24,945           65.6         430          136         43
Base Line Road
Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue                 6,310           59.6         109          34          11
Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue                11,285           62.2         195          62          19
Gladstone Street
Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue                11,290           60.4         126          59          27
Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue                11,395           60.5         127          59          27
 Glendora Community Plan 2025                         ▸ 10 ◂                                   Noise Element

                        GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                                   Table N-4 (Continued)
                                               Existing Traffic Noise Levels
                                                                      dBA @ 100 Feet Distance from Roadway Centerline to:
                Roadway Segment                           ADT           from Roadway                         (Feet)
                                                                           Centerline         60 CNEL        65 CNEL 70 CNEL
Glendora Avenue and Bonnie Cove Avenue                   14,530                61.5              150             69              32
Bonnie Cove Avenue and Sunflower Avenue                  12,500                60.9              135             63              29
Sunflower Avenue and Valley Center Avenue                11,930                60.7              131             61              28
Valley Center Avenue and Lone Hill Avenue                14,410                61.5              149             69              32
Grand Avenue
Leadora Avenue and Bennett Avenue                         9,920                58.9               95             44              20
Bennett Avenue and Foothill Boulevard                    12,500                59.5              110             51              24
Foothill Boulevard and Ada Avenue                        18,870                64.4              325            103              33
Ada Avenue and Route 66                                  18,590                64.4              325            103              33
Route 66 and Mauna Loa Avenue                            23,500                61.3              144             67              31
Mauna Loa Avenue and Base Line Road                      24,310                65.5              419            132              42
Base Line Road and Gladstone Street                      27,490                63.0              186             87              40
Gladstone Street and Juanita Avenue                      26,420                62.8              182             84              39
Glendora Avenue
Route 66 and Base Line Road                              16,935                62.2              166             77              36
Base Line Road and Interstate 210                        13,160                61.1              140             65              30
Interstate 210 and Gladstone Avenue                      15,200                61.7              154             72              33
Gladstone Avenue and Juanita Avenue                      11,760                60.6              130             60              28
Loraine Avenue
North of Sierra Madre Avenue                              2,110                53.2               41             19               9
Sierra Madre Avenue and Leadora Avenue                    2,790                54.4               50             23              11
Leadora Avenue and Bennett Avenue                         4,820                56.7               72             33              15
Bennett Avenue and Foothill Boulevard                     6,850                58.3               91             42              20
Foothill Boulevard and Route 66                           6,395                58.0               87             40              19
Sunflower Avenue
Interstate 210 and Gladstone Street                      10,250                60.0              119             55              26
Gladstone Street and Juanita Avenue                       9,040                59.5              109             51              23
Valley Center Avenue
Bennett Avenue and Foothill Boulevard                     5,180                53.4               38             18               8
Foothill Boulevard and Compromise Line Road               4,890                56.8               72             34              16
Lone Hill Avenue
Foothill Boulevard and Route 66                          14,580                57.5               77             36              17
Route 66 and Interstate 210                              27,870                63.0              188             87              41
Interstate 210 and Gladstone Street                      26,720                65.9              460            146              46
Amelia Avenue
Foothill Boulevard and Route 66                           5,260                53.5               39             18               8
Route 66 and Interstate 210                               7,740                58.8               98             46              21
1. Traffic modeling based upon data contained within the Traffic Impact Study prepared by Kimley-Horn and Associates Inc. in April 2007.
 Glendora Community Plan 2025                                    ▸ 11 ◂                                               Noise Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
3.3.2 Stationary Noise
Commercial and industrials land uses located near residential areas currently generate occasional noise
impacts. The primary noise sources associated with these facilities are caused by delivery trucks, air
compressors, generators, outdoor loudspeakers, and gas venting. Other significant stationary noise
sources in the City include noise from construction activity, street sweepers, and gas-powered leaf
blowers. Residential land uses and areas identified as noise-sensitive, must be protected from excessive
stationary noise. Stationary sources include, among others, commercial and industrial centers. These
impacts are best controlled through effective land use planning and application of the City Noise
Ordinance.
3.3.3 Other Stationary Noise Sources
Ambient Noise
In atmospheric sound transmission or noise pollution, the ambient noise level is the sound pressure
level at a given location, normally specified as a reference level to study a new intrusive sound source.
Ambient sound levels are often measured in order to map sound conditions over a spatial regime to
understand their variation with locale. In this case the product of the investigation is a sound level
contour diagram. Alternatively ambient noise levels may be measured to provide a reference point for
analyzing an intrusive sound to a given environment. For example, aircraft noise is studied by
measuring ambient sound without the presence of any overflights, and then studying the noise
addition by measurement or computer simulation of overflight events.
Ambient noise level is measured with a sound level meter. It is usually measured in dB above a
reference pressure level of 0.00002 Pascals (Pa), in the International System of Units (SI). Most
frequently ambient noise levels are measured using a frequency-weighting filter, the most common
being the A-weighting scale, such that resulting measurements are denoted dBA, or decibels on the
A-weighting scale.
Noise Measurement Methodology
Locations for noise measurements were selected utilizing aerial photographs flown by Eagle Aerial in
2006, as well as a land use map provided by the City of Glendora. RBF utilized the aerial photograph
to divide the City into a grid, which was then further grouped into similar land uses to determine
specific areas to be measured. RBF determined nine areas that would provide sufficient data to
establish an acoustical baseline for the City. RBF conducted one short-term noise measurement (10
minutes in length) in each designated area on May 3, 2007.
Noise monitoring equipment used for the ambient short-term noise survey consisted of a Brüel &
Kjær Hand-held Analyzer Type 2250 equipped with a 4189 microphone. The monitoring equipment
complies with applicable requirements of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) for Type
I (precision) sound level meters.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸ 12 ◂                                     Noise Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Noise Measurement Results
Noise measurements were conducted by RBF Consulting on May 3, 2007 and are shown in Table N-5,
Noise Measurements. The noise measurement sites were representative of typical existing noise exposure
adjacent to major roadways as well as within residential and commercial uses. Meteorological
conditions were typical, with light wind speeds (0 to 5 miles per hour), low humidity and clear skies.
Existing measured short-term noise levels ranged from 49.0 dBA to 66.3 dBA.
                                                       Table N-5
                                                Noise Measurements
        Site                                                                      Leq
                                              Location                                   Time
        No.                                                                      (dBA)
                Located at the intersection of Gladstone Street and Grand
         1                                                                        66.3 10:26 AM
                Avenue, north of Oakdale Memorial Park.
                Located north along Foothill Boulevard and west along Barranca
         2                                                                        65.3 10:59 AM
                Avenue.
         3      Located along Route 66, near Huntington East Valley Hospital.     64.4 11:28 AM
         4      Located in the southwest corner of Finkbiner Park.                46.6 11:51 AM
                Located at the intersection of East Sierra Madre and Loraine
         5                                                                        59.2 12:13 PM
                Avenue within residential uses and nearby a middle school.
                Located within a residential area along Lemon Avenue (east of
         6                                                                        49.0  1:14 PM
                Loraine Avenue).
                Located within a residential area, north of Route 66 and east of
         7                                                                        49.1  1:39 PM
                Lone Hill Avenue.
                Located within a commercial general area to the west of Lone
         8                                                                        60.2  2:08 PM
                Hill Avenue and south of Interstate-210.
                Located within a residential area (north of Arrow Highway) that
         9                                                                        57.4  2:33 PM
                adjoin commercial uses.
      Source: Noise Monitoring Survey conducted by RBF Consulting, May 3, 2007.
4.0 NOISE CONTOURS
Projected general plan buildout noise levels can be found in Table N-6, General Plan Buildout Traffic
Noise Levels.
Exhibit N-2, Existing Noise Contours, and Exhibit N-3, General Plan Buildout Noise Contours, provide
existing and expected 2025 noise contours along many of the city’s major and secondary arterials and
the two freeways that traverse the City.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                               ▸ 13 ◂                           Noise Element

                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                                 Table N-6
                                 General Plan Buildout Traffic Noise Levels
                                                        dBA @ 100 Feet Distance from Roadway Centerline
               Roadway Segment                 ADT        from Roadway             to: (Feet)
                                                            Centerline  60 CNEL      65 CNEL 70 CNEL
Sierra Madre Avenue
Between Live Oak Avenue and Loraine Avenue     6,290           54.3         44           20          9
Between Loraine Avenue and Valley Center
                                               5,870           54.0         42           19          9
Avenue
Foothill Boulevard
Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue              13,700           60.2        118           37         12
Grand Avenue and Vermont Avenue               20,100           66.0        471          149         47
Elwood Avenue and Loraine Avenue              12,210           56.7         68           32         15
Loraine Avenue and Valley Center Avenue       14,060           57.3         75           35         16
Valley Center Avenue and Lone Hill Avenue     15,610           57.8         80           37         17
Route 66
Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue              12,255           62.5        211           67         21
Grand Avenue and Vermont Avenue               23,990           65.4        414          131         41
Vermont Avenue and Glendora Avenue            22,270           65.1        384          121         38
Glendora Avenue and Pasadena Avenue           27,320           6.0         471          149         47
Pasadena Avenue and Elwood Avenue             27,450           6.0         473          150         47
Elwood Avenue and Loraine Avenue              27,580           66.0        475          150         48
Loraine Avenue and Compromise Line Road       28,830           66.2        497          157         50
Base Line Road
Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue              10,280           61.8        177           56         18
Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue              12,115           62.5        209           66         21
Gladstone Street
Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue              12,200           60.8        133           62         29
Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue              12,465           60.9        135           63         29
Glendora Avenue and Bonnie Cove Avenue        16,270           62.0        161           75         35
Bonnie Cove Avenue and Sunflower Avenue       19,390           62.8        181           84         39
Sunflower Avenue and Valley Center Avenue     18,730           62.6        177           82         38
Valley Center Avenue and Lone Hill Avenue     19,480           62.8        182           84         39
Grand Avenue
Leadora Avenue and Bennett Avenue             12,440           59.5        110           51         24
Bennett Avenue and Foothill Boulevard         15,220           60.4        126           58         27
Foothill Boulevard and Ada Avenue             21,570           65.0        372          118         37
Ada Avenue and Route 66                       23,990           62.4        170           79         37
Route 66 and Mauna Loa Avenue                 30,250           66.4        521          165         52
Mauna Loa Avenue and Base Line Road           32,750           66.8        565          179         56
Base Line Road and Gladstone Street           32,730           63.7        209           97         45
Gladstone Street and Juanita Avenue           28,900           63.2        193           89         42
 Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸ 14 ◂                                  Noise Element

                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                             Table N-6 (Continued)
                                  General Plan Buildout Traffic Noise Levels
                                                             dBA @ 100 Feet         Distance from Roadway Centerline
               Roadway Segment                     ADT         from Roadway                     to: (Feet)
                                                                  Centerline         60 CNEL      65 CNEL 70 CNEL
Glendora Avenue
Route 66 and Base Line Road                       20,920             63.1               191           89         41
Base Line Road and Interstate 210                 17,040             62.2               166           77         36
Interstate 210 and Gladstone Avenue               19,150             62.7               180           83         39
Gladstone Avenue and Juanita Avenue               15,140             61.7               154           71         33
Loraine Avenue
North of Sierra Madre Avenue                       2,980             54.7                52           24         11
Sierra Madre Avenue and Leadora Avenue             3,360             55.2                56           26         12
Leadora Avenue and Bennett Avenue                  5,525             57.3                79           36         17
Bennett Avenue and Foothill Boulevard              7,690             58.8                98           45         21
Foothill Boulevard and Route 66                    6,855             58.3                91           42         20
Sunflower Avenue
Interstate 210 and Gladstone Street               10,470             60.1               120           56         26
Gladstone Street and Juanita Avenue                9,530             59.7               113           52         24
Valley Center Avenue
Bennett Avenue and Foothill Boulevard              6,590             54.5                45           21         10
Foothill Boulevard and Compromise Line Road        6,770             58.2                90           42         19
Lone Hill Avenue
Foothill Boulevard and Route 66                   18,250             58.4                89           41         19
Route 66 and Interstate 210                       36,740             64.2               226          105         49
Interstate 210 and Gladstone Street               33,438             66.9               577          182         58
Amelia Avenue
Foothill Boulevard and Route 66                    5,560             53.7                40           19          9
Route 66 and Interstate 210                        8,070             59.0               101           47         22
1. Traffic modeling based upon data contained within the Traffic Impact Study prepared by Kimley-Horn and Associates Inc.
in April 2007.
 Glendora Community Plan 2025                           ▸ 15 ◂                                           Noise Element



                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
Exhibits N-2 and N-3 display the average daily traffic (ADT) volume noise levels at 100 feet from the
roadway centerline and the distance from the roadway centerline to the 70, 65, and 60 dBA CNEL
contours. None of the roadways measured generated currently general noise levels at a distance of
100 feet from centerline that exceed 70 CNEL. Of the 48 roadway links modeled within the City
planning area, seven roadway links generate noise levels at 65 CNEL or greater at 100 feet from
centerline.
Twenty-one of the roadway links modeled generate noise levels between 60 CNEL and 65 CNEL.
These links include Route 66 between Barranca Avenue and Glendora Avenue, Base Line Road
between Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue, segments along Gladstone Street between Barranca
Avenue and Lone Hill Avenue, segments along Grand Avenue from Foothill Boulevard and Gladstone
Street and Juanita Avenue, Glendora Avenue between Route 66 and Juanita Avenue, a segment on
Sunflower Avenue between Interstate 210 to Gladstone Street, and one on Lone Hill Avenue from
Route 66 and Interstate 210.
Fourteen of the 48 roadway segments modeled generate noise levels between 55 CNEL and 60 CNEL.
These segments are along Foothill Boulevard between Barranca and Grand Avenue and Elwood and
Loraine Avenue, Base Line Road between Barranca and Grand Avenue, Grand Avenue between
Leadora Avenue and Foothill, Loriane Avenue between Leadora Avenue and Route 66, a segment on
Sunflower Avenue between Gladstone Street and Juanita Avenue, Valley Center Avenue at Foothill
Boulevard and Compromise Line Road, Lone Hill Avenue between Foothill Boulevard and Route 66,
and Amelia Avenue between Route 66 and Interstate 210.
Six modeled roadway links with nose levels below 55 CNEL at 100 feet from centerline are located
along Sierra Madre Avenue between Live Oak Avenue and Valley Center Avenue, Loraine Avenue
north of Sierra Madre and between Sierra Madre and Leadora Avenue, along Valley Center Avenue
between Bennett Avenue and Foothill Boulevard, and Amelia Avenue between Foothill Boulevard and
Route 66.
Tables in the Circulation Element indicated traffic volumes on designated street segments. Surface
traffic noise has the greatest impact on the noise environment of Glendora’s residential and sensitive-
receptor properties. Contours between 55 and 60 dBA CNEL are common along City collector
streets, 65 dBA CNEL or greater contours are common along major streets.
5.0 DESCRIPTION OF NOISE PLAN
Transportation noise is the most serious noise problem in Glendora. However, local government has
little direct control of transpiration noise at the source. State and federal agencies have the
responsibility to control vehicle noise admission levels. The noise effective method the City has to
mitigate transportation noise by reducing noise impact on the community. Mitigation through site
planning and the design and construction of a noise barrier are the most common ways of alleviating
traffic noise impacts in existing urban environments.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸ 18 ◂                                   Noise Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
5.1 TYPICAL NOISE ATTENUATION TECHNIQUES
Noise impacts can be mitigated in three basic ways: by reducing the sound level of the noise
generator, by increasing the distance between the source and receiver, and by insulating the receiver.
Noise reduction can be accomplished by placement of walls, landscaped berms, or a combination of
the two, between the noise source and the receiver. Generally, effective noise shielding requires a solid
barrier with a mass of at lease four pounds per square-foot of surface area which is large enough to
block the line of sight between source and receiver. Variations may be appropriate in individual cases
based on distance, nature and orientation of buildings behind the barrier, and a number of other
factors. Garages or other buildings may be used to shield dwelling units and outdoor living areas from
traffic noise.
In addition to site design techniques, noise insulation can be accomplished through proper design of
buildings. Nearby noise generators should be recognized in determining the location of doors,
windows and vent openings. Sound-rated windows (extra thick or multi-paned) and wall insulation
are also effective. None of these measures, however, can realize their full potential unless care is taken
in actual construction: doors and windows fitted properly; openings sealed; joints caulked; plumbing
adequately insulted from structural members. Sound-related doors and windows will have little effect
if left open. This may require installation of air conditioning for adequate ventilation. This chain of
design, construction and operation is only as effective as its weakest link.
Noise impacts can be reduced by insulating noise sensitive uses, such as residences, schools, libraries,
hospitals, nursing and care homes and some types of commercial activities. But perhaps a more
efficient approach involves limiting the level of noise generation at the source. State and Federal
statutes have largely preempted local control over vehicular noise emissions but commercial and
industrial operations and certain residential activities provide opportunities for local government to
assist in noise abatement. Local ordinances may establish maximum levels for noise generated on-site.
This usually takes the form of limiting the level of noise permitted to leave the property where it may
impact other uses.
Although vehicular noise emissions standards are established at the State and Federal levels, local
agencies can play a significant part in reducing traffic noise by controlling traffic volume and
congestion. Traffic noise is greatest at intersections due to acceleration, deceleration and gear shifting.
Measures such as sign synchronization can help to minimize this problem. Likewise, reduction of
congestion aids in reduction of noise. This can be accomplished through the application of traffic
engineering techniques such as channelization of turning movements, parking restrictions, separation
of modes (bus, auto, bicycle, pedestrian) and restrictions on truck traffic.
Noise reduction through reduction of traffic volumes can also be accomplished with incentive
programs for traffic volumes can also be accomplished with incentive programs for use of public
transit facilities and high-occupancy vehicles, staggering of work hours and land use controls. Vehicle
trips can be turned into pedestrian trips with integration of housing and employment into the same
project or area, construction of high-density, affordable housing in proximity to employment,
shopping and public transit facilities and other techniques.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸ 19 ◂                                     Noise Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
5.2 NOISE AND LAND USE PLANNING INTEGRATION
Information relative to the existing and future noise environments within Glendora should be
integrated into future land use planning decisions. The Element presents the existing and future noise
environments so that the City will include noise impact considerations in development programs.
Noise and land use compatibility guidelines are presented, as well as noise standards for new
developments. Community noise considerations are to be incorporated into land use planning to the
maximum extent feasible.
5.3 TRANSPORTATION NOISE CONTROL
The most efficient and effective means of controlling noise from transportation systems is to reduce
noise at the source. However, since the City has little direct control over source noise levels because of
State and federal preemption (for example, State motor vehicle noise standards and Federal air
regulations), the City should focus on reducing the impact of the noise on the community.
5.4 NON-TRANSPORTATION NOISE CONTROL
People must be protected from excessive noise from non-transportation sources, including commercial
and industrial centers. These impacts are most effectively controlled through the application of the
City’s Noise Ordinance.
6.0 PLANNING FACTORS, GOALS, AND POLICIES
TRANSPORTATION NOISE IMPACTS
Planning Consideration: The most significant contributors to noise impacts are generated from
transportation sources. The City of Glendora seeks to minimize the noise impacts associated with
transportation to the greatest extent feasible. Minimizing these impacts requires the evaluation of
existing noise sources and coordination of appropriate mitigation through design and policy
considerations.
Goal            N-1:         Reduced noise impacts from transportation sources.
Policies        N-1.1        Ensure traffic noise mitigation measures are included and implemented in
                             the design of new development.
                N-1.2        Encourage the State Department of Transportation (Caltrans) to continue
                             programs that lead to the reduction of the noise levels on I-210.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸ 20 ◂                                     Noise Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                 N-1.3        Limit construction, delivery, and through truck traffic to designated
                              routes.
                 N-1.4        Mitigate transportation equipment impacts at construction sites.
NON-TRANSPORTATION NOISE IMPACTS
Planning Consideration: Non-transportation noise sources, including those generated from
commercial/industrial activities, construction equipment and various community activities, have the
potential of introducing undesirable impacts within the City. Development policy and regulatory
standards should consider the reduction of these non-transportation noise impacts and mitigate them
to a less than significant level.
Goal             N-2:         Reduced noise impacts from non-transportation sources.
Policies         N-2.1        Review and update the Noise Ordinance, on a regular basis, to ensure
                              noise-generating uses are adequately addressed.
                 N-2.2        Strive to resolve existing and potential conflicts between noise generating
                              uses and human activities.
                 N.2.3        Prohibit significant noise generating activities from locating adjacent to
                              residential neighborhoods and near schools.
                 N-2.4        Ensure that construction noise does not cause an adverse impact to the
                              residents of the City by requiring that noise mitigation techniques be
                              incorporated into all construction-related activities.
                 N-2.5        Consider developing maximum noise standards for ventilation systems
                              (i.e., air conditioning units) in residential areas.
COORDINATION WITH LAND USE PLANNING
Planning Consideration: Land use planning has a direct relationship with objectionable noise. The
location and type of land uses should consider the potential noise impacts generated. Therefore, the
evaluation of potential noise generation should be a consideration in all land use decisions.
Goal             N-3:         Coordinated land use planning and noise mitigation.
Policies         N-3.1        Ensure Community Noise Equivalent Levels (CNEL) levels for noise
                              sensitive land uses meet or exceed normally acceptable levels, as defined by
                              State of California standards.
                 N-3.2        Enforce all noise standards as outlined in the City’s Noise Ordinance.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                         ▸ 21 ◂                                   Noise Element

                  GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
               N-3.3         Enforce limits set by the State of California to control noise levels,
                             particularly those governing motor vehicles.
               N-3.4         Ensure that all new development is consistent with exterior and interior
                             noise standards.
               N-3.5         Incorporate noise reduction measures into all development proposals, as
                             necessary.
               N-3.6         Consider noise impacts associated with the development of non-residential
                             uses in the vicinity of residential uses.
               N-3.7         Require acoustical materials in all new residential and commercial
                             developments where noise levels exceed the compatibility standards
                             outlined in the Noise Element.
               N-3.8         Encourage the use of double-paned windows for residential uses adjacent
                             to the freeways and along major arterials.
               N-3.9         Encourage programs to retrofit existing homes to reduce noise impacts in
                             the homes.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                        ▸ 22 ◂                                Noise Element

CHAPTER 7
OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION
ELEMENT
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The purpose of the Open Space and Recreation Element is to examine existing open
space and recreational facilities and outline strategies and actions to preserve and enhance       Habitat lands
                                                                                                   are discussed
these amenities within the City. The Open Space designation in Glendora includes both              in more detail
private and public lands in the foothills and South Hills. The primary source of open              in the
space lands are the City’s foothills. As discussed further on in the element they play a           Conservation
vital role in supporting the City’s water needs. They also support a unique variety of             Element
wildlife and plant resources - several of which are protected by state and/ or federal
regulations.
Open space and recreational facilities are located throughout the City and provide
recreational, training and educational opportunities along with various programs and
services to assist and improve the quality of life in the community. Such amenities and
areas in the City of Glendora include parks, community centers, trails, hillside areas,
open space easements, and institutional uses.
Proximity to open space resources provides intrinsic economic value to the community.
Studies indicate that properties nearer to open space resources tend to have higher
property values than those with no nearby resources. Open space opportunities within a
community also contribute to the overall health of a community. Access to open space
contributes to the mental and physical well being of individuals.
2.0 AUTHORITY FOR ELEMENT
California Government Code Section 65302(e) requires that a General Plan “include an open
space element.” Recreation Elements are an optional element of the General Plan commonly
coupled with the open space element, which is pursuant to Section 65303 of the Government
Code. Other sections of the Government Code that are applicable to the Open Space and
Recreation Element include Sections 65560, 65562, 65563, 65564, 65566 and 65567. In
addition, Public Resources Code Section 5076 allows cities to consider the demands for trail-
oriented recreational use. Government Code Section 66477, commonly referred to as the
Quimby Act, allows cities to adopt ordinances that address parkland and/or fees for residential
subdivisions.
The Open Space Element must contain goals and policies concerned with managing all open
space areas, including undeveloped lands and outdoor recreation areas. Also included is open
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸1 ◂                Open Space and Recreation Element

space left undeveloped for public health and safety reasons, the preservation or management of
production of resources in the community, and for recreation purposes.
Although the task of “managing”, as stated above, may imply maintaining the status quo to avoid
a loss of effectiveness, it is the City’s intent to enhance its open space resources through proper
stewardship. Stewardship includes ensuring that existing open space resources are adequately
and properly maintained, that open space resources are properly managed to sustain their
longevity for future generations of Glendorans, that any open space resources in a state of
decline be restored, and that best management practices (BMPs) always be utilized.
3.0 SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
Open space and recreational uses available to the City include active and passive facilities,
shared facilities with other public or private parties, hillside lands, and easements. Glendora has
a total of approximately 4,911.63 acres of land designated as Conservation Open Space, Open
Space or Flood Control; refer to Exhibit OSR-1, Open Space and Recreational Facilities and
Table LU1 of the Land Use Element. Approximately 4,300 acres of land are designated as
Conservation Open Space, which includes Angeles National Forest areas in the planning area,
Big Dalton Wilderness Park and South Hills Park. Big Dalton Wilderness Park and South Hills
Park provide both recreational and open space opportunities within Glendora. Land designated
as Open Space consists of approximately 339.38 acres and includes active and passive parks,
special use parks, and the Fairmount Cemetery, Oakdale Memorial Park and Glendora Country
Club, which are private facilities. Although shared facilities and private recreational and open
space uses are an asset to the community and environment, they do not fulfill the requirements
established by the Quimby Act. Flood control facilities comprise approximately 267 acres.
Existing open space and recreation facilities are listed in Table OSR-1, Existing Open Space and
Recreation Facilities.
                                              TABLE OSR-1
                EXISTING OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION FACILITIES
                           Type of Facility                             Acreage
             Passive and Active Recreation Parks                           46.8
             Joint Use Facilities                                          12.7
             Special Use Parks                                             24.0
             Wilderness Parks                                             938.5
             Community Centers                                             N/A
             Open Space – Private                                         192.3
             Open Space                                                   63.58
             Flood Control                                               267.39
             Open Space – Conservation*                                 3,366.36
             Total                                                      4,911.63
            * excludes South Hills and Big Dalton Wilderness Parks
Glendora Community Plan 2025                         ▸2 ◂              Open Space and Recreation Element

3.1 PASSIVE AND ACTIVE RECREATION PARKS
Glendora currently provides nine passive and active parks, which include two joint use facilities
with GUSD. A tenth park has been approved resulting from approved development in Focus
Area B (see Section 3.12.5), but has not yet been constructed. An approved development
agreement and specific plan will ensure that this park will be built. The parks vary in amenities
and size. Passive Parks include Big Tree Park, South Hills Wilderness Area and Big Dalton
Wilderness Park. Both South Hills and Big Dalton provide primarily riding and hiking
opportunities. The Big Dalton Wilderness Park provides additional links to trails located in the
adjacent Angeles National Forest. South Hills provides local hiking opportunities. Big Tree Park
was established for the primary purpose of preserving a City-designated historic landmark
consisting of a Moreton Bay Fig Tree. The park also provides a small picnic and tot lot area.
Active parks include Dawson Park, Finkbiner Park, Gladstone Park, Louie Pompei Memorial
Sports Park, Ole Hammer Park, George Manooshian Park, Willow Springs Park, South Hills
Park and Sandburg Park. The parks range in size from 1.5 acres to 20 acres. Typical amenities
include regulation-sized sports facilities, including ballfields, basketball courts, tennis courts, and
racquetball facilities, as well as playgrounds, open space areas, restrooms and picnic areas.
George Manooshian Park and Sandburg Park are both leased through a joint-use agreement with
Glendora Unified School District (GUSD). George Manooshian Park has a separate area behind
Goddard Middle School which is available to the public at all times while Sandburg Park is only
available during off school hours. Facilities at these parks include various fields and diamonds,
racquet and volleyball courts, picnic and barbeque areas, playgrounds, restrooms, exercise
equipment, skate parks, amphitheaters, and memorials. They are hosts to sports activities and
events throughout the year.
Louie Pompei Memorial Park, located north of Gladstone Street on Valley Center Ave, is a 20-
acre active recreation park. Improvements underway as of the completion of the element include
a regulation baseball diamond with night lighting, softball fields, overlay soccer fields, overlay
football fields, children’s playground, and picnic area. Improvements to the park will include the
alleviation seasonal flooding issues which reduced the useable area of the facility. The facility is
expected to accommodate most of the City’s directed sports programs.
Table OSR-2, Open Space and Park Facility Matrix, provides an inventory of the type of
amenities provided at each location.
3.2 SPECIAL USE PARKS
Glen Oaks Municipal Golf Course, Carlyle E. Linder Equestrian Park, and Centennial Heritage
Park are considered special use parks within Glendora (refer to Table OSR-2).
Glen Oaks Municipal Golf Course, located at the southwest corner of Glendora Avenue and
Dawson Avenue provides a three-par, nine-hole golf course with night lighting, driving range
and a putting practice green. A golf pro shop, coffee shop, community meeting room, and
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸3 ◂                 Open Space and Recreation Element

restrooms are also located on-site, comprising approximately 19.79 acres. Glen Oaks Golf
Course is under the same lease and shares facilities with the adjacent Dawson Park.
Carlyle E. Linder Equestrian Park, located on Glendora Mountain Road and Boulder Springs
Drive, is a 2.11-acre equestrian facility with a riding rink, training rink, and enclosed riding area.
The Equestrian Park provides access to the primary equestrian trailhead for Big Dalton
Wilderness Park.
Centennial Heritage Park, located east of Glendora Avenue at the terminus of Mauna Loa, is a
5.5-acre park constructed to depict a late 19th century to early 20th century citrus ranch. Historic
buildings including the Hamilton House and Orton Englehart workshop, along with a working
printshop, and antique farm implements are also located within the park. The City owns the land
on which the park is located; however, the actual facility is operated by a private non-profit
organization through a lease agreement with the City. Public access to the park is limited to
specific hours throughout the week and tours are available by appointment. In 2004 the City
approved the Centennial Heritage Park Master Plan which identifies the ultimate build out of the
park. Planned improvements and activities to the park will ultimately result in the re-creation of a
town square and citrus ranch to reflect early 20th Century life in Glendora.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸4 ◂                  Open Space and Recreation Element

                                                                                                                                                            TABLE OSR-2
                                                                                                                                                OPEN SPACE AND PARK FACILITY MATRIX
                                                                                                                              Playground/ Tot                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Community/
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Horse Shoe Pit                                                                                                         Meeting Room   Parking Stalls   Camp-ground
                                                       Soccer/                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Stage/
                                                                                   Tennis Court   Racquet Ball                                                           Shuffleboard                                        Picnic Table
                                                                                                                                                            Skateboard                  Horseback                                            Exercise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Equipment                  Concession                                                                    Hiking/
                                                                      Basketball                                 Volleyball                     Parcourse                                                                                               Barbeque                                           Restroom
                                         Baseball/
                              Acreage                                                                                                                                                                                  Gym                                                                                            Pool                                                                               Other
 Open Space & Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Checkout                                                                                                Equestrian
                                          Softball                                                                                                             Park                     Riding Ring                                         Equipment                                           Station
                                                     Football Field                                                                 Lot                                                                                                                                        Amphitheater                                                                                             Meeting Center
       Sites                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Station                                                                                                  Trails
Big Tree Park                  0.34                                                                                                 •                                                                                            •
Dawson Avenue Park              4.0                                    •      •1                                                    •                                                                                            •                                                                                                               •
Finkbiner Park                   10           •                 •      •                                            •               •                           •            •                            •                      •             •          •            •            •             •          •                                   •                                           •
George Manooshian
Park (Goddard Middle            6.9           •         •       •      •                                            •               •                                                                                   •        •             •           •                                      •           •                                  •
School)
Gladstone Park                  7.5           •                 •                                                   •               •                                                                      •                     •                        •            •                                     •
Old Hammer Park                 1.5                                                                                 •               •                                                                                            •                        •
Louie Pompei
Memorial Sports Park             20           •         •                                                                           •                                                                                            •                         •                                      •           •                                  •
Sandburg Park
(Sandburg Middle                5.8           •         •       •      •                                            •                                                                                                   •        •                         •                        •             •                                              •
School)
South Hills Park                1.5                                                                                                 •                                                                                            •                                                                           •                                   •
Willow Springs Park             1.5           •                                                                                     •                                                                                            •
Focus Area B Park3             4.66
                   Total       63.7
Big Dalton Wilderness                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           •
Park Campground                 690                                                                                                                                                         •                                    •                         •                        •                         •                                  •                                                        •
South Hills                     243                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •                         •
Wilderness Area
                   Total       938.5
Centennial Heritage          5.5                                                                                                                                                                                                 •                                                                                                               •
Park
Glen Oaks Municipal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •
Golf Course/Park                 18                                                                                                               •2                                                                             •                                                                •           •                                  •
Carlyle E. Linder
Equestrian Park                   3                                                                                                                                                         •                                    •                         •                                      •           •                                  •
                   Total       26.5
Timothy Daniel
Crowther Teen &                                                                                                                                                                                                         •                                                                                     •                                  •                                                        •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •
Family Center
La Fetra Center                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              •                                   •                                           •            •
Legion Memorial
Building/Community                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            •                                  •                                                        •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •
Center/Scout Hut
                   Total        N/A
1 Leased (Privately-owned)
2 Facility includes a golf course, putting practice, driving range and pro shop.
3 Park approved, but not constructed.
               Glendora Community Plan 2025                                                                                             ▸5 ◂                                                      Open Space and Recreation Element

3.3 WILDERNESS PARKS
The City of Glendora maintains two wilderness parks, Big Dalton Wilderness Park and South
Hills Wilderness Area. Combined, the parks provide 938.5 acres of recreational and open space.
Big Dalton Wilderness Park is located on Big Dalton Road in the foothills of the San Gabriel
Mountains above the Big Dalton debris dam. The 690-acre wilderness park is located adjacent to
the Angeles National Forest. Big Dalton Campground provides camping and picnicking
facilities and is the staging area for the trail systems of Big Dalton Wilderness Park and the
Angeles National Forest. A day camp facility, located further into the canyon, provides summer
recreation programs. South Hills Wilderness Area is comprised of 248.5 acres located north of
the Pasadena Freeway, east of Glendora Avenue, West of Los Cerritos and South of Route 66.
South Hills Park and the undeveloped northern terminus of Bonnie Cove Avenue provide access
to the trail system of the South Hills Wilderness Park. Included within both parks are many of
the City’s hiking, riding and equestrian trails. The City’s Trails Committee has prepared
Masterplans for the continued maintenance and development of trails in both parks.
3.34 COMMUNITY CENTERS
The La Fetra Center for seniors located at 333 Foothill Boulevard, provides daily activities and
special events for the community’s seniors. Programs and activities include card games, book
discussion groups, computer instruction, support groups, legal and tax advice and health and
fitness classes.
The Timothy Daniel Crowther Teen and Family Center is the most recent addition to Dawson
Park and includes the only City-owned gymnasium, computer lab, game room and meeting
rooms. The 15,000 square foot facility provides a free place for teens in grades 6 through 8 to
play, socialize or study after school and on weekends. The center organizes and host special
activities such as lock-ins and day trips at a reasonable price for youth throughout the year. In
addition, the facility is used for a variety of other activities and classes for residents of all ages
during hours it is not in use as a teen center.
Legion Memorial Building Community Center is located at Finkbiner Park on North Wabash
Avenue. The Legion building is used for various dance and educational classes and workshops.
Available services and activities available are both free and/or include fees.
A Youth Center and American Legion Building are located in the eastern portion of Finkbiner
Park North of Dalton Street and used for various classes, events and activities. The Scout Hut
was donated by the Glendora Rotary Club, which sponsors programs and actives in the
community.
3.5 AQUATIC CENTER
There are three locations in Glendora with available pool facilities: Citrus College, Glendora
High School, and Glendora Country Club. Glendora Aquatics Center is located on the Citrus
College campus. The facility offers swim related programs, lessons and recreational swimming
during the summer. Glendora High School Pool has a joint program with the City and offers
similar services and facilities that include the use of 13 heated lanes, two-one meter diving
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸7 ◂                 Open Space and Recreation Element

boards, public restrooms and showers. Glendora Country Club also has pool facilities, but those
are restricted to members.
3.6 BIKES AND TRAILWAYS
Biking, hiking and equestrian trails are maintained primarily through dedicated volunteers within
the community. The Glendora Trails Committee has been the spearhead for maintaining existing
trails and cutting new trails. The last new trail was added in 1996. The City’s Trails Committee
has prepared a masterplans for trails located in the northern foothills as well as for the South
Hills. The City has not officially adopted the Trails Committee Masterplan prepared in 2003. The
Masterplan provides an inventory and description of existing trails. Table OSR-3, Trails Within
Glendora, provides characteristics of these trails. Most trails occur over public lands and public
easements. Bikeways are further addressed in the Circulation Element.
Existing and proposed trails may be located on public rights-of-way such as streets, within utility
easements including flood control channels, on government owned lands and easements on
private property. A majority of the trails are located in the foothills.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸8 ◂                 Open Space and Recreation Element

TABLE OSR-3
                                     TRAILS WITHIN GLENDORA1
                                             Northern Foothills Trails
          Trail Name                Length (miles)          Type               Difficulty Level
   Big Dalton Canyon                        1.0             Hiking     Easy
   Coulter Pine                             1.4             Hiking     Moderate to strenuous
   Dunn Canyon                              0.1             Hiking     Easy
   Garcia (historic)                        1.2             Hiking     Strenuous
   Glendora Mountain Road                   0.6            Equestrian  Easy
   Keiser                                   0.5             Hiking     Easy to moderate
   Greencroft                               0.2            Multi-use   Easy
   Oak Knoll                               0.06            Multi-use   Easy
   Palm Drive                              0.06            Multi-use   Easy
   Pavil Canyon                             0.3             Hiking     Easy
   Poopout                                  0.7             Hiking     Very strenuous
   Colby-Dalton                             1.5            Multi-use   Moderate to strenuous
   Mystic Canyon Upper                      1.0            Multi-use   Strenuous
   Mystic Canyon Lower                     0.75             Hiking     Strenuous (steep)
   Wren-Meachum                             1.0            Multi-use   Strenuous (advanced equestrian)
   Marshall                                 0.3            Multi-Use   Easy
   Colby                                    1.5            Multi-Use   Moderate to strenuous
   Glendora Wilderness                      1.5             Hiking     Strenuous
                                                South Hills Trails
          Trail Name                Length (miles)          Type               Difficulty Level
   Alosta Canyon                            0.6            Multi-use   Easy
   Alosta Canyon S. Fork                    0.4             Hiking     Strenuous
   Big Dalton Wash                          0.5            Multi-use   Easy
   Bonnie Cove                              0.3            Multi-Use   Moderate
   Bonnie Cove East                         0.4            Multi-Use   Moderate
   Bonnie Cove West                        0.25            Multi-Use   Moderate
   East View N. Fork                        0.3            Multi-Use   Easy
   East View S. Fork                        0.2            Multi-Use   Easy
   Elderberry                               0.5            Multi-Use   Moderate
   Mustard                                 0.25             Hiking     Easy
   North Spur                              0.15            Multi-Use   Easy
   South Hills                              1.9            Multi-Use   Easy
   Toyon                                   0.25            Multi-Use   Moderate
   Walnut                                   0.4            Multi-Use   Easy
   Wild Iris                                0.2            Multi-Use   Moderate
1
  Source: City of Glendora Trails Committee
Glendora Community Plan 2025                          ▸9 ◂              Open Space and Recreation Element

3.7 RECREATIONAL PROGRAMS
3.7.1        Community Classes and Programs
The Recreation Division of the Community Services Department provides seasonal programs for
all age groups including youth and adults. Programs include sports leagues, educational classes,
volunteer opportunities, leisure activities and trips, dance, fitness and exercise classes, after
school, summer and holiday activities, and a year-round tennis program and summer swim
program.
3.7.2        Community Organizations
Community organizations assist the City with the goal of providing adequate, quality open space
and recreation opportunities for Glendora citizens. Organizations’ focuses range from
environmental preservation to hosting activities and events. Camp Fire Boys and Girls,
Glendora Trail Builders, Glendora Community Conservancy, Glendora Preservation Foundation
and Glendora Rotary are a few of the organizations providing programs or assistance in the area
of open space and recreation within the community.
Glendora Community Conservancy
The Glendora Community Conservancy (GCC) is a private, nonprofit corporation formed in July
1991. The GCC was formed with the mission to promote the preservation of land and/or buildings
for historic, educational, ecological, recreational, scenic or open space opportunities. Nearly 300
acres are owned and stewarded by volunteers and projects through Conservancy programs. The
Brodiaea Reserve on Conservancy property is second in size in protection of this rare species. The
Conservancy hosts a calendar of activities and projects available to residents, organizations and
businesses to sponsor, fund and/or participate in.
3.7.3        Youth and Teen Programs
The Community Services Department operates the Hire-A-Youth (H.A.Y.) program for young
adults residing in Glendora. The office is located at the La Fetra Center. The H.A.Y. office
accepts job orders and arranges for young adults to perform various types of work including
housework, yard work, childcare, food service and clerical assistance.
Parks Playground Program is an after school and weekend recreational program available at
Gladstone and Finkbiner Parks.
The Action Zone (TAZ) is a drop in recreation center for Glendora’s Middle School youth.
Located at Glendora Library’s Bidwell Forum, TAZ is a free service providing trips, activities
and other special events. TAZ operates Monday through Friday from 3:00 PM to 5:30 PM with
extended hours on most school holidays and during spring break. Timothy Daniel Crowther
Teen Center provides a place for youth in grades 6 through 8 to hang out, play games and study
after school and on weekends. Hours are Monday through Thursday 2:30PM until 6:00 PM,
Friday until 8pm and Saturday from 12:30 PM to 8:00 PM.
3.7.4        Senior Activities
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸10◂                 Open Space and Recreation Element

The Human Services Department, operating under the Community Services Department, offers a
variety of programs and services to Glendora seniors including, information and referral services,
educational classes, physical and leisure activities, social activities (trips, events, movies),
nutrition programs, legal aid, notary service and tax preparation assistance. Most of the activities
and programs are offered at the La Fetra Center for seniors. The center organizes and publicizes
the recreational activities, social services, educational and training classes along with various
clubs and groups available to seniors.
3.7.5       Trips and Excursions
The Community Services Department organizes several trips throughout the year. The trips vary
from one- to two-day events to excursions to extended trips and tours consisting of several days.
3.7.6       Seasonal Events
Concerts in the Park. Rain Bird sponsors the Summer Series of Concerts in the Park Sunday
evenings in the Bandshell at Finkbiner Park.
Movies in the Park. The City of Glendora and Glendora Rotary Club cosponsor Movies in the
Park Saturday evenings at Finkbiner Park.
Trail Hikes. Glendora Trails Committee hosts Tuesday evening nature walks and Saturday
morning trail hikes during the summer months. The walks/hikes are of varying difficulty and are
conducted over various trails routes within the City.
Detailed programming information provided in Glendora City Newsletter & Community Services
Guide, which is issued quarterly to residents.
3.8 INSTITUTIONAL USES
Four school districts serve the City of Glendora: Glendora Unified, Charter Oak Unified, Azusa
Unified, and Bonita Unified. Glendora Unified School District (GUSD) and Charter Oak
Unified School District (COUSD) are located within the City and serve the majority of the
population. Azusa Unified School District (AUSD) and Bonita Unified School District (BUSD)
also provide services to the community. GUSD serves the City with six elementary schools, two
middle schools, Whitcomb (continuation) High School and Glendora High School. COUSD
maintains two elementary schools and the Sunflower Alternative Education Campus. AUSD
maintains Sierra High School within the City of Glendora. Beyond this, several youth residents
attend schools in the BUSD, located outside the City limits.
3.8.1       Partnerships With Schools
The City of Glendora has maintained an agreement for the joint-use of school facilities at GUSD
and COUSD. This agreement grants public access to school site buildings and grounds for
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸11◂                Open Space and Recreation Element

recreational use during the hours facilities are not in use for school purposes. Some school sites
only lease portions of their facilities for public use, and all uses have been discounted based on
public availability. Acreage on Table OSR-4, School Facilities in Glendora, displays the total
acreage of school facilities and is only a general number of shared facility acreage for open space
and recreation in Glendora. Exhibit OSR-2, School Facilities, shows the location of school
facilities within Glendora.
The George Manooshian Park and Sandburg Middle School Park are most integrated with the
City. George Manooshian Park at Goddard Middle School has separate facilities located behind
the school for public use at all times, whereas Sandburg Middle School Park is only available to
the public during off school hours. All school facilities significantly increase available baseball,
practice, informal, and soccer fields along with tennis, volleyball and handball courts. The City
of Glendora shares in the maintenance of the facilities.
                                           TABLE OSR-4
                             SCHOOL FACILITIES IN GLENDORA
                                 School                               Acreage
              Cullen Elementary                                         8.74
              La Fetra Elementary                                        8.63
              Sellers Elementary                                        12.16
              Stanton Elementary                                         8.50
              Sutherland Elementary                                     10.44
              Williams Elementary                                       9.30
              Goddard Middle                                            27.28
              Sandburg Middle                                          22.94
              Glendora High School                                     36.29
              Whitcomb High                                             9.44
              Sunflower Campus                                          15.44
              Willow Elementary                                         8.41
              Washington Elementary                                      7.62
                                                  Subtotal             185.19
3.9 OPEN SPACE
3.9.1       Open Space for Protection of Health and Safety
Open space located in areas susceptible to environment hazards or otherwise concern the health
and safety of the public can create a duel use within the City. In Glendora, this includes mainly
flood areas consisting of channels, basins, and check dams. The control of floodwater in the
planning area is the responsibility of the City and the Los Angeles County Department of Public
Works and is discussed in more detail in the Safety Element of the General Plan.
3.9.2       Hillsides
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸12◂                 Open Space and Recreation Element

Substantial open space resources are in the foothills and South Hills and provide the community
with open views and natural wilderness areas. The foothills are located in the northern part of
the City at the base of the San Gabriel Mountains and are comprised of approximately 3,986
acres of designated Conservation Open Space area. The South Hills are located adjacent to the
Foothill Freeway (I-210) and consist of approximately 248-acres of designated Conservation
Open Space area within the City. Combined, the hillsides encompass over 4,200 acres. Large
areas of the hillsides are undeveloped due to the extreme topography and lack of accessibility;
however, some hillside areas are designated for residential uses at low densities.
Approximately 3,500 acres of the hillside areas within the City are Angeles National Forest
lands. The northeast portion of the National Forest land is also part of the larger San Dimas
Experimental Forest, which includes a total of 17,153 acres within the Angeles National Forest.
Under the jurisdiction of the Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, the San
Dimas Experimental Forest provides a field laboratory for studies in the ecology of chaparral and
related ecosystems. The Glendora Community Conservancy has jurisdiction over approximately
350 acres of the foothills, of which 257 acres are within the City of Glendora. The acreage
includes a reserve to protect the Brodiaea filifolia; a California State and Federally listed
endangered plant. The Conservancy has historically purchased hillside land to promote the
preservation of land for educational, ecological and open space opportunities. The City owns
approximately 1,040 acres within the hillsides.
3.12.3       Open Space Easements
Open space easements create an opportunity for the City to utilize areas owned by public utilities
to create additional links and recreational opportunities for the community. Since 1995 the City
has had an agreement with Los Angeles County to use the Big Dalton Wash flood control
easement from Glendora Avenue north to Sierra Madre Avenue. This includes the spreading
grounds behind the equestrian center on Glendora Mountain Road. Additional potential right-of-
way is located in the South Hills. Existing L.A. County flood control rights-of-way and potential
rights-of-way create potential easement areas for open space in Glendora. Agreements are
created through the Los Angeles County Department of Power and Water and also Public Works.
3.12.4       Private Open Space Areas
Open space can exist on privately owned land as long as the use is for purpose of preservation or
management of the production of natural resources and habitat. Table OSR-5, Private Open
Space in Glendora, provides a general inventory of private open space in Glendora. Private
acreage does not fulfill requirements in the Quimby Act.
3.12.5       Open Space in Focus Areas
Community Plan 2025 included the identification of various Focus Areas throughout the
community. Focus Areas are generally areas where land use changes were likely to occur during
the life of the Community Plan. Two such Focus Areas located in close proximity to each other
encompass nearly 130 acres and provide an opportunity to link Glendora to planned Gold Line
transportation improvements in the City of Azusa. This “linear park” would begin at Grand
Avenue and Foothill Boulevard, follow the existing rail right-of-way to the west, cross Barranca
Avenue, and continue west to Citrus Avenue. Improvements would extend north, paralleling
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸13◂                 Open Space and Recreation Element

Citrus Avenue, and make an appropriate connection with the improvements in the City of Azusa
which would lead to the planned future Gold Line station.
Prior to adoption of the Community Plan 2025, the City Council approved the Arboreta Specific
Plan which provided for the development of a planned residential community on the Focus Area
B site known as the “Rainbird Property”. Included in the specific plan was the eastern portion of
the linear park between Glendora and Azusa. Completion of the linear park to Azusa will occur
upon the completion of the residential development on the Focus Area A site known as the
“Monrovia Nursery”.
In addition to providing pedestrian walking and biking opportunities, the linear park is also
expected to serve as a means to reduce potential noise and vibration issues associated with the
operation of the Gold Line. The separation provides the opportunity for the City to establish a
dual use of the separation - additional walking and biking opportunities to connect with the
future Gold Line station and avoidance of significant noise and vibration impacts on
development adjacent to the Gold Line.
                                              TABLE OSR-5
                             PRIVATE OPEN SPACE IN GLENDORA
           Private Open Space                               Location                             Acreage
      Fairmont Cemetery                             301 Baldy Vista Avenue                          2.00
      Oakdale Memorial Cemetery              1401 – 1621 South Grand Avenue                         94.0
      Glendora Country Club                        310 South Amelia Avenue                         115.0
                                                                                     Total         211.0
4.0 OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION PLAN
The Open Space and Recreation Plan for the City of Glendora details how the City will provide
adequate recreation and open space resources to the City’s residents. This section of the Open
Space and Recreation Element emphasizes coordination between the City, its internal
departments, local agencies and community groups to provide citywide recreation opportunities.
The City will enhance its overall open space and recreational to the satisfaction of Glendora
residents.
4.1 PARKLAND STANDARDS
The State of California Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Sections 65000 through
66037) and The Quimby Act2 (Government Code Section 66477) indicate that the legislative
body of a municipality or county may, by ordinance, require the dedication of land, the payment
2
   The Quimby Act was established by the California legislature in 1965 to provide parks for the growing
communities in the State. The Act only allows cities and counties to establish ordinances requiring new residential
subdivisions to provide park/recreation land and/or in-lieu fees as well as specifying acceptable uses and
expenditures of such funds.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                          ▸14◂                     Open Space and Recreation Element

of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both for park recreational purposes as a condition to
the approval for a final tract map or parcel map. In cases where such dedications or fees have
not been obtained for particular lots through a map, they may be imposed at the time that
building permits are issued.
Among other requirements, the following conditions must be met:
    f    The ordinance must include definite standards for determining the proportion of a
         subdivision to be dedicated and the amount of any fee to be paid in lieu thereof; and
    f    The legislative body has an adopted General Plan containing a Recreation Element, and
         any proposed park and recreational facilities are in accordance with definite principles
         and standards contained therein.
For new subdivisions, land for open space and/or payment of an in-lieu fee can be required of
new subdivisions over 50 lots. Only an in-lieu fee is collected for projects with less than 50 lots.
The City may also obtain parkland through the methods outlined below.
Specific Plans. Specific Plans guide, coordinate and regulate the development of property within
a given area. These areas have been found and declared to be in some degree different and
unique in comparison with other areas of the City due to differences in location; accessibility;
natural characteristics of the land; patterns of the land ownership; age and conditions of
improvements; characteristics and desires of occupants and other factors. There were five
Specific Plans within the City as of April 2006.
Assessment Districts. California State law provides for the establishment of special assessment
districts to provide public facilities. Certain types of these districts, Mello-Roos, can be used to
develop and maintain public parks in newly developing areas based upon a vote of current land
owners.
Developer Land Dedications and Exactions. The City, at its discretion, may require dedication
of land and/or payment of fees for the purpose of providing and preserving open space and
recreational facilities and improvements in developing areas, as provided for in Chapter 20.38 of
the Municipal Code. It may also be appropriate for the City to obtain open space through the
application of mitigation through the CEQA process to avoid or reduce a project’s potentially
significant impacts. Depending on the circumstances of a project, it may also be as relevant for
the City to require public open space as permitted through the Subdivision Map Act, local
ordinance, or as a condition of development approval.
Parks Masterplan. In 2001 the City of Glendora adopted the Parks Master Plan which identified
suggested standards for the provision of recreation facilities within the City. The Parks
Masterplan provides general guidelines for planning purposes rather than a definitive set of park
facilities standards.
4.2 PARKLAND
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸15◂                  Open Space and Recreation Element

This Element contains measures to ensure that adequate recreational opportunities are provided
for Glendora residents. The City of Glendora has approximately 1,022 acres of parks, which
include active, passive, and wilderness parks. Specifically, the City of Glendora provides
approximately 46.8-acres of active and passive parks, which includes 24 acres of special use
parks and approximately 12.7-acres of active/joint use facilities. Additionally, approximately
938.5 acres of wilderness parks are located within the City.
4.3 URBAN OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION PROGRAMS
Glendora will continue to expand and enhance its recreational programs and services to serve the
City’s population. Actions that will continue the City’s level of recreational services for the
community include:
    f   Continue to employ cooperative agreements with the school districts to provide
        additional recreational resources.
    f   Continue to coordinate with various civic and private groups to provide an overall
        recreation program that is well coordinated and responsive to the needs of the
        community.
4.4 VACANT LAND FOR PARK DEVELOPMENT
Future population growth in Glendora will require the utilization of existing vacant land
resources as a means to provide additional open space and recreational resources.
The City has identified vacant parcels, totaling approximately 32 acres, as shown in Exhibit LU-
1, Vacant and Underutilized Land and in Table LU-2, Summary of Vacant and Underutilized
Land, in the Land Use Element. Meeting future park and recreation needs of the community will
require additional analysis of these parcels to determine if their size, location and other land use
and environmental constraints make them suitable for open space.
5.0 PLANNING                     CONSIDERATIONS,                          GOALS,             AND
        POLICIES
CONSERVATION AND PRESERVATION OF SENSITIVE LANDS AND OPEN SPACE
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora understands the importance of preserving open
space and natural resources within and contiguous to the City’s boundaries. The City’s location,
adjacent to United States Forest Service lands, and other significant open space, sensitive
habitats and natural systems demonstrates the importance of coordinated efforts. Ensuring the
conservation and preservation of these areas and resources within the City through coordination
with public and private entities is a priority of the Glendora community.
Goal            OSR-1 Preserve open space resources.
                                                                                              Refer to Goal
                                                                                              CON-9 in the
                                                                                              Conservation
                                                                                              Element
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸16◂               Open Space and Recreationregarding
                                                                                               Element
                                                                                              natural
                                                                                              resources and
                                                                                              sensitive
                                                                                              habitats.

Policies      OSR-1.1        Promote the preservation of open space resources
                             through increased public awareness about the
                             importance of protecting and maintaining natural
                             open space areas.
              OSR-1.2        Promote coordination with public and private
                             entities such as local and regional water districts
                             and utility companies to enhance and preserve open
                             space resources such as an “adopt-a-park” program
                             and/ or creating park partnership programs.
              OSR-1.3        Continue to work in conjunction with the Glendora Community
                             Conservancy to investigate open space preservation opportunities.
              OSR-1.4        Investigate opportunities for open space land acquisition for the
                             preservation of natural resources and sensitive habitats.
              OSR-1.5        Continue to partner with the Glendora Community Conservancy to
                             determine funding opportunities for open space land acquisition for
                             the preservation of natural resources and sensitive habitats.
              OSR-1.6        Pursue partnerships with other organizations, such as the United
                             States Forest Service to ensure preservation of natural resources
                             and sensitive habitats.
              OSR-1.7        Recognize the value of major institutional passive open spaces,
                             such as cemeteries, as important components of the total open
                             space systems and protect their visual character.
              OSR-1.8.       Support regional and local efforts to acquire, develop, and
                             maintain open space linkages.
              OSR-1.9.       Consult with regional and sub-regional agencies such as the San
                             Gabriel and Lower Los Angeles Rivers and Mountains
                             Conservancy Master Plan in evaluating new development projects
                             for opportunities for open space conservation where applicable.
              OSR-1.10       Develop a land management/ land maintenance plan of City-owned
                             wilderness parks to increase fire safety, minimize potential
                             naturally occurring safety hazards in wilderness park areas, protect
                             biodiversity and native plant species.
              OSR-1.11       Create and update best management practices for all of the City’s
                             open space resources.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                   ▸17◂                Open Space and Recreation Element

Planning Consideration: Land use planning should acknowledge the potential environmental
challenges associate with growth while it considers opportunities and challenges for rural,
hillside development. A balance between the need for preservation and the management of
storm water run-off, wildfires, habitat destruction and other sensitive land resources is vital. The
City should evaluate policies and programs that would effectively address preservation of
foothills/hillsides, while acknowledging the rights of property owners.
Goal             OSR-2           Coordinated land use and environmental planning.
Policies         OSR-2.1         Develop and implement a comprehensive hillside development
                                 strategy.
                 OSR-2.2         Require a constraints analysis for proposed hillside residential
                                 development to ensure that significant land and natural resource
                                 features are avoided, such as ridgelines, significant watershed
                                 areas, tributaries and streams, and rare, threatened or endangered
                                 species habitat.
                 OSR-2.3         Control the grading of land to minimize the potential for erosion,
                                 landsliding, and other forms of land failure, as well as to limit the
                                 negative aesthetic impact of excessive modification of natural
                                 landforms.
                 OSR-2.4         Encourage residential clustering as a means of preserving open
                                 space.
HILLSIDE PRESERVATION
Planning Consideration: The City of Glendora is recognized for its vast foothills and hillsides.
The hillside areas are an invaluable resource to the City. Preserving the integrity of the hillsides
while acknowledging private property rights is a priority for Glendora.
Goal             OSR-3           Preserved and enhanced integrity of Glendora’s hillsides.
Policies         OSR-3.1         Work directly with property owners to encourage preservation of
                                 the foothills and hillsides.
                 OSR-3.2         Partner with the Glendora Community Conservancy to determine
                                 opportunities for land acquisition of developable hillside properties
                                 for open space.
                 OSR-3.3         Ensure development within the hillsides is consistent with
                                 preserving hillside integrity.
        OSR-3.4          Prohibit hillside grading and development activities that would damage
the integrity of hillside areas for the purpose of providing off-site views.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸18◂                 Open Space and Recreation Element

RECREATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
Planning Consideration: Recreation activities and facilities improve the health of residents and
the community, encourage social interaction and contribute to a sense of community. The City
of Glendora understands the importance of providing the community a variety of opportunities
for organized activities and programs, recreation facilities and community gathering areas.
Goal           OSR-4           Diversified range of park and recreation facilities and
                               programs for all Glendora residents.
Policies       OSR-4.1         Investigate opportunities to enhance and expand existing park and
                               recreation facilities.
               OSR-4.2         Create an implementation strategy to link land use decisions with
                               the Parks Master Plan in coordination with the Conservation and
                               Open Space Elements.
               OSR-4.3         Provide a variety of program opportunities for residents of all ages.
               OSR-4.4         Provide a variety of park facilities including active and passive
                               parks, dog parks, trails and lighted sports fields and racquet courts
                               with consideration of residential areas.
               OSR-4.5         Encourage the use of open space resources through the provision
                               of passive amenities.
               OSR-4.6         Encourage private development of recreation facilities that
                               complement and supplement the public recreational system.
               OSR-4.7         Provide a balance between recreational opportunities throughout
                               the community.
               OSR-4.8         Expand park use to include services that increase the overall well-
                               being of residents.
Goal           OSR-5           Improved community access to recreation facilities.
Policies       OSR-5.1         Create access trails to link open space and recreational areas within
                               the City.
               OSR-5.2         Ensure all Glendora residents are aware of recreational
                               opportunities by expanding the methods of communication (i.e.,
                               City website, reader boards, newsletters, etc.)
               OSR-5.3         Encourage the development of park and recreation facilities in
                               areas of the City where existing supplies are limited.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸19◂                Open Space and Recreation Element

              OSR-5.4         Ensure park and recreation facilities meet American with
                              Disabilities Act (ADA) standards.
              OSR-5.5         Locate parks adjacent to compatible uses, such as residential,
              greenbelts, trails, bicycle paths, and schools, to minimize the negative impacts on
              adjacent land uses.
Goal          OSR-6           Coordinated joint-use of public facilities for recreation
                              activities.
Policies      OSR-6.1         Continue to work with the Glendora and Charter Oak Unified
                              School Districts to provide joint-use opportunities for recreation
                              activities.
              OSR-6.2         Investigate additional opportunities for the joint-use of public
                              facilities.
              OSR-6.3         Investigate additional opportunities for the joint-use of private
                              facilities such as churches and private schools.
Goal          OSR-7           Enhanced trail system in and throughout the community.
Policies      OSR-7.1         Prepare and implement a Trails Master Plan evaluating the
                              potential for creation of a variety of trail types to serve all
                              residents. The Master Plan should include topics such as trail
                              restoration, enhancements, amenities, and safety.
              OSR-7.2         Investigate opportunities to expand and connect the existing trail
                              system.
              OSR-7.3         Promote use of the trail system by Glendora residents and
                              surrounding communities.
              OSR-7.4         Improve and create more connections, and increase the safety of
                              the pedestrian, bicycling, and equestrian trail system in the City.
              OSR-7.5         Evaluate opportunities for public trails and trail improvements in
                              conjunction with new development.
              OSR-7.6         Create an implementation strategy to link land use decisions with a
                              Trails Master Plan.
              OSR-7.7         Establish a public open space link encompassing pedestrian and
                              bicycling in Focus Areas A and B to provide a means of
                              connection to the future Gold Line station in the City of Azusa.
              OSR-7.8         Develop both the South Hills and Foothills trail system balancing
                              the needs of various trail users such as equestrian, pedestrian, and
                              bike users. (GCC)
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸20◂                  Open Space and Recreation Element

              OSR-7.9        Investigate opportunities to link Glendora’s local trail system with
                             regional and sub-regional trails. (GCC)
Glendora Community Plan 2025                 ▸21◂                 Open Space and Recreation Element

Glendora Community Plan 2025 ▸22◂ Open Space and Recreation Element
                                                                                                          ANGELES NATIONAL                                                                                                                                                  ANGELES NATIONAL
                                                                                                               FOREST                                                                                                                                                            FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Big Dalton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Wilderness Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OPEN SPACE AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RECREATIONAL FACILITIES MAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C.E. Linder
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Equestrian Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EXHIBIT OSR-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   George
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Manooshian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LEGEND
                                                                                                                   Sierra Madre Avenue
                                                                 Citrus Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CONSERVATION OPEN SPACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Willow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Springs                                                                                                  OPEN SPACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Park
                                                                                                        Sandburg
                                                                                                         School                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UTILITY AND FLOOD CONTROL
                                                                                                          Park                                                                                   Ole
                                                                                                                                                                                               Hammer
                                                                                                                                                                                                Park                                                                                                                                                    PARCELS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CITY LIMITS
                                                                                                                         Rainbird                                        Finkbiner
                                                                                                                                                                           Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                                                                                 Foothill Boulevard
                                                                                                                                                       Glendora Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Glendora Country Club
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Route 66
                                                                                     Barranca Avenue
                                                                                                                               Grand Avenue
                                                                                                                                              Big
                                                                                                                                              Tree
                                                                                                                                              Park                                    Centennial
                                                                                                                                                                                        Park
                                                                                                                                                                                     South Hills
                                                                                                                                                                                       Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                     South Hills
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/open_space06.mxd January 22, 2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    &
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wilderness Park
                                                                                                                          '
                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                          &
                                                                                                                          210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    210
                                                                             AZUSA                                                            Dawson                                                                                                     Louie Pompei Sports Park
                                                                                                                                              Avenue
                                                                                                                                               Park
                                                                                                                                               Glenoaks                                                                                                                                                                           SAN DIMAS
                                                                                                                                              Golf Course
                                                                                                                                                                              Gladstone Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gladstone
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Park
                                                                                                       Oakdale Memorial Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     East Arrow Highway
                                                                                                                                               COVINA                                                                                                                                                                                         0   1,200 2,400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Feet
                                                                            ANGELES NATIONAL
                                                                                 FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SCHOOL FACILITIES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OSR - 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Elementary School
                                                                                                 Sierra Madre Avenue
                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                              10                                                                                           Middle School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           High School
                                                            Citrus Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                            (3                                                             CITY LIMITS
                                                                               !
                                                                               (     9
                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                       (2                                              !
                                                                                                                                                       (1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    No.   NAME                                   ACRES
                                                                                                         Grand Avenue                                                      Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.    Cullen Elementary School                8.74
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.    La Fetra Elementary School              8.63
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                                               Foothill Boulevard                                                                                   3.    Sellers Elementary School              12.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4.    Stanton Elementary School               8.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sutherland Elementary School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Washington Elementary School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10.44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7.62
                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                    7                                                                               7.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Williams Elementary School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Willow Elementary School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Carl Sanburg Middle School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8.41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 22.94
                                                                                                                             Glendora Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10.   Goddard Middle School                  27.28
                                                                                                                                                                           Route 66                                                                 11.   Glendora High School                   36.29
                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                 (
                                                                               Barranca Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12.   Whitcomb High School                    9.44
                                                                                                  4                                                                                                                                                 13.   Sunflower Campus                       15.45
                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                        12
                                                            AZUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (5
                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                             &
                                                                                                             %                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                           g
                                                                                                                                                                                                           &
                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/schools.mxd January 23, 2007
                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                          g
                                                                                                                                                                          &
                                                                                                                                                                          %                                                         SAN DIMAS
                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                              (6                                 Gladstone Street
                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                               (  13
                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (8                                                         Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                                        East Arrow Highway
                                                                                                                        COVINA                                                                                                                  0     1,200 2,400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Feet
                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                       SAFETY ELEMENT
CHAPTER 6
SAFETY ELEMENT
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The aim of the Safety Element is “to reduce the potential risk of death, injuries, property damage,
and economic and social dislocation resulting from fires, floods, earthquakes, landslides and other
hazards”.1 It serves as a guide for the City government and public for understanding the hazards
facing the City of Glendora and how to reduce the impacts of these hazards.
2.0 AUTHORITY FOR THE ELEMENT
California Government Code Section 65302(g) requires that a General Plan include:
“...a safety element for the protection of the community from any unreasonable risks associated with
the effects of seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, tsunami, seiche,
and dam failure; slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides; subsidence, liquefaction and
other seismic hazards identified pursuant to Chapter 7.8 (commencing with Section 2690) of the
Public Resources Code, and other geologic hazards known to the legislative body; flooding; and wild
land and urban fires.”
The following Federal and State regulations provide the legal framework to the Safety Element of a
General Plan. These programs provide minimum requirements/criteria that must be complied with.
Cities have the ability to adopt stricter requirements if desired.
2.1 CALIFORNIA ALQUIST-PRIOLO EARTHQUAKE
        FAULT ZONING ACT
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act was signed into law in 1972 with its primary
purpose being to mitigate the hazard of fault rupture by prohibiting the location of structures for
human occupancy across the trace of an active fault. The Act requires the State Geologist to
delineate “Earthquake Fault Zones” along faults that are “sufficiently active” and “well
defined.” The Act dictates that cities and counties withhold development permits for projects
within an Earthquake Fault Zone within their jurisdiction until geologic investigations
demonstrate that the projects are not threatened by surface displacements from future faulting.
Projects include all land divisions and most structures for human occupancy. State law exempts
single-family wood-frame and steel-frame dwellings that are less than three stories and are not
part of a development of four units or more. However, local agencies can be more restrictive
than the State.
1
  Source: State of California, Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, 2003 General Plan Guidelines, October
2003, page 90.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                           ▸1◂                                       Safety Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                   SAFETY ELEMENT
2.2 CALIFORNIA SEISMIC HAZARDS MAPPING ACT
The goal of the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act of 1990 is to minimize loss of life and property by
identifying and mitigating seismic hazards. The act addresses nonsurface fault rupture earthquake
hazards, including strong ground shaking, liquefaction and seismically induced landslides. The State
agency charged with implementation of the Act is the California Geological Survey (CGS). The
CGS prepares and provides local governments with seismic hazard zone maps that identify areas
susceptible to amplified shaking, liquefaction, earthquake-induced landslides, and other ground
failures. The seismic hazard zones delineated by the CGS are referred to as “zones of required
investigation,” because site-specific geological hazard investigations are required for construction
projects located within these areas.
2.3 REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
Pursuant to the Natural Hazards Disclosure Act, since June 1, 1998, sellers of real property and
their agents are required to provide prospective buyers with a “Natural Hazard Disclosure
Statement” when the property being sold lies within one or more State mapped hazard areas, such
as within an Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone or a Seismic Hazard Zone.
2.4 CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
         ACT
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was passed in 1970 to insure that local
governmental agencies consider and review the environmental impacts of development projects
within their jurisdictions. CEQA requires that an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) be prepared
for projects that may have significant effects on the environment. EIRs are required to identify
geologic and seismic hazards, and to recommend potential mitigation measures, giving the local
agency the authority to regulate private development projects in the early stages of planning.
2.5 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE
The California Building Code (CBC), which is included in Title 24 of the California Administrative
Code, provides “minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare
by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy,
location and maintenance of all buildings and structures.” These documents are historically updated
every three years. The most recent version of the CBC is the 2001 edition, based on the 1997 edition
of the Uniform Building Code. The City of Glendora has adopted the 2001 CBC edition with
local amendments.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸2◂                                      Safety Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                    SAFETY ELEMENT
2.6 UNREINFORCED MASONRY LAW
The Unreinforced Masonry Law of 1986 requires all cities and counties in Seismic Zone 4 (CBC,
1998) to identify hazardous unreinforced masonry (URM) buildings in their jurisdictions. Owners of
such buildings must be notified of the potential earthquake hazard, and mitigation must be
performed. The mitigation method, which may include retrofitting or demolition, is left to the local
jurisdiction. Chapter 19.03 of the Municipal Code pertains to seismic strengthening provisions for
unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings. All URM buildings within the City have been
identified and upgraded to meet current requirements.
2.7 NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE ACT AND FLOOD
         DISASTER PROTECTION ACT
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is mandated by the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968 and the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 to evaluate flood hazards and provide
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) for local and regional planners to promote sound land use and
floodplain development. Further, the Flood Disaster Protection Act requires owners of all structures
in identified Special Flood Hazard Areas to purchase and maintain flood insurance as a condition of
receiving Federal or federally related financial assistance, such as mortgage loans from federally
insured lending institutions. The National Flood Insurance Reform Act of 1994 further strengthened
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) by providing a grant program for State and
community flood mitigation projects. The act also established a system (Community Rating
System - CRS) for crediting communities that implement measures to protect the natural and
beneficial functions of their floodplains, as well as managing the erosion hazard. Glendora does not
currently participate in the NFIP since the City is located within Zone X, as identified on the FIRM.
Zone X is areas of moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area
2.8 FIRE REGULATIONS
Assembly Bill 337 (the Bates Bill, adopted September 29, 1992) was passed as a direct result of the
great loss of lives and homes in the Oakland Hills “Tunnel Fire” of 1991. The Bates Bill Process is
used to identify Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones (VHFHSZs). Under Assembly Bill 3819,
passed in 1994 (AB 3819 – Willie Brown), “Class A” roofing, minimum clearances of 30 feet
around structures, and other fire defense improvements are required in VHFHSZs.
Assembly Bill 6 (AB 6) requires that fire hazard areas be disclosed in real estate transactions. Civil
Code Section 1103(c)(6) also requires real estate sellers to inform prospective buyers whether or
not a property is located within a wildland area that could contain substantial fire risks and hazards.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸3◂                                       Safety Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                   SAFETY ELEMENT
Public Resources Code Section 4290 requires minimum statewide fire safety standards pertaining
to:
    f   Road standards for fire equipment access;
    f   Standards for signs identifying streets, roads, and buildings;
    f   Minimum private water supply reserves for emergency fire use; and
    f   Fuel breaks and greenbelts.
Wildland fire areas are also subject to Public Resources Code Sections 4291 through 4299, which
require property owners in such areas to conduct maintenance in order to reduce the fire danger.
Section 18.04.010 of the City’s Municipal Code adopts by reference, the Uniform Fire Code 2000
Edition.
2.9     STANDARDIZED EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM LAW
The Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) is described by the Petris Bill (SB
1841), and is contained in Chapter 1 of Division 2 of Title 19 of the California Code of
Regulations. It requires all jurisdictions within the State of California to participate in the
establishment of a standardized statewide emergency management system. The California
Emergency Services Act, Section 8568, states that “the State Emergency Plan shall be in effect in
each political subdivision of the State, and the governing body of each political subdivision shall
take such action as may be necessary to carry out the provision thereof.” The act provides the basic
authorities for conducting emergency operations following the proclamations of emergencies by
the Governor or appropriate local authority, such as a City Manager.
2.10    EMERGENCY PLANNING AND COMMUNITY RIGHT-TO-KNOW ACT
        (EPCRA)
The primary purpose of the Federal Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act
(EPCRA) is to inform communities and citizens of chemical hazards in their areas. Sections 311
and 312 of the EPCRA require businesses to report to state and local agencies the locations and
quantities of chemicals stored on-site. Section 313 of the EPCRA requires manufacturers to report
the release to the environment of any of more than 600 designated toxic chemicals. These reports
help communities prepare to respond to chemical spills and similar emergencies.
EPCRA mandates that Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) reports be made public. The TRI is a database
that contains information on toxic chemical releases and other waste management activities reported
annually by certain industry groups as well as federal facilities. This inventory was established in
1986 under the EPCRA and expanded by the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸4◂                                  Safety Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                     SAFETY ELEMENT
2.11 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DISCLOSURE PROGRAM
In 1986, Congress passed the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA). Title III
of this legislation requires that each community establish a Local Emergency Planning Committee
(LEPC). This committee is responsible for developing an emergency plan that outlines steps to
prepare for and respond to chemical emergencies in that community.
Several California statutes require the emergency notification of a hazardous chemical release.
These include: Health and Safety Codes Section 25270.7, Section 25270.8 and Section 25507;
Vehicle Code Section 23112.5; Public Utilities Code Section 7673; Government Codes Section 51018,
Section 8670.25.5(a); Water Codes Section 13271 and Section 13272; and California Labor Code
Section 6409.1(b)10. The Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Enforcement Act of 1986, better known
as Proposition 65, and Section 9030 of the California Labor Code also has specific reporting
requirements.
3.0 SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
3.1 CITY PLANS AND PROGRAMS
3.1.1 Multi-Hazard Functional Plan
The Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS), California Code of Regulations, Title
19, Division 2, Section 2443, requires compliance with the SEMS to.... “be documented in the areas
of planning, training, exercise, and performance." To be in compliance, emergency plans should
address five SEMS functions:
    f   Management;
    f   Operations;
    f   Logistics;
    f   Planning/Intelligence; and
    f   Finance/Administration.
The plan also addresses mutual aid, operational areas and multi/inter-agency coordination.
Glendora has prepared a Multi-Hazard Functional Plan (MHFP) for emergency response within the
City. The Plan meets the SEMS requirements of State law. The City also complies with the Los
Angeles County Emergency Management Plan.
The City’s MHFP is divided into three parts. Part One – Basic Plan, provides the overall
organizational and operational concepts relative to response and recovery, as well as an overview of
potential hazards. Part Two – Emergency Organization Functions, provides a description of the
emergency response organization and emergency action checklists. Part Three provides the
supporting and legal documents to the SEMS MHFP. Emergency response and threats are
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸5◂                                     Safety Element

                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                     SAFETY ELEMENT
thoroughly described and outlined in the MHFP. Key points of the plan include the identification of
critical areas in the City that represent both dangers, as well as areas for meeting and staging in an
emergency event, communications and emergency evacuation.
The MHFP addresses the City’s planned response to emergencies associated with natural disasters
and technological incidents. It provides an overview of operational concepts, identifies components
of the City’s emergency management organization within the SEMS and describes the overall
responsibilities of Federal, State and county entities and the City for protecting life and property and
assuring the overall well being of the population.
The City maintains an Emergency Operations Center (EOC) at the Glendora Police Department at
150 South Glendora Avenue and an alternate EOC is located at the Youth Center (159 North Cullen
Avenue) to coordinate City services during an emergency. During an emergency, the centralized
command center houses personnel from the City, emergency responders and other appropriate
agencies.
Emergency evacuation routes have been identified as shown in Exhibit SAF-1, Emergency
Evacuation Routes.
3.1.2 Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan
In October 2004, the City of Glendora adopted a Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan. The Natural
Hazard Mitigation Plan includes resources and information to assist City residents, public and private
sector organizations, and others interested in participating in planning for natural hazards. The
mitigation plan provides a list of activities that may assist the City of Glendora in reducing risk and
preventing loss from future natural hazard events. The action items address multi-hazard issues, as
well as activities for earthquakes, earth movements, flooding, wildfires and windstorms.
The action items are a listing of activities in which City agencies and citizens can be engaged to
reduce risk. Each action item includes an estimate of the time line for implementation. Short-term
action items are activities that City agencies may implement with existing resources and authorities
within one to two years. Long-term action items may require new or additional resources or
authorities, and may take between one and five years (or more) to implement.
The action items are organized within a matrix, which lists all of the multi-hazard and hazard-
specific action items included in the mitigation plan. The matrix includes the following information
for each action item:
      f   Coordinating Organization. The coordinating organization is the public agency with
          regulatory responsibility to address natural hazards, or that is willing and able to organize
          resources, find appropriate funding, or oversee activity implementation, monitoring, and
          evaluation.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸6◂                                     Safety Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             SAFETY ELEMENT
Exhibit SAF-1
Emergency Evacuation Routes
Glendora Community Plan 2025       ▸7◂          Safety Element

                                                                                    ANGELES NATIONAL
                                                                                         FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EMERGENCY EVACUATION ROUTES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SAF - 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EVACUATION ROUTE
                                                                                     Sierra Madre Avenue                                                                                                                                CITY LIMITS
                                                                    Citrus Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                             Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                                     Foothill Boulevard
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                                   Glendora Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                             Route 66
                                                                                          Barranca Avenue
                                                                                                                Grand Avenue
                                                                       AZUSA
                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                            g
                                                                                                            &
                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                               g
                                                                                                                                                                                               &
                                                                                                                                                                                               %
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/evacuation_route.mxd January 3, 2007
                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                            g
                                                                                                                                                                            &
                                                                                                                                                                            %                                      SAN DIMAS
                                                                                                                                                     Gladstone Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                                          East Arrow Highway                                    0    1,200    2,400
                                                                                                                               COVINA                                                                                                            Feet
                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                      SAFETY ELEMENT
      f   Time Line. Each action item includes an estimate of the time line for implementation. The
          timing is defined as short-term (one to two years) or long-term (between one and five years
          or more).
      f   Ideas for Implementation. Each action item includes ideas for implementation and potential
          resources, which may include grant programs or human resources.
      f   Plan Goals Addressed. The plan goals addressed by each action item are included as a way
          to monitor and evaluate how well the mitigation plan is achieving its goals once
          implementation begins.
      f   Constraints. Any applicable constraints for the action items are noted. Constraints may
          include a lack of city staff, lack of funds, or vested property rights, which might expose the
          City to legal action as a result of adverse impacts on private property.
3.1.3 City of Glendora Capital Improvement Program
The City of Glendora conducts an annual review and update of its Capital Improvement Program
(CIP). The Capital Improvement Program provides the primary planning and budget mechanism for
improvement projects throughout the City. The CIP must provide consistency with City policies as
set forth in the City’s General Plan. Projects within the CIP typically include water, recycled water,
sewer, storm drains and public right-of-way improvements.
3.1.4 Glendora Municipal Code
The Glendora Municipal Code contains all Ordinances adopted by the Glendora City Council. Many
of these chapters provide direct relevance to policies and programs in the Safety Element. Relevant
Code sections include:
    f    Title 6: Health and Sanitation;
    f    Title 9: Public Peace, Safety and Morals;
    f    Title 11: Emergency Preparedness,
    f    Title 14: Water,
    f    Title 18: Fire, and
    f    Title 19: Buildings and Construction.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                        ▸8◂                                    Safety Element

                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                     SAFETY ELEMENT
3.2 EXISTING CONDITIONS
The Safety Element specifically addresses both natural and man-made hazards.
Natural hazards include:
    f    Geologic Hazards (Seismic) – fault rupture, landslides, liquefaction, ground shaking,
    f    Geologic Hazards (Soils) – geologic and soil instability; and
    f    Flood Hazards – associated with rivers and streams, debris flows, and dam failure.
Man-made hazards include:
    f    Fire,
    f    Crime,
    f    Hazardous materials, and
    f    Aircraft overflight
This section of the Safety Element addresses the existing conditions of these hazards and the
programs currently in place to address them.
3.2.1 Natural Hazards
Geologic, hydrologic, seismic and soil conditions present in the City have been evaluated in order to
identify potential seismic hazards, such as surface faulting (ground rupture), ground shaking,
liquefaction, ground lurching, differential compaction, ground cracking and seismically induced
landslides. These data were used to evaluate potential seismic hazards to existing public and private
facilities, and future land development.
3.2.1.1 Geology
Glendora is located at the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains, bounded by the Angeles National
Forest to the north, city of Azusa to the west, city of Covina to the south and the city of San Dimas to
the east. Two predominant terrain types are located within Glendora: alluvial fan and foothill. The
alluvial fan portion of the City is characterized by gently to moderately sloping areas within the City
where a vast majority of urban development has already occurred. The foothill portion of the City is
characterized by moderate to very steep hillsides predominantly located along the northern boundary
adjacent to the Angeles National Forest. In addition, a small area known as “South Hills” located in
the southern portion of the City is also characterized by foothill terrain.
The City is located in the Transverse Range Geomorphic Province of southern California. This
province is characterized by an east-west trending mountain range (San Gabriel Mountains), which
have been uplifted and folded as a result of compression. This compression is the result of the
tectonic movements associated with the San Andreas, Cucamonga, Sierra Madre, and San Fernando
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸9◂                                      Safety Element

                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                      SAFETY ELEMENT
Fault Zones. These faults have shaped the landscape of southern California. Within the City, the
dominant geologic feature is the Sierra Madre Fault Zone, which has shaped the landscape in the
area.
The geologic units underlying the City can be categorized into two general categories: bedrock and
alluvium. The bedrock units within the City consist of three main types: (1) sedimentary units of
sandstone and siltstone, (2) volcanic units composed of tuff, lava, and mixtures of both, and (3) an
igneous-metamorphic complex of crystalline rocks. The alluvium units within the City consist of old
and young alluvial deposits that are derived from the surrounding bedrock units. These deposits
consist of sand, silt, and gravels, with the youngest deposits located within active drainage courses.
Refer to Exhibit SAF-2, Regional Geologic Map.
Groundwater depths within the City range between 100 and 150 feet beneath the surface in the areas
underlain by alluvium. The depth to groundwater has lowered over the last couple of decades due to
domestic water production, which relies on pumping groundwater from the Glendora Basin aquifer.
3.2.1.2 Seismic Hazards
The following section describes seismic hazards present in the City of Glendora including earthquake
faults, surface rupture, ground shaking, liquefaction, hazardous buildings and seismic response.
Earthquake Faults
Southern California is considered a seismically active region that is dominated by earthquake faults.
In the Transverse Range Geomorphic Province, these faults typically trend east-west, following the
general alignment of the San Gabriel Mountains. One major fault zone is located within the City of
Glendora. This zone is known as the Sierra Madre Fault Zone, which runs along the southern margin
of the San Gabriel Mountains and is related to the Cucamonga Fault to the east and San Fernando
Fault Zone to the west. In addition, to these faults, several other faults are located within the region
that could have an impact on the City. The San Andreas Fault is approximately 20 miles northeast of
the City, and is considered the most seismically active fault in the southern California region. A map
illustrating the location of faults in the vicinity of the City is shown in Exhibit SAF-3, Regional Fault
Map.
Earthquakes that could affect the City would most likely originate from the Sierra Madre,
Cucamonga, or San Andreas Fault Zones. These faults are close enough in proximity or expected to
generate strong enough shaking that could affect the City. Geologic conditions within the foothill
portions of the City could be impacted more severely due to the steep topography within this portion
of the City and the relative instability of some of the geologic units in this portion of the City. The
level of seismicity in Glendora, both as to maximum credible earthquake intensity and likely
earthquake occurrences, is considered to be approximately the same as for the Los Angeles Basin.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                         ▸ 10 ◂                                 Safety Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             SAFETY ELEMENT
Exhibit SAF-2
Regional Geologic Map
Glendora Community Plan 2025       ▸ 11 ◂       Safety Element

                                                                                                           water
                                                           pCc
                                                                           ANGELES NATIONAL
                                                                                FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pCc
                                                                                                                                                                                                    grMz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           REGIONAL GEOLOGY MAP
                                                                                 grMz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SAF - 2
                                                                                                                                                                                          pCc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Tv                        grMz Mesozoic granite, quatrz monzonite, granodiorite,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and quartz diorite.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M       Undivided pre-Cenozoic metasedimentary and metavolcanic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rocks of great variety. Mostly slate, quartzite, hornfels, chert,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       pCc                           phyllite, mylonite, schist, gneiss, and minor marble.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pCc     Complex of Precambrian igneous and metamorphic rocks.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mostly gneiss and schist intruded by igneous rocks; may
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     be Mesozic in part.
                                                                 M
                                                                                                      Sierra Madre Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Q      Alluviium, lake, playa, and terrace deposits; unconsolidated
                                                                 Citrus Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and semi-consolidated. Mostly nonmarine, but includes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     deposits near the coast.
                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Tv                              Tv      Tertiary volcanic flow rocks; minor pyroclastic deposits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Water
                                                                                                             Grand Avenue                                           Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CITY LIMITS
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                                          Foothill Boulevard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                            Glendora Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                    Route 66
                                                                                    Barranca Avenue
                                                                        Q
                                                                 AZUSA
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/geology.mxd January 3, 2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                                                                                                     Tv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SAN DIMAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                              Gladstone Street                                                                                                     Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology
                                                                                                                                                                 East Arrow Highway                                                                    0          1,400      2,800
                                                                                                                                               COVINA                                                                                                                           Feet
                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             SAFETY ELEMENT
Exhibit SAF-3
Regional Fault Map
Glendora Community Plan 2025       ▸ 12 ◂       Safety Element

                                                                                         ANGELES NATIONAL
                                                                                              FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M AD R E FAULT
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AN C H SIERRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                N.   B R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                REGIONAL FAULT MAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SAF - 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HOLOCENE fault displacement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (during past 10,000 years) without
                                                                                                              Sierra Madre Avenue                                                                                                                                       historic record.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LATE QUATERNARY fault discplacement
                                                                         Citrus Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (during past 700,000 years)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        QUATERNARY fault
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (age undifferentiated)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CITY LIMITS
                                                                                                                      Grand Avenue                                             Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                                                       Foothill Boulevard
                                                                                                                                     Glendora Avenue                                                       Lone Hill Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                               Route 66
                                                                                            Barranca Avenue
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/preferred_alternative.mxd August 31, 2006
                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                           g
                                                                                                                           &
                                                                                                                           %                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                            g
                                                                                                                                                                                                            &
                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                         AZUSA                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                              g
                                                                                                                                                                              &
                                                                                                                                                                              %                                                               SAN DIMAS
                                                                                                                                                         Gladstone Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2001 ESRI Data and Maps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Media Kit
                                                                                                                                                                            East Arrow Highway
                                                                                                                                     COVINA                                                                                                               0   1,200 2,400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Feet
                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                      SAFETY ELEMENT
Sierra Madre Fault Zone. The Sierra Madre Fault Zone consists of east-west trending faults and
folds, which extends along the southern margin of the San Gabriel Mountains. This fault zone is
approximately 55 km in length and terminates at Dalton Canyons to the east and at the San Fernando
Fault to the west. This fault is composed of five individual segments, which range in activity.
Currently portions of this fault are located within Alquist Priolo Special Study zones (AP Zone),
however the segments within the City are not considered active. Data gathered on this fault suggests
that the slip rate ranges from 0.36 to 4 millimeters per year and this fault is expected to generate
earthquakes with a magnitude of 6.0-7.0 on the Richter scale.2 Faults that are associated with this
fault system include:
    f   Cucamonga Fault;
    f   Duarte Fault;
    f   San Fernando Fault;
    f   San Gabriel Fault;
    f   Clamshell-Sawpit Canyon Fault; and
    f   Raymond Fault.
Cucamonga Fault. The Cucamonga fault extends 24 miles from the east side of Dalton Canyons to
the San Jacinto fault. The eastern portions of this fault in the vicinity of the communities of Upland
and Rancho Cucamonga have been identified within an AP Zone. However evidence of recent
faulting has not been uncovered along the portions of this fault within the City of Glendora. Data
gathered on this fault suggests that this fault has a slip rate between 5 and 14 millimeters per year and
could generate earthquakes of 6.0-7.0 Mw on the Richter scale.3
3.2.1.3 Liquefaction Hazards
Liquefaction is a phenomenon in which the strength and stiffness of a soil is reduced by earthquake
shaking or other events. Liquefaction occurs in saturated soils, which are soils in which the space
between individual soil particles is completely filled with water. This water exerts a pressure on the
soil particles that influences how tightly the particles themselves are pressed together. Prior to an
earthquake, the water pressure is relatively low. However, earthquake shaking can cause the water
pressure to increase to the point where the soil particles can readily move with respect to each other.
Because liquefaction only occurs in saturated soil, its effects are most commonly observed in low-
lying areas. Typically liquefaction is associated with shallow groundwater, which is less than 50 feet
beneath the earth’s surface.
Available data indicates that groundwater levels beneath the City range between 100 to 150 feet
deep. Certain locations however have shallow groundwater conditions and could be susceptible to
liquefaction. According to the Seismic Hazard Zone Maps for the Baldwin Park, Azusa, San Dimas,
and Glendora Quadrangles (March 1999) prepared by the California Geological Survey (CGS;
formerly California Division of Mines and Geology), there are several locations within the City that
2 Data obtained from the Southern California Earthquake Center, www.scec.org, accessed on March 3, 2006.
3 Ibid.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                         ▸ 13 ◂                                     Safety Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                     SAFETY ELEMENT
are considered susceptible to liquefaction. The areas identified as prone to liquefaction within the
City are identified on Exhibit SAF-4, Potential Seismic Hazards.
3.2.1.4 Landslide Hazards
A landslide is a phenomenon characterized by the general downlsope movement under gravity of
masses of soil and rock material. Many factors contribute to these types of earth movements such as:
topography, rock/ soil type, water saturation, and seismic shaking. According to the Seismic Hazard
Zone Maps for the Baldwin Park, Azusa, San Dimas, and Glendora Quadrangles (March 1999)
prepared by the CGS indicate that the foothill areas of the City are considered to have a high
potential for landslides. The areas identified as prone to earthquake induced landslide within the City
are identified on Exhibit SAF-4, Potential Seismic Hazards.
As illustrated on Exhibit SAF-2, several landslides have been mapped within the hillsides located in
the northeast portion of the City. These landslides are located within bedrock units that have been
severely faulted and broken up. The stresses that have been exerted on these bedrock units have
weakened the geologic units allowing surficial failures to occur.
3.2.1.5 Structure Failure
Glendora is fortunate that most of its buildings have been built under recent building codes and
design criteria. In fact, a substantial amount of construction has occurred in Glendora under design
standards that take into account some of the lessons learned from the 1971 Sylmar earthquake.
3.2.1.6 Seismic Response
Because most of the structures and infrastructure in Glendora have recently been built under modern
building codes, it is possible to survive the maximum expected earthquake with relatively moderate
losses. Possible geologic effects of a likely major earthquake in Glendora include:
    f   Rupture of the ground surface associated directly with movement on geologic faults. The
        likelihood of an event such as this is prevalent, however it would be focused in the foothill
        portions of the City, which are not as densely populated as the alluvial portions.
    f   Ground failure due to liquefaction (a momentary quick condition, similar to quicksand) could
        occur in Glendora wherever the right combination of perched water and low density, sandy
        material exists. Liquefaction conditions may occur in areas along the canyon and wash areas
        located at the base of the foothills and in isolated areas as identified on Exhibit SAF-4.
    f   Ground shaking with moderate to high lateral accelerations would be the primary seismic
        effect in the City.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸ 14 ◂                                    Safety Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                              SAFETY ELEMENT
    Exhibit SAF-4
    Potential Seismic Hazards
Glendora Community Plan 2025        ▸ 15 ◂      Safety Element

                                                                              ANGELES NATIONAL
                                                                                   FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AREA NOT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SURVEYED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POTENTIAL SEISMIC HAZARDS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SAF - 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EARTHQUAKE - INDUCED LANDSLIDES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Areas where previous occurrence of landslide
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    movement, or local topographical, geological,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    geotechnical, and subsurface water conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    indicated a potential for permanent ground
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    displacements.
                                                                                                      Sierra Madre Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LIQUEFACTION
                                                                   Citrus Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Areas where historic occurrence of liquefaction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    of local geological, geotechnical and groundwater
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    conditions indicate a potential fore permanent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ground displacement.
                                                                                    Barranca Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CITY LIMITS
                                                                                                             Grand Avenue                                              Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                         Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                                            Foothill Boulevard
                                                                                                                               Glendora Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                       Route 66
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/seismic_hazards.mxd January 3, 2007
                                                                     AZUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SAN DIMAS                  Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Source: California Department of Conservation,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Division of Mines and Geology, March 1999
                                                                                                                                                 Gladstone Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (http://gmw.consrv.ca.gov/shmp/)
                                                                                                                                                                    East Arrow Highway                                          0      1,400    2,800 Feet
                                                                                                                            COVINA
                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                    SAFETY ELEMENT
    f   In general, complete collapse of buildings is not likely to occur and building damage is likely
        to be only moderate. However, partial to total collapse could occur among the very few pre-
        1933 buildings still existing, and partial collapse of some tilt-up and concrete block buildings
        built prior to March 1972 must be counted as a possibility, based on the evidence of the
        Sylmar earthquake. The majority of construction has been under modern building codes.
        Where current state-of-the-art seismic evaluations can enter into all future development, and
        where disaster preparedness is being maintained, it is possible to survive the maximum
        expected earthquake with relatively moderate losses.
Possible impacts to the City from a major seismic event include:
    f   Injuries and loss of life;
    f   Economic losses;
    f   Property damage;
    f   Economic disruption – loss of jobs, loss of productive time, interference with trade,
        transportation, communication and other utilities;
    f   Social disruption;
    f   Housing dislocation;
    f   Interference with community activities and services;
    f   Emergency welfare requirements – shelter, food, communications, financial assistance; or
    f   Psychological trauma – especially among young children.
However, the full extent of these impacts will be influenced by many factors.
3.2.1.7 Flooding
According to Federal Guidelines from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the
built areas of the City are in Flood Zone X, meaning that the area is not located within a 100-year
flood plain. FEMA maps showing areas that require flood insurance are maintained at City Hall.
Three flood channels traverse through the City: the Little Dalton Wash, Big Dalton Wash, and San
Dimas Wash. All three channels are concrete-lined channels designated as floodways to serve the
region. Access to these channels is limited at all times for public safety.
3.2.1.8 Dam Inundation
Dam inundation is flooding that occurs due to structural failure of a dam. Failure of a dam may be
caused by seismic activity, severe flooding that causes water to exceed the capacity of the dam or
landslides that flow into a reservoir displacing the water.
The City of Glendora faces a potential hazard from dam inundation resulting from the failure of
either of two dams: Big Dalton Dam and San Dimas Dam. It is considered unlikely that either dam
would fail during a catastrophic event. The SEMS Multi-Hazard Functional Plan prepared by the
City of Glendora outlines the City’s response for dam failure.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸ 16 ◂                                   Safety Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                    SAFETY ELEMENT
Big Dalton Dam. This dam is located in Big Dalton Canyon, four miles northeast of Glendora.
Completed in 1929, this dam is owned and operated by the Los Angeles County Flood Control
District. This dam stores approximately 960 acre feet (over 312 million gallons) of water.
Should a breach occur, the water would flow south westerly out of Big Dalton canyon via the Big
Dalton Wash. The areas between the South Hills and San Gabriel foothills surrounding this wash,
would be inundated by the waters from this flood. The affected area is mostly comprised of
residential with some commercial, and industrial uses as well. Exhibit SAF-5, Dam Inundation
Areas, shows the area that would be affected by a dam failure.
San Dimas Dam. The San Dimas Dam is owned and operated by the Los Angeles County Flood
Control District. It is located east of the City in the foothills above the City of San Dimas. Built in
1922, this dam stores approximately 1,500 acre-feet (488 million gallons) of water.
Should a breach occur, the water would flow southwest along the San Dimas wash inundating the
portions of the City located south of the 210 Freeway. Land uses that would be affected by this
inundation mainly include residential, commercial, and industrial. Exhibit SAF-5, Dam Inundation
Areas, shows the areas that would be affected by a dam failure.
3.2.2 MAN-MADE HAZARDS
3.2.2.1 Hazardous and Toxic Materials
Hazardous materials are any substance or combination of substances, which because of quantity,
concentration, or characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in death or
serious injury, or pose substantial hazards to humans and/or the environment. Local governments
have little control over the production and use of these materials because they are part of our society.
Even household wastes can be hazardous materials.
Emergency response plans are in place with the City per the SEMS Multi-Hazard Functional Plan in
the case that a hazardous or toxic materials event occurs. In addition, the County of Los Angeles
Fire Department provides emergency response to hazardous materials. The County provides two
engines, one hazardous materials task force, one squad and a battalion chief that directly respond to
hazardous materials incidents.
3.2.2.2 Transport of Hazardous Materials
In Glendora, a hazardous chemical release would most likely occur as a result of either transportation
of chemicals by railroad or truck, use of chemicals at a business or illegal dumping of chemical
waste. Interstate 210 is heavily traveled by trucks and thus, represent the most likely location of a
release.
Exhibit SAF-5
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸ 17 ◂                                  Safety Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                             SAFETY ELEMENT
Dam Inundation Areas
Glendora Community Plan 2025       ▸ 18 ◂       Safety Element

                                                                                 ANGELES NATIONAL
                                                                                      FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                          Big Dalton
                                                                                                                                                                                         Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                        Inundation Area
                                                                                                                                           Big Dalton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DAM INUNDATION AREAS
                                                                                                                                     Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SAF - 5
                                                                                                                             Inundation Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Big Dalton Dam
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Inundation Area                                                 BIG DALTON DAM INUNDATION AREA
                                                                                                      Sierra Madre Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BIG DALTON DEBRIS BASIN INUNDATION AREA
                                                                 Citrus Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LITTLE DALTON DEBRIS BASIN INUNDATION AREA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CITY LIMITS
                                                                                                              Grand Avenue                                             Loraine Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Amelia Avenue
                                                                                                                                               Foothill Boulevard
                                                                                                                             Glendora Avenue                                                              Lone Hill Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                       Route 66
                                                                                    Barranca Avenue
M:mdata/10102317/gis/arcinfo/DamInundation.mxd January 4, 2007
                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                   g
                                                                                                                   &
                                                                                                                   %                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                           g
                                                                                                                                                                                                           &
                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                 AZUSA                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                      g
                                                                                                                                                                      &
                                                                                                                                                                      %                                                                      SAN DIMAS
                                                                                                                                                 Gladstone Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Source: GIS Data, City of Glendora
                                                                                                                                                                    East Arrow Highway
                                                                                                                             COVINA                                                                                                                      0   1,200 2,400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Feet
                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                    SAFETY ELEMENT
Fixed Facility. The second most likely threat from hazardous materials comes from the potential of
an accidental spill and/or incident at one of the approximately 150 known facilities that manufacture,
warehouse and process toxic chemicals and/or generate hazardous waste materials within or next to
the City. This potential also exists at former facilities, such as abandoned service stations or
industrial businesses. The threat is significantly lessened though, because of required plan
contingency and evacuation plans.
Clandestine Dumping. Clandestine dumping of hazardous materials is a criminal act and could
pose a threat. The City anticipates that there will be an increase in dumping as costs to legally dump
materials at designated hazardous waste disposal sites increases, but cannot anticipate if or when
such an act would occur.
Pipelines. Two water pipelines traverse the City. There are no oil or gas lines or lines that carry
hazardous materials within the City.
Household Hazardous Waste. Household hazardous waste poses a risk to the City. Glendora
participates in the Los Angeles County sponsored monthly Household Hazardous Waste Roundups
for County residents.
3.3 CRIME, FIRE AND MEDICAL EMERGENCIES
Crime and fire hazards have the potential to lead to property damage, injury, and even death. , and
can affect the sense of comfort within the community. Fire and police departments are prepared to
service most emergencies with quick and effective response times. In addition, various programs for
citizen education and community involvement encourage unity and enhance safety.
3.3.1   FIRE PROTECTION
Los Angeles County Fire Department provides fire protection and emergency service to the City of
Glendora. Three fire stations located within the City serve the City of Glendora: Fire Station 85
located at 650 East Gladstone, Fire Station 86 located at 520 South Amelia Avenue and Fire Station
151 located at 231 West Mountain View Avenue (refer to Table SAF-1, Fire Stations in Glendora).
Water is provided by five different sources throughout the City: the South Hills and Glendora Water
are the primary sources.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸ 19 ◂                                  Safety Element

                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                         SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                   TABLE SAF-1
                                    FIRE STATIONS IN GLENDORA
                         Station No./              Number of                  Equipment
                           Address                  Personnel
                  Station No. 85                        17         3 Captains
                                                                   3 Firefighter Specialists
                  650 East Gladstone                               9 Firefighters
                                                                   1 Engine
                                                                   1 EST (2 person unit)
                  Station No. 86                        21         6 Captains
                                                                   3 Firefighter Specialists
                  520 South Amelia                                 12 Firefighters
                  Avenue                                           1 Engine
                                                                   1 Truck
                  Station No. 151                       17         3 Captains
                                                                   3 Firefighter Specialists
                  231 West Mountain                                9 Firefighters/Paramedics
                  View Avenue                                      1 Engine
                                                                   I Nurse Educator
                  Source: Captain Joel Douty, Station 85, March 2006
                        Captain Gomez, Station 86, March 2, 2006
                        Captain Morando, Station 151, March 2, 2006
Medical
The County of Los Angeles Fire Department provides an Emergency Response Service (EMS).
Although none of the stations located within Glendora have this section it is accessible through other
stations in the county. The EMS section is responsible for paramedic training, certification,
equipment, and quality improvement. However, each station is staffed with qualified emergency
medical training (EMT) firefighters. In addition, Station 85 has an Emergency Service Team, which
serves similar functions, and Station 151 is equipped with a paramedic unit. This means that the nine
firefighters are also trained paramedics.
Response Times
The Los Angeles County Fire Protection District has no official adopted standards for response. For
the City of Glendora, the average response time is 4.38 minutes.
Community Relations and Services
Safety Inspections- The Los Angeles County Fire Protection District provides annual safety review
of all occupations in Glendora except single-family dwellings. Personnel at the three fire stations
work together to conduct these inspections with regard to fire prevention and ordinance compliance.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                              ▸ 20 ◂                             Safety Element

                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                     SAFETY ELEMENT
Education – The County Fire Protection District offers various programs with the purpose of public
education. This encompasses fire prevention, hazardous waste disposal, earthquake preparedness,
event safety tips, first aid and more.
Other Services – Station 151 provides plan check services for residents to insure new construction
plans are to code. Weed abatement services are also available at cost to all individuals, or citizens
who fail to meet the obligation.
3.3.2 POLICE PROTECTION
Police protection is provided by Glendora Police Department located at 150 South Glendora Avenue.
The police department has 59 sworn officers and 42 civilian employees. Sworn officers include one
chief, one captain, five lieutenants, five sergeants, six corporals and 41 officers. In addition to the
full-time officers and civilian employees, Glendora has a reserve officer force. The reserve officer
force provides additional, equally qualified officers on a flexible, part-time status that provide
valuable aid to the department. These seven reserve members assist the department in fulfilling their
mission and provided a total of 2,500 service hours in 2006.
Community Relations and Emergency Services
School Resource Officer - A law enforcement office is located at Glendora High School. Duties
include: handling campus related problems, providing referrals, assisting school district with security
planning & investigating crimes and detaining offenders (Glendora High School, Whitcomb
Continuation High School, Sandburg Middle School and Goddard Middle School)
Community Relations/Public Information - Duties include: public presentations (including school
presentations and news media), police facility tours, coordination of several community programs,
city liaison with various community groups, and city code enforcement task force.
Emergency Services Bureau - Started in September 2001, the unit trains and prepares City staff, City
departments and the community to properly respond to and recover from emergencies and disasters.
Animal Control - Animal control services are offered Monday through Saturday at the Glendora
Police Department. The office provides licensing, vaccinations and sterilizations, kennel services,
transportation services and dead animal pick up. Services are offered for a subsidized fee supported
by the Animal Control Program.
Response Times
Quick and effective response to citizen emergencies and concerns are important to the city. These
are measured based on the time the dispatcher receives a call for service from the public to the time
the responding officer arrives at the location of the call. Call types are defined below, and Table
SAF-2, Police Response Times, illustrates the Department’s average response times for 2006.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸ 21 ◂                                   Safety Element

                          GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                             SAFETY ELEMENT
    f    Emergency: Officer responding with red lights and siren.
    f    Immediate: Officer needed as soon as possible, obey all traffic laws.
    f    Alarm: Officer needed to respond to an alarm activation.
    f    Non-Emergency: Beat officer needed when available.
    f    Report: Beat officer needed to take a report when available.
                                                        TABLE SAF-2
                                            POLICE RESPONSE TIMES
              Call Type                      2006 Average Response Time   Target Response Time
    Emergency                                                 00:04:25            00:4:00
    Immediate                                                 00:12:00            00:10:00
    Alarm                                                     00:11:42            00:10:00
    Non-Emergency                                             00:16:31            00:15:00
    Report                                                    00:19:06            00:20:00
    Source: City of Glendora Police Department - March, 2007,
3.4      COMMUNITY SAFETY SERVICES
Volunteering
Glendora residents are also valuable resources in maintaining a safe community. Assistance can be
in the form of generous donations to various programs offered or performed by the fire and police
department. Qualified citizens also have the opportunity to donate their time through volunteer
programs that exist within the city police department and county fire stations in Glendora.
Community Emergency Response Team (CERT)
The CERT program educates citizens in the community about disaster preparedness and train the
public in basic disaster response skills. The program includes a 20 hour FEMA approved training
course provided through the Emergency Services Bureau of the police department.
Volunteer Photographer
The county fire department utilizes citizen volunteers willing and authorized to assist the department
with documenting major incidents and minor events in the city.
Auxiliary Volunteers
Auxiliary volunteers assist the Police Department by performing a variety of non-hazardous tasks
that would otherwise require the time of full-time staff. These duties range from providing additional
Glendora Community Plan 2025                                   ▸ 22 ◂                     Safety Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                    SAFETY ELEMENT
manpower at events throughout the community to assistance with fires, traffic accidents, business
patrols and more. Volunteers who prefer to donate their time and skills in the office staff the front
desk, animal control center and perform various other clerical duties throughout the police
department. The Auxiliary organization was created in 1970 and currently consists of 25 officers,
who in 2006 contributed over 7,000 hours of service.
Citizen’s Academy
The Citizen’s Academy is an outreach program which doubles as a basic course for persons who
wish to become part of the Auxiliary Volunteers. Participants are exposed to the various duties and
actives performed by the police department and criminal justice system. This eleven-week course is
held twice a year free of charge to Glendora residents.
Law Enforcement Exploring
The City of Glendora Police Department, headed by members of the department, provides an
opportunity for high school students, ages 14 to 18, to experience firsthand the challenge of a law
enforcement career. The program includes hands on training, ride-a-longs and other aspects of police
work. It is possible for students to earn school credit through the Regional Occupational Program
(ROP) for their participation in the program.
Police Chaplains Program
The city of Glendora began the Police Chaplain Program in 2002. The chaplains’ role is to assist
employees of the police department in time of death, injury or personal distress. This service also
extends to members of the community during instances of crisis. In 2006, the program included two
appointed volunteer chaplains who are pastors and active community residents. Their services have
contributed over 1,000 hours of service to the community.
3.5 CRIME PREVENTION THROUGH ENVIRONMENTAL
        DESIGN
Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) resolves around restoring public safety
and creating “defensible space.” The concept of defensible space is applicable to community and site
planning, as well as building design. CPTED approaches the problem of creating a defensible
environment by addressing both the physical and psychological aspects of design. Security concerns
are addressed during the design stage of a project, rather than added after the development is
constructed.
CPTED Approaches to Security
Physical Planning Process. Crime prevention is an important consideration in the physical planning
process. Conditions for public safety can be enhanced and property loss reduced by utilizing land
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸ 23 ◂                                Safety Element

                     GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                   SAFETY ELEMENT
use planning and site design techniques to deter criminal activity. Carefully planned development
can serve to minimize the opportunity of unlawful activity, and thus lower the actual occurrence of
crime.
Crime Prevention Through Physical Planning. The use of physical planning may be one of the least
costly and most successful means of crime prevention. The key is to establish design criteria that
will affect community control by members of the community. Improving the observational
capability of residents to residents to visually survey their residential environment through design
considerations is aimed at reducing the workload of law enforcement agencies and enhancing
community orientation.
Street, Building, and Landscaping Design. The design of streets, buildings, and landscaping can
influence the way people regard spatial use. Architectural alteration of entrances can change a space
once considered public into a semi-private one that is shared by a limited number of people. In large
multi-family complexes with one or two entrances, people are able to enter the building without
notice or challenge. Multi-family buildings designed to provide a separate common entrance for six
to eight families allow a higher level of surveillance by the occupants. Families soon become
acquainted with their neighbors’ normal day-to-day activities and are able to recognize their most
frequent visitors.
Streets are typically designed and considered as public space allowing free and ready access into any
neighborhood by anyone. By siting residential structures in relation to their lots and the street, a
degree of neighborhood control or territoriality may be established. The designed use of symbolic or
psychological barriers through landscaping can have an apparent differentiation to public versus
private space. Typical examples of these symbolic barriers are a small hedge, a long walkway, or a
set of steps between the public sidewalk and the house. These design features tend to identify the
end of the public space and the beginning or a more selective space use.
Landscaping features can also facilitate neighborhood control by providing observable “barriers”
beyond which other residents of the area would take note and potentially challenge. Here
landscaping can be used to define space use by visually delineating area for their private space use
from public space use. An attractively landscaped front yard can be considered the object of the
resident’s pride of ownership. With neighbors reinforcing this aspect of private domain, they soon
develop a sense of identity to and responsibility for others’ front yards. Landscaping treatment
should be used in a manner that enhances an area’s or project’s setting without obstructing the
visibility of walkways or entrances from the streets or other residences.
Community Identity and Control. The design of physical space can augment community identity
and control. Visibility alone is not enough; there must be a reason before a person will challenge
inappropriate behavior. If a person feels he/she has a stake in a neighborhood or community, there is
ample reason to question the potentially unlawful behavior of others.
The use of design in the physical planning process can encourage residents to assert a psychological
identity over their immediate neighborhood, and thus to deter crime by reducing the opportunity for
Glendora Community Plan 2025                     ▸ 24 ◂                                 Safety Element

                      GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                      SAFETY ELEMENT
unlawful activity. Strongly defined areas of influence, real and psychological barriers, and improved
opportunities for surveillance can assist a community in exerting a meaningful level of crime
prevention and control by its residents.
CPTED Strategies
CPTED incorporates several strategies to create a defensible space, such as surveillance,
territoriality, natural access control, and physical security.
Surveillance. This concept promotes maximizing the visibility of people, parking areas, and building
entrances. Features to implement this concept could include doors and windows that look out onto
streets and parking areas, pedestrian-friendly sidewalks and streets, front porches, and adequate
nighttime lighting.
Territoriality. Creating gateways to clearly indicate public routes, and using structural or design
elements to discourage access to private areas.
Physical Security. This concept seeks to make it more difficult and time consuming to enter a
location, but not make the location a fortress. This concept is achieved by installing window locks,
dead bolts for doors, and interior door hinges. For outdoor areas, create an environment where
entryways are exposed and well designed, and include landscaping features that deter intruders and
increase security around the home a sense of territory is important as it encourages individuals to
take control of their environment and defend it against becoming a potential target of attack. The
concept of territoriality incorporates design features that define property lines and distinguish private
spaces from public spaces using landscape plantings, pavement designs, gateway treatments, and
fences.
Natural Access Control. This concept clearly distinguishes public areas and private areas, thus
reducing access to potential targets and increasing the deterrent to potential offenders. This concept
is achieved by designing streets, sidewalks, building entrances, and neighborhood gateways to clearly
indicate public routes, and using structural or design elements to discourage access to private areas.
Physical Security. This concept seeks to make it more difficult and time consuming to enter a
location, but not make the location a fortress. This concept is achieved by installing window locks,
dead bolts for doors, and interior hinges. For outdoor areas, create an environment where entryways
are exposed and well designed, and include landscaping features that deter intruders and increase
security around the home.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                       ▸ 25 ◂                                   Safety Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                   SAFETY ELEMENT
 3.6 AIRCRAFT OVERFLIGHT
While the City of Glendora is not within the direct flight paths of any particular airport, aircraft
fly over the City throughout the day and night. A majority of these flights are from small private
aircraft originating out of local airports. The closest airports in the area are: Bracket Airport in
Pomona/ La Verne and Cable Airport in the City of Upland. The nearest commercial airport is
Ontario International Airport located in the City of Ontario, which is approximately 20 miles east
of Glendora.
The City of Glendora Multi-Hazard Functional Plan provides the policies and procedures
addressing emergency response to air disasters. Regardless of where a air crash occurs, the
resulting explosions and fires have the potential to cause injuries, fatalities and the destruction of
property at and adjacent to the impact point. The time of day when the crash occurs may also
have a profound affect on the number of fatalities or wounded. Damage assessment and disaster
relief efforts associated with an air crash incident will require support from other local
governments, private organizations and in certain instances from the State and Federal
governments.
4.0 PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS, GOALS, AND POLICIES
FLOOD HAZARDS
Planning Consideration: Glendora is particularly susceptible to flooding due to its location
adjacent to the San Gabriel Mountains. Significant flooding events have occurred periodically
and have had a demonstrated impact on the safety and property of Glendora residents. To reduce
the potential impacts of flooding to the safety and economic integrity of the City’s residents, it is
important to ensure disaster planning is coordinated with local planning decisions.
Goal            SAF-1          Protection from potential flood hazards, including dam
                               inundation.
Policies        SAF-1.1        Coordinate with the Los Angeles County Flood Control District to
                               ensure that flood control facilities under their jurisdiction are
                               adequately operated and maintained.
                SAF-1.2        Utilize the City’s capital improvement process to identify
                               necessary storm drain improvements to minimize potential flood
                               damage.
                SAF-1.3        Provide an annual review of the Standardized Emergency
                               Management System Multi-Hazard Functional Plan to ensure
                               evacuation routes are sufficient in the event of flooding.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                   ▸ 26 ◂                                    Safety Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                   SAFETY ELEMENT
               SAF-1.4         Continue the maintenance of City-owned flood control facilities
                               within Glendora to ensure their efficient operation and work with
                               Los Angeles County, as needed, to transfer the maintenance of
                               existing and new facilities.
               SAF-1.5         Evaluate new development within the City to assess the
                               development’s exposure to potential flooding hazards and ensure
                               that habitable structures and infrastructure are not located within
                               the 100-year flood plain.
               SAF-1.6         Coordinate with Los Angeles County to ensure that storm drain
                               and flood protection facilities built in conjunction with new
                               development are maintained by the County.
FIRE HAZARDS
Planning Consideration: The City’s location adjacent to national forest lands and areas of
natural open space and vegetation, when combined with long dry seasons, significantly increase
risks of wildland fires and urban fires. The establishment of policies and procedures to mitigate
potential impacts of wildfires and urban fires will contribute to the protection of life and property
of Glendora’s residents.
Goal           SAF-2           Reduced incident of damage to life and property from wildland
                               fires.
Policies       SAF-2.1         Require all proposed developments to prove that the development
                               can adequately be served by fire flows.
               SAF-2.2         Maintain low density/intensity land use designations in the hillside
                               areas.
               SAF-2.3         Require fire resistant building materials for structures in the
                               hillside areas.
               SAF-2.4         Require proposed developments to comply with access
                               requirements of the Los Angeles County Fire Department and
                               Glendora Police Department.
               SAF-2.5         Continue to implement brush-clearance requirements in areas
                               subject to wildland fire hazards.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸ 27 ◂                                   Safety Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                  SAFETY ELEMENT
               SAF-2.6        Evaluate all new development to be located in or adjacent to
                              wildland areas to assess its vulnerability to fire and its potential as
                              a source of fire.
Goal           SAF-3          Reduced incident of damage to life and property from urban fires.
Policies       SAF-3.1        Enforce the installation of fire alarm systems, smoke detectors
                              and/or sprinklers to protect life and property.
               SAF-3.2        Provide education and outreach to residents regarding fire safety
                              and prevention.
               SAF-3.3        Continue to implement and enforce the latest edition of the
                              Uniform Fire Codes.
SEISMIC HAZARDS
Planning Consideration: Glendora is located within a highly active seismic region. To ensure
the safety of Glendora residents and the City’s economic integrity, demonstrated efforts must be
undertaken to protect residents from the potential loss of life and property due to seismic events.
The City seeks to coordinate citywide planning policies to reduce potential hazards associated
with a seismic event.
Goal           SAF-4          Protection from loss of life and property during seismic events.
Policies       SAF-4.1        Require that new development and infrastructure avoid on-site
                              seismic hazards such as faults, liquefaction zones and landslide
                              areas.
               SAF-4.2        Adopt building regulations that minimize effects from seismic
                              events in building construction.
               SAF-4.3        Provide instructional materials, classes and other educational
                              resources to ensure residents and the daytime population are
                              knowledgeable of the risks and methods to reduce such risks, as
                              well as involve the residents and community groups in the City’s
                              annual emergency preparedness event.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸ 28 ◂                                  Safety Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                  SAFETY ELEMENT
Goal            SAF-5          Protection from landslides.
Policies        SAF-5.1        Ensure that development within landslide prone areas meets the
                               City’s Hillside Development Criteria and Hillside Development
                               Strategy.
                SAF-5.2        Require proposed developments located within areas identified by
                               California Department of Conservation Seismic Hazard Maps
                               (dated March 25, 2999 or as revised) to prepare a geotechnical
                               investigation report.
POLICE PROTECTION
Planning Consideration: Glendora residents have enjoyed lower incidence of crime and this is
reflected in the community’s perception that Glendora is a safe place to live. The City of
Glendora seeks to maintain and enhance its low crime rates through the coordination of public
safety issues and police protection with physical planning.
Goal            SAF-6          Coordinated public safety and community planning.
Policies        SAF-6.1        Consult the Glendora Police Department to identify and address
                               impacts of proposed development on police services.
                SAF-6.2        Ensure police services are not impacted by development, traffic
                               congestion and other growth related issues.
Goal            SAF-7          High quality police protection.
Policies        SAF-7.1        Deploy human and financial resources to ensure adequate and
                               equitable distribution of police services.
                SAF-7.2        Conduct periodic reviews of calls for service and response times to
                               ensure adequate emergency response.
                SAF-7.3        Continue to promote citizen involvement in crime prevention and
                               public safety through programs and education.
                SAF-7.4        Continue to support police involvement with youths, youth
                               organizations and school activities.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸ 29 ◂                               Safety Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                   SAFETY ELEMENT
Goal            SAF-8          Reduced incidence of crime to persons and property.
Policies        SAF-8.1        Inform and educate Glendora residents and business owners on
                               crime trends within the community and opportunities to increase
                               their safety.
                SAF-8.2        Encourage the organization of neighborhoods and businesses to
                               promote crime prevention through programs such as Neighborhood
                               Watch and Business Watch.
DISASTER PREPAREDNESS
Planning Consideration: Recent events including wildfires and floods have demonstrated the
need to ensure disaster planning is coordinated with local planning decisions. The concerns over
physical safety of Glendora residents and the potential impacts to life and property should,
therefore, be a consideration in all citywide planning decisions.
Goal            SAF-9          Minimized loss of life, injury or property during disaster
                               events.
Policies        SAF-9.1        Maintain and update the City’s adopted Natural Hazard Mitigation
                               Plan and Multi-Functional Disaster Plan.
                SAF-9.2        Implement the strategies and plans in the City’s Multi-Hazard
                               Functional Disaster Plan.
                SAF-9.3        Implement the strategies and plans in the City’s Natural Hazard
                               Mitigation Plan.
                SAF-9.4        Require new developments to incorporate appropriate development
                               features and project mitigation measures that avoid natural and
                               man-made hazards.
                SAF-9.5        Prepare for and support multi-jurisdictional emergency response.
                SAF-9.6        Continue to work cooperatively with adjacent jurisdictions and
                               regional agencies to address emergency preparedness.
                SAF-9.7        Ensure compliance with the Los Angeles County Emergency
                               Management Plan.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                    ▸ 30 ◂                               Safety Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 SAFETY ELEMENT
               SAF-9.8       Coordinate with Regional, State and Federal Agencies to prepare
                             for and respond to potential terrorism threats.
               SAF-9.9       Ensure the community is aware of home-based emergency
                             preparedness procedures.
Goal           SAF-10        Community outreach for disaster preparedness.
Policies       SAF-10.1      Provide education and outreach to Glendora residents and business
                             owners on the City’s emergency plan.
               SAF-10.2      Work in conjunction with neighboring cities and regional
                             jurisdictions to address emergency preparedness.
COMMUNITY SAFETY
Planning Consideration: Overall community safety is a real and perceived issue that relates the
physical environment with safety through design of the built environment. The design of
physical features of the community, such as roadways, parking areas and street lighting, can
make a significant contribution to safety. Glendora residents seek to establish a real and
perceived sense of safety through the incorporation of physical improvements and community
participation.
Goal           SAF-11        Reduced traffic safety hazards.
Policies       SAF-11.1      Minimize the potential for accidents involving railways,
                             automobiles, pedestrians, and cyclists by working closely with the
                             Glendora Police Department, Los Angeles County Metropolitan
                             Transportation Authority, California Highway Patrol, and all
                             applicable transportation and/or railroad companies to identify
                             safety problems and implement corrective measures.
               SAF-11.2      Use technology to improve safety at grade crossings that cause the
                             least environmental harm (e.g., automated horn systems).
               SAF-11.3      Ensure new infrastructure and development projects are designed
                             according to accepted traffic engineering principles.
Goal           SAF-12        Improved community safety and reduced opportunities for
                             criminal activity through appropriate physical design.
Policies       SAF-12.1      Maximize natural surveillance in all new development through
                             physical design features that promote visibility.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                  ▸ 31 ◂                               Safety Element

                    GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                     SAFETY ELEMENT
                SAF-12.2         Promote land use and design policies and regulations that
                                 encourage a mixture of compatible land uses to promote the safety
                                 of public use areas and of pedestrian travel.
                SAF-12.3         Involve the Glendora Police Department in the development
                                 review process of public areas relative to building and site plan
                                 vulnerability to criminal activities.
                SAF-12.4         Encourage new developments to incorporate the principles of
                                 Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design to create
                                 defensible space.
Goal            SAF-13           Community outreach related to safety and crime prevention.
Policies        SAF-13.1         Continue to promote citizen involvement in crime prevention and
                                 public safety through programs, education and other methods.
                SAF-13.2         Maintain community outreach, education and training programs
                                 that raise personal, neighborhood and community safety
                                 awareness.
                SAF-13.3         Support cooperative arrangements between the Glendora Police
                                 Department and local organizations, such as schools, business
                                 organizations and other appropriate groups.
TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Planning Consideration: Glendora is aware hazardous waste is produced as the by-product of a
variety of industrial activities and is present in many common household products. The potential
threat to the community by these hazards must be addressed through precautionary actions and
contingency plans.
Goal            SAF-14           Safe transport, use, storage and disposal of toxic and/or
                                 hazardous materials.
Policies        SAF-14.1         Encourage the proper disposal of household hazardous waste
                                 through the dissemination of information through educational and
                                 outreach activities.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                      ▸ 32 ◂                              Safety Element

                   GLENDORA COMMUNITY PLAN 2025
                                 SAFETY ELEMENT
              SAF-14.2       Monitor facilities or businesses that utilize, store or handle
                             hazardous materials to ensure practices and procedures will reduce
                             the threat of damage to life and property.
              SAF-14.3       Enforce Federal, State, and local laws and regulations relating to
                             the use, storage, transport and cleanup of toxic, explosive and other
                             hazardous materials to prevent unauthorized discharges.
              SAF-14.4       Identify specific routes, both street and railroad systems, for the
                             safe transport of hazardous materials in and through the City.
Glendora Community Plan 2025                  ▸ 33 ◂                                 Safety Element

