  LAND USE
INTRODUCTION
Existing land use patterns in Ione began during the Gold Rush era
when Ione was mined for gold and later clay. Mining, agriculture,
                                                                         See page 3-2 for a complete
the expansion of rail lines through Ione, and geography all helped       listing of topics covered in this
shape Ione’s land use pattern over the past 150 years. The City has      Element, with page number
maintained its small town feel through periods of growth and             references.
stability alike.
VISION
Ione will retain its small town feel while generating new jobs and expanding housing and shopping
options for residents, visitors, and employees. A range of housing types will be available to residents
to meet diverse housing needs, including a mix of prices and density levels. The Downtown will
thrive with the densification of land uses, including mixed-use with second floor residential over first
floor commercial. Development patterns will protect prime farmland and maximize public access to
open space areas. A jobs housing balance will be achieved. The mining industry will remain an
important part of Ione’s economy, while other industrial and commercial uses will also expand.
August 2009                                                                    City of Ione General Plan
                                                 3–1

                                                                                   LAND USE
                                          IN THIS SECTION
       •  Introduction (Page 3-1)
       •  Vision (Page 3-1)
       •  Purpose (Page 3-2)
       •  Related Plans and Programs (Page 3-2)
       •  Relationship to Other General Plan Elements (Page 3-3)
       •  Setting, Issues, and Considerations (Page 3-3)
       •  Issues This Element Attempts to Solve (Page 3-4)
       •  Land Use Principles (Page 3-6)
       •  The Land Use Plan (Page 3-8)
       •  Land Use Classifications (Page 3-27)
       •  Goals, Policies, and Actions (Page 3-36)
PURPOSE
The Land Use Element provides the central framework for the General Plan and serves as a
compass to guide planners, developers, landowners, the general public, and decision makers on the
desired pattern of development in Ione. It describes both existing and future land use activity, the
latter of which has been designed to achieve the City’s long-range goals for physical development.
This Element also identifies the distribution, location, and intensity of all land uses types throughout
the City. Text, maps, and diagrams establish the blueprint for future land uses within the City and
describe how these uses are integrated with the other General Plan elements and policies.
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
Formulation, adoption, and implementation of local land use policy require consideration of several
related plans, programs, and agencies, both local and regional in nature. Relevant plans and agencies
are listed below, and summarized in the City of Ione General Plan Update Background Report,
Appendix A.
     •   Amador Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo)
     •   City of Ione Framework for Planning, Entitlement Review, and Development
     •   City of Ione Redevelopment Agency – draft Redevelopment Plan
     •   City Zoning Code
     •   California Environmental Quality Act
City of Ione General Plan                                                                    August 2009
                                                   3–2

  LAND USE
    •   Surface Mining and Reclamation Act
    •   West Ione Roadway Improvement Strategy (WIRIS)
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
The Land Use Element relates directly to all other elements of the General Plan. This Element
establishes the planned land use pattern for Ione based on historic development and the
community’s vision for the future. Land use planning takes into consideration balanced housing
needs and housing choices identified in the Housing Element. Natural and manmade hazards and
development constraints that affect the potential locations of the land uses are identified in the
Noise and Safety Element. Conservation, parks, and open space policies of the City, including the
integration of the parks and opens spaces into land planning, are outlined in the Conservation and
Open Space Element. A circulation plan is established in the Circulation Element to accommodate
increased traffic from the planned development outlined in the Land Use Element. Finally, the
other General Plan elements ensure that the infrastructure, services, and environmental quality
standards necessary for development are available to accommodate planned land uses.
SETTING, ISSUES, AND CONSIDERATIONS
BACKGROUND/EXISTING SETTING – CITY
The City of Ione is located approximately 30 miles southeast of Sacramento and 30 miles northeast
of Stockton, in southwestern Amador County. Ione occupies about five square miles, or about
2,900 acres within the existing City limits. The City’s population was estimated to be about 3,500,
excluding Mule Creek State Prison and Preston Youth Correctional Facility inmates, as of January 1,
2008 (Department of Finance, 2008).
The City has a historic downtown with a variety of retail businesses and City offices, surrounded by
residential areas. Industrial uses, mining operations, and grazing and agricultural activities are
located on the fringes of the City and outside the City limits. The Mule Creek State Prison,
California Department of Forestry Fire Protection Training Academy (CAL FIRE), and Preston
Youth Correctional Facility are located in the northwestern portion of the City. State Routes 124 and
104 bisect the City. Sutter Creek passes through the City from east to west. Development
constraints in the City and surrounding area include lands within floodplains, steep slopes,
agricultural easements, and other constraints. For more information about Ione’s existing setting,
please see the Background Report in Appendix A.
PLANNING AREA
The Planning Area for the City of Ione General Plan contains the existing incorporated City, the
City’s Sphere of Influence (SOI), and a larger study area including the unincorporated area extending
west to the San Joaquin County Line, south beyond State Route (SR) 88, and east beyond the
intersection of SR 104 and SR 88 (See Figure 3-1). The General Plan Planning Area, with nearly
32,000 acres, is almost 11 times the size of the incorporated City. Land uses surrounding the
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                                3–3

                                                                                     LAND USE
General Plan Planning Area include primarily grazing land, open space, and mining and industrial
land uses.
The General Plan Planning Area, outside of the City, is largely composed of grazing/agricultural
uses, mining, and open space, with some industrial development. While the City does not have
jurisdiction over lands currently outside of the City boundary, the General Plan demonstrates what
the City’s vision and desires are for areas outside of the City’s jurisdiction.
SPHERE OF INFLUENCE (SOI)
The Sphere of Influence, which extends beyond the Ione City limits, represents the area the City is
likely to annex and incorporate within Ione’s City limits in the future. It includes the City of Ione,
and totals 4,438 acres (See Figure 3-1).
ISSUES THIS ELEMENT ATTEMPTS TO SOLVE
The primary issues that this element attempts to solve are listed below. These are the significant
land use issues and concerns that were raised during development of the General Plan.
     •   Balancing the mix of land uses to ensure a jobs/housing balance and establish a fiscally
         viable future for the City.
     •   Establishing a more livable community where residents can walk to commercial services,
         parks, and open space trails.
     •   Creating and supporting a full range of retail shopping and commercial service opportunities
         in the Planning Area so that residents and visitors are able to meet their shopping needs
         locally as much as possible.
     •   Making the City’s streets friendlier to pedestrians, bicyclists, and golf carts.
     •   Ensuring that new development and redevelopment respect the heritage and historical
         character of Ione.
     •   Maintaining the small town feel of Ione while providing a wide range of housing options for
         residents.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                 August 2009
                                                  3–4

 LAND USE
            FIGURE 3-1: PLANNING AREA BOUNDARIES
August 2009                                      City of Ione General Plan
                            3–5

                                                                               LAND USE
LAND USE PRINCIPLES
One of the essential goals of the City is to ensure that future growth enhances quality of life and
community balance. Growth and land use patterns in Ione will be developed in keeping with the
following eight Land Use Principles, which are described in more detail below.
     •   Balanced Land Uses
     •   Transportation Choices
     •   Housing Choices
     •   Thriving Downtown
     •   Walkable Community
     •   Preservation/Integration of Natural Resources
     •   Preserving Sense of Place/Quality Design
     •   Regeneration/Infill
BALANCED LAND USES
Providing the right overall balance of land uses is a significant priority for the City. Residential,
commercial, office, industrial, and public/quasi-public uses need to be provided throughout the
entire community and should be sized commensurate with their service area. Retail shopping
opportunities must be provided close to homes. Overall land planning activities must include
consideration for public/quasi-public uses that may otherwise go unplanned (see the Public Facilities
Element for additional discussion). Balance also includes providing a range of housing choices
throughout the community (see the Housing Element for additional discussion). A balanced
community is a healthy community – one that can support itself over the long-term and provide the
goods and services that residents need and expect. Additionally, when local decisions affecting the
land use balance in the community are made, they must be maintained with unwavering dedication
in the face of market forces and development pressure.
TRANSPORTATION CHOICES
As Ione grows, the movement of people in and around the City will be a key issue. Walking, cycling,
and driving will all be important modes of transportation. Residents, employees, businesses, and
visitors of Ione should have transportation choices in moving throughout the community and
traveling to nearby communities in the region. Streets will be designed to safely accommodate all
modes of transportation, including walking and bicycling. Land use and transportation planning will
go hand and hand to ensure that transportation choices are integrated into the land planning and
implementation of future Ione (see the Circulation Element for additional discussion).
City of Ione General Plan                                                                August 2009
                                               3–6

  LAND USE
HOUSING CHOICES
In order to meet diverse housing needs, the City will need to diversify its existing housing supply
while retaining Ione’s small town feel. Approximately 85 percent of the existing housing is single-
family detached with a typical density of approximately four to five units per acre. The remaining 15
percent of the City’s existing housing supply is predominantly multi-family. The City’s supply of
large lot single-family homes, higher density single-family homes (e.g., town homes, zero lot lines),
condominiums, luxury apartments, housing for seniors, and mixed-use housing above ground floor
retail or office is limited. New development and redevelopment of housing within the City will need
to integrate a range of housing types and densities to improve housing choices throughout the
community.
THRIVING DOWNTOWN
Downtown Ione, with its historic buildings, serves as the heart of the community and is central in
shaping the community’s character. The historic character of Downtown will be preserved while
Downtown land uses are intensified to ensure the area’s long-term economic viability and to provide
for a range of commercial services, jobs, and housing.
WALKABLE COMMUNITY
In a walkable community, pedestrians can easily move from their homes to schools, parks, jobs,
open space, and shopping areas. In Ione, a child should be able to walk or ride a bike a short
distance to school, the park, or a market without having to cross many busy streets. Streets will be
designed as pedestrian and bicycle-friendly spaces. Neighborhood streets will be designed for slower
speeds and pedestrian crossings at key locations. Off street trails and enhanced street sidewalks will
connect residential areas to parks and open space areas. Walkable communities provide numerous
personal and social benefits, such as lower transportation costs, greater social interaction, improved
personal and environmental health, and expanded consumer choice.
PRESERVATION/INTEGRATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES
Natural resource areas such as wetlands, creeks, and open space lands are a valued amenity within
Ione. Natural habitats are places where wildlife and plants unique to Ione and the region can thrive.
Management and protection of the City’s numerous natural resources will contribute to Ione’s
environmental health as well as to quality of life for residents. The City will strive to balance
preservation and development interests in order to maintain valuable resources through the design
of land plans and the siting of natural resource protection areas.
PRESERVING SENSE OF PLACE/QUALITY DESIGN
One of the most important aspects of preserving community character, heritage, and sense of
identity is the quality of project design. Quality design is not simply about the architectural style,
colors, and materials of a building, but also the site design, public realm, and relationship to
August 2009                                                                 City of Ione General Plan
                                                 3–7

                                                                                  LAND USE
surroundings. All development should be designed to contribute to the character of the community,
maintain and compliment the historic character of Ione, and to create a unique and memorable place
that is inviting to residents, employees, and visitors.
REGENERATION/INFILL
While the majority of land in the General Plan Planning Area is currently undeveloped, revitalization
of existing residential and commercial areas is a significant priority in Ione. The City will establish
incentives and programs for redevelopment/infill development within existing Ione.
THE LAND USE PLAN
The future land use plan for Ione consists of both the text of this Element and the accompanying
Land Use Map (Figures 3-2 and 3-3). The Map graphically illustrates the desired land uses for each
parcel in the City and the General Plan Planning Area. Although uses are plotted for all property
within the Planning Area, only land within the jurisdiction of the City is regulated by these land uses.
The first figure (3-2) illustrates the General Plan land use designations for the General Plan Planning
Area. This map is parcel based with a specific land use category applied to each parcel. Subsequent
zoning and new development/redevelopment must comply with the General Plan land use
designation.
POLICY AREAS
Figure 3-3 identifies 10 individual Policy Areas within the General Plan Planning Area with unique
characteristics/features that warrant more detailed planning efforts and specific policies. The Policy
Areas have been established based on several criteria, including existing, proposed, or approved
project boundaries; location within the General Plan Planning Area; ownership; type of existing or
proposed land uses; distinctive issues; and geographic or environmental features. Each Policy Area
warrants the incorporation of special provisions or consideration as the City develops. Figures 3-4
through 3-13 show each Policy Area in greater detail.
Each of the 10 Policy Areas is listed in the Land Use Element with a description of land uses;
environmental conditions; residential, commercial retail and office, and industrial capacity; and area
specific policies. Each Policy Area has General Plan land use designations, as shown on Figure 3-2.
Some of the Policy Areas have land use designations of Special Planning Area while other Policy
Areas have land use designations of Rural Residential, Low Density Residential, Light Industrial,
Heavy Industrial, Open Space, and other land use designations. These classifications are described
in the next section of this Element. The Policy Area designations serve as policy overlays that work
in conjunction with the land use designations. Specific land use policies apply to each of the Policy
Areas, as described in the policy section of this element.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                  3–8

 LAND USE
            FIGURE 3-2: GENERAL PLAN LAND USE MAP
August 2009                                       City of Ione General Plan
                            3–9

                                        LAND USE
This page intentionally left blank
.
City of Ione General Plan                    August 2009
                                   3–10

 LAND USE
            FIGURE 3-3: GENERAL PLAN POLICY AREAS
August 2009                                      City of Ione General Plan
                           3–11

                                                              LAND USE
                    FIGURE 3-4: CASTLE OAKS GATEWAY POLICY AREA
City of Ione General Plan                                         August 2009
                                       3–12

 LAND USE
            FIGURE 3-5: DOWNTOWN POLICY AREA
August 2009                                  City of Ione General Plan
                          3–13

                                                                LAND USE
                        FIGURE 3-6: INDUSTRIAL PARK POLICY AREA
City of Ione General Plan                                           August 2009
                                         3–14

 LAND USE
            FIGURE 3-7: OLD STOCKTON POLICY AREA
August 2009                                      City of Ione General Plan
                            3–15

                                                               LAND USE
                         FIGURE 3-8: PRESTON REUSE POLICY AREA
City of Ione General Plan                                          August 2009
                                         3–16

 LAND USE
            FIGURE 3-9: Q RANCH POLICY AREA
August 2009                                 City of Ione General Plan
                         3–17

                                                               LAND USE
                         FIGURE 3-10: RINGER RANCH POLICY AREA
City of Ione General Plan                                          August 2009
                                         3–18

 LAND USE
            FIGURE 3-11: SILVA POLICY AREA
August 2009                                City of Ione General Plan
                       3–19

                                                             LAND USE
                FIGURE 3-12: STATE ROUTE 124 CORRIDOR POLICY AREA
City of Ione General Plan                                         August 2009
                                      3–20

 LAND USE
            FIGURE 3-13: TRIANGLE POLICY AREA
August 2009                                   City of Ione General Plan
                          3–21

                                                           LAND USE
      FIGURE 3-14: INDUSTRIAL PARK POLICY AREA CONCEPTUAL LAND USE PLAN
City of Ione General Plan                                          August 2009
                                    3–22

 LAND USE
      FIGURE 3-15: OLD STOCKTON POLICY AREA CONCEPTUAL LAND USE PLAN
August 2009                                            City of Ione General Plan
                                  3–23

                                                            LAND USE
         FIGURE 3-16: Q RANCH POLICY AREA CONCEPTUAL LAND USE PLAN
City of Ione General Plan                                          August 2009
                                     3–24

  LAND USE
Policies contained within this Land Use Element set forth the development potential of each policy
area. The maximum allowable number of residential units is based on average densities sought by
the City for each area. Maps showing the land use designations for each policy area are shown in
Figures 3-3 through 3-13. Figures 3-14 through 3-16 show conceptually the approximate locations
of specific land uses for three of the Policy Areas. Each of the Policy Areas will rely on more
detailed subsequent land use planning (Specific Plan, Master Plan, or similar planning tool) prior to
development to ensure implementation consistent with the General Plan. The Policy Areas falling
outside the City limits will need to be annexed to the City prior to development.
The 10 Policy Areas are:
    •   Castle Oaks Gateway (see Policy LU-1.8)
    •   Downtown (see Policy LU-1.9)
    •   Industrial Park (see Policy LU-1.10)
    •   Old Stockton (see Policy LU-1.11)
    •   Preston Reuse (see Policy LU-1.12)
    •   Q Ranch (see Policy LU-1.13)
    •   Ringer Ranch (see Policy LU-1.14)
    •   Silva (see Policy LU-1.15)
    •   State Route 124 Corridor (see Policy LU-1.16)
    •   Triangle (see Policy LU-1.17)
Table 3-1 establishes the development potential for each of the 10 Policy Areas.
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                               3–25

                                                                                                                                                          LAND USE
                                                                                    TABLE 3-1:
                                                             POLICY AREA DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL*
                                     Acres          Dwelling            Commercial-                       Commercial-                 Industrial                    Average
        Policy Area
                                   (Estimate)          Units            Office Sq. Ft.                   Retail Sq. Ft.                  Sq. Ft.           Residential Density
                                                                               See                            70,000                                        5.0 for RL; 12.0 for
  Castle Oaks Gateway                  52               210                                                                                  0
                                                                     Commercial-Retail                (retail & office total)                                 RM; 20.0 for RH
  Downtown                             75                 --                   --**                            --**                          --                          --
  Industrial Park                     348                 --               2,012,472                       1,439,658                  6,137,604                          --
  Old Stockton                        190               119                     --                               0                           0                          1.0
  Preston Reuse                        17                25                 760,000                             --                           0                          5.0
                                                                                                                                                           1.0 – 2.0 for RR, 5.0
  Q Ranch                             439               850                     --                               0                           0
                                                                                                                                                            for RL, 12.0 for RM
                                                                               See                            50,000
  Ringer Ranch                        139               670                                                                                  0                          5.0
                                                                     Commercial-Retail                (retail & office total)
                                                                               See                            20,000
  Silva                               105               552                                                                                  0                          5.0
                                                                     Commercial-Retail                (retail & office total)
                                                    1,176 RL                                                                                                      5.0 for RL;
  124 Corridor                        247                                       --                               0                           0
                                                     326 RH                                                                                                      20.0 for RH
  Triangle                            990                 0                2,450,000                         610,000                  4,170,000                          --
* Note: This table represents maximum development potential for each Policy Area. Each Policy Area may have all of the development listed in the row corresponding to the Policy Area. **
Commercial Office and Commercial Retail are located in the Downtown but not quantified in this table.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                                                                                                 August 2009
                                                                                        3–26

  LAND USE
LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS
The City’s land use designations reflect the City’s Land Use Principles. Land use designations are
organized into categories of agriculture, residential, commercial, public/quasi-public and open space,
industrial, and other designations, which are applied to individual properties as shown on the
General Plan Land Use Map. Development standards corresponding to each land use designation
reflect desired development patterns throughout the City.
PROPOSED LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
Agriculture Categories
General Agriculture (AG)
The General Agriculture designation is for lands set aside for agricultural production. Sites within
this category are considered economically viable for farming operations. Ideal properties for the
General Agricultural category include farmland designated by the State of California as Williamson
Act-Prime Farmland, Prime Farmland, Farmland of Statewide Importance, and Unique Farmland.
Residential Categories
Rural Residential (RR)
The Rural Residential category is designed as a transition category between agricultural activities and
residential uses. The Rural Residential designation is intended to be located along the edge of the
City, where urban development meets the rural portions of the region. Residential units are
permitted on 0.5-10 acre lots. The allowed density range of residential development is between 0.1
and 2.0 units per acre.
Low Density Residential (RL)
The Low Density Residential category represents the traditional single-family neighborhood.
Development within these areas is limited to detached single-family homes and accessory residential
uses that have low intensity characteristics, including second residential units and home occupations.
Additionally, schools, day-care centers, places of religious assembly and nursing homes may be
permitted. Pocket parks and neighborhood parks should be provided in new Low Density
Residential developments at a ratio of five acres of total parkland per 1,000 population. This is the
predominant land use category of the City’s residential areas. Density range is 2.1-7.0 units per acre.
Medium Density Residential (RM)
The Medium Density Residential category is characterized by small lot single-family detached or
attached (e.g., town homes, duplex and triplex units), and small apartment complexes. Uses that are
ancillary to multi-family residential uses include schools, day care centers, places of religious
assembly, and nursing homes. Pocket parks and neighborhood parks should be provided in new
August 2009                                                                   City of Ione General Plan
                                                 3–27

                                                                                   LAND USE
Medium Density Residential developments at a ratio of five acres of total parkland per 1,000
population. Density range is 7.1-15 units per acre. Minimum lot size is 4,000 SF.
High Density Residential (RH)
High density residential is the most urban residential category available. The predominant style of
development is larger multi-family housing complexes, including apartments and condominiums.
Parking for these facilities is usually provided in traditional surface lots located around the complex.
At higher densities, parking may be in a parking structure, underground, or tuck-under. Pocket
parks and neighborhood parks should be provided in new High Density Residential developments at
a ratio of five acres of total parkland per 1,000 population. Density range is a minimum of 15.1
units per acre to a maximum of 25.0 units per acre; however developments with a density bonus, as
allowed under State law, may be allowed to exceed the 25.0 unit per acre maximum.
Commercial Categories
Central Business District (CBD)
This District is characterized by a vertically and/or horizontally integrated mix of retail, office,
professional, and service uses that serve daily shopping needs. Retail uses will generally dominate
the ground floor. Types of uses include:
    •    Neighborhood Market
    •    Neighborhood drug store
    •    Banks
    •    Restaurants/Pubs/Coffee Shops
    •    Clothing stores
    •    Services (e.g., hair salon, barber, florist, pet store, etc.)
    •    Theatre
    •    Medical, legal, financial, and other professional and administrative offices
    •    Lodging
    •    Public offices
    •    Apartments (rental) and condominiums (ownership), as residential-over-retail
Development is pedestrian friendly with gathering places for both daytime and nighttime activities.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                    August 2009
                                                    3–28

  LAND USE
When residential uses are present in the CBD, the minimum density allowed is 7.1 units per acre and
the maximum allowed density is 25.0 units per acre. The Floor Area Ratio (FAR) within the Central
Business District will range from a minimum of 0.5 to a maximum of 3.5.
General Commercial (GC)
General Commercial land use designation provides commercial businesses and tourist-oriented
services. Typical uses include retail stores, entertainment, indoor recreational facilities, lodging,
warehousing, wholesale trade, gas stations, automobile sales and service. Office uses may also be
allowed, but are not the predominant use. Lands classified General Commercial should be served by
the publicly maintained circulation network and should be situated in locations where future growth
                                                           is anticipated.    FARs will range from a
                                                           minimum of 0.25 to a maximum of 1.0.
                       Floor Area Ratio: Floor area
                       ratio (FAR) expresses the           Downtown Transition (DT)
                       intensity of use on a lot. The
                       FAR represents the ratio            The Downtown Transition land use designation
                       between the total gross floor       is intended as a transitional land use category
                       area of all buildings on a lot and
                       the total land area of that lot.    from existing residential uses to more intensive
                       For example, a 20,000 square        commercial uses. The designation respects the
                       foot building on a 40,000           existing residential nature of the area but
                       square foot lot yields a FAR of     recognizes that market demands and land
                       0.50:1. A 0.50:1 FAR describes      owner desires will drive conversion of the
                       a single-story building that
                       covers half of the lot, or a two-   property to commercial office and/or retail. As
                       story       building     covering   such, existing residential uses are allowed to
                       approximately one-quarter of        continue in perpetuity, existing homes may be
                       the lot. See figure to left.        remodeled, expanded, and/or replaced, and
                                                           new homes on vacant lots may be built.
                                                           Further, properties may be developed or
                                                           redeveloped into commercial uses either
                                                           through the conversion of residential structures
to commercial operation or wholesale redevelopment of parcels with new commercial structures.
The mixing of commercial and residential uses, either vertically or horizontally, on the same parcel is
also permissible. Desirable commercial uses include office and retail that respects the existing
residential character of the area, such as small medical offices (e.g., dental, chiropractic), small office
professional, limited personal services, minor and small scale manufacturing and services (e.g.
cabinetry, woodworking), and limited retail (e.g., smaller tenant spaces). This category also
recognizes that the conversion of existing residential structures may require changes in Building
Code occupancy ratings, Site Plan Review, or similar discretionary review process for building
construction, and completion of the Conditional Use Permit process on a case-by-case basis.
Compliance with Zoning Code standards for off-street parking, lighting, landscaping, use
compatibility, and other factors as relevant, are also applicable. The maximum FAR allowed is 1.5.
When residential uses are developed, the allowed density range is between 3.1 and 25.0 units per
acre.
August 2009                                                                       City of Ione General Plan
                                                       3–29

                                                                                  LAND USE
Note: In order to be fully implemented, this land use designation will require the creation of a new
Zoning District and the rezoning of effected parcels to this new commercially-oriented district.
Office-Commercial (OC)
The Office Commercial land use designation is characterized predominantly by office professional
uses with minor, supporting commercial uses. This designation allows for a variety of office uses,
including medical, legal, financial, and other professional and administrative offices. Other
permitted uses may include small, accessory-level commercial uses that support the principal office
uses such as day care facilities, small eateries, and coffee shops. Floor area ratios will range from
0.35 to a maximum of 1.5.
Public and Open Space Categories
Public Service (PS)
The Public Service category covers a variety of public, quasi-public, and public utility sites used to
provide public services. While the list of possible uses includes civic buildings; schools, and colleges;
religious institutions; museums; cemeteries; power substations, water and sewer facilities and
corporation yards, these uses may be located in other Land Use category as identified. Major,
permanent, facilities should be identified with the Public Service category. In new development
areas, this designation shall be used to ensure adequate sites are provided for utility facilities (e.g.,
water tanks, electric substations).
Parks and Recreation (PR)
This designation includes lands suitable for park development, which can be integrated into
Commercial or Residential areas, and provide indoor and outdoor recreation opportunities for
residents and visitors. This category includes regional parks (Howard Park) and community-wide
park services that support a variety of activities from picnicking to organized sports.
Open Space (OS)
Land within the Open Space category is intended to apply to lands not suited for development or to
lands most valuable in their undeveloped natural state. This designation includes areas set aside for
(1) the preservation of natural resources, such as wildlife habitat, (2) use as passive outdoor
recreation, which may include trails, and (3) areas where natural hazards exist, such as floodplains.
In the case of Open Space areas adjacent to and integrated with General Agricultural area, the open
space may be used as grazing land.
Industrial Categories
Light Industrial (LI)
Uses within the Light Industrial category generally include industrial or manufacturing activities that
occur entirely within an enclosed building. This category also includes warehousing, fabrication,
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                 3–30

  LAND USE
assembly, distribution of consumer goods corporation yards, auto-repair or other uses which do not
create excessive noise, smoke, odors, or other objectionable nuisances to adjacent non-industrial
zoned areas. Employee intensive operations (e.g., research and development) are permitted. FARs
will range from a minimum of 0.25 to a maximum of 0.75.
Heavy Industrial (HI)
Uses within the Heavy Industrial category include industrial or manufacturing activities that may
occur inside or outside of a building or structure. This designation is intended to accommodate
more intense industrial uses than the Light Industrial areas. Uses permitted in this designation
include manufacturing and lumber processing. Parcels will normally be larger than for light
industrial uses to provide ample room for operations as well as buffers and screening from adjacent
non-industrial uses. FARs will range from a minimum of 0.10 to a maximum of 0.75.
Surface Mining (SM)
This category is a long-term designation that applies to areas where surface mining and mineral
extraction activities will be occurring for more than ten years.
Special Categories
Special Planning Area (SPA)
The Special Planning Area designation represents potential areas of new growth within Ione. These
areas require a more specific level of policy direction to direct future growth, protect the unique
characteristics of each area, and guide future development. A Special Planning Area includes a
mixture of residential uses (at varying densities), commercial activities, parks, and other uses as
described in text and/or graphics within the General Plan. The exact land plan for the SPA(s) is to
be created and refined through the adoption of a Specific Plan or Planned Development Master
Plan. Development must be approved by the Planning Commission and the City Council.
Future Growth Area (FGA)
The Future Growth Area designation represents potential areas of new growth. An area identified as
a Future Growth Area has the potential for future development after the majority of existing land
designated in the General Plan for residential use has been developed or entitled. The City may
accept an application for development of an FGA at an earlier point if development of the FGA
creates a significant public benefit for Ione that could not be secured through development of other
property within the City or its adopted Sphere of Influence. The General Plan includes basic
policies and a vision for the FGAs, which applications must be consistent with, but will require a
General Plan Amendment to fully adopt. These areas require a more specific level of policy
direction, such as being comprehensively planned and developed through the use of Specific Plans
or Planned Developments. As such, growth in this area must be approved by the Planning
Commission and the City Council.
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                                3–31

                                                                                LAND USE
Land Use Development Standards
State General Plan law requires that the Land Use Element specify the maximum densities and
intensities permitted within the Land Use Plan. The land use designations shown on the Land Use
Map are described in detail in this Element. Table 3-2 lists each of the land uses designations shown
on the Land Use Map and provides a corresponding indication of maximum density or intensity of
development, and minimum and maximum floor area ratio. Maximum allowable development on
individual parcels of land is governed by these measures of density or intensity as listed below.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                               3–32

  LAND USE
                                                                                        TABLE 3-2:
                                                                  LAND USE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                                   Minimum                                        Minimum    Maximum
                                                                           Maximum
                                                  Parcel Size                                    Residential Residential Minimum          Maximum
        Land Use Category                                                  Parcel Size
                                                 (square feet                                       Density   Density      FAR               FAR
                                                                              (acres)
                                                    or acres)                                       (du/ac)    (du/ac)
  General Agriculture                                     -                        -                    -         -          -                 -
  Rural Residential                                 0.5 acres                     10                  0.1        2.0         -                 -
  Low Density Residential                                 -                        -                  2.1        7.0         -                 -
  Medium Density Residential                              -                        -                  7.1        15          -                 -
  High Density Residential                                -                        -                  15.1      25.01        -                 -
  Central Business District                               -                        -                   7.1      25.01       0.5               3.5
  General Commercial                                      -                        -                    -         -        0.25               1.0
  Downtown Transition                                     -                        -                   3.1      25.0 1       -                1.5
  Office-Commercial                                       -                        -                    -         -        0.35               1.5
  Public Service                                          -                        -                    -         -          -                 -
  Parks and Recreation                                    -                        -                    -         -          -                 -
  Open Space                                              -                        -                    -         -          -                 -
  Light Industrial                                        -                        -                    -         -        0.25              0.75
  Heavy Industrial                                        -                        -                    -         -        0.10              0.75
  Surface Mining                                          -                        -                    -         -          -                 -
  Special Planning Area                                   -                        -                    -         -          -                 -
  Future Growth Area                                      -                        -                    -         -          -                 -
Notes:
1- Density bonus consistent with State law may be allowed to exceed the 25.0 unit per acre maximum.
August 2009                                                                                                                    City of Ione General Plan
                                                                                            3–33

                                                                                                            LAND USE
LAND USE POTENTIAL
Table 3-3 provides a summary of acreage (including percentages) for land with development
potential within the City limits, land outside the City limits, and total Planning Area. Table 3-4
provides a breakdown of acreage by individual land use category for land within the City limits, the
Sphere of Influence, and the entire Planning Area, and compares the proposed land uses to existing
land uses.
The land use potential results in a jobs/housing balance of approximately 1.8, or roughly 12,800 jobs
and about 7,000 housing units. As a general rule of thumb, a 1.0 jobs/housing ratio is considered a
well-balanced community, although this varies depending on a City’s demographics and other
factors. 1.8 represents a plentiful number of jobs and is a desirable ratio for the City to strive
toward.
The total land use potential is not anticipated to be developed for many decades, however, and is
likely to occur gradually, with only a portion of the development anticipated to occur prior to the
year 2030.
                                                            TABLE 3-3:
                                    SUMMARY OF DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
                                                                                                                     Total
                                             City                         Outside of City                     (General Plan
                                                                                                             Planning Area)
                                                      % of                                % of                                % of
                                   Total                                 Total                             Total
                                                     Total                               Total                                Total
  Acres Designated
                                   2,873                9%              10,337            33%             31,768              100%
  For Development
Note: “Development potential” for purposes of this table includes all General Plan land use designations except for Agricultural and Open
Space.
                                                            TABLE 3-4:
              SUMMARY OF GENERAL PLAN LAND USE DESIGNATIONS (IN ACRES)
                                                                                                      Planning
   General Plan Land Use Designation                              City                SOI                                    Total
                                                                                                         Area
  Downtown Transition                                               35                 --                  --                  33
  Central Business District                                         12                 --                  --                  12
  General Commercial                                                21                 2                   --                  23
  Office Commercial                                                  --                --                  --                   --
  Heavy Industrial                                                   --                --                  44                  44
City of Ione General Plan                                                                                                 August 2009
                                                                3–34

  LAND USE
                                                                                                          Planning
   General Plan Land Use Designation                                City                 SOI                                     Total
                                                                                                             Area
  Light Industrial                                                    2                    --                   --                 2
  Open Space                                                          28                 361                10,887              11,276
  Parks and Recreation                                               325                   1                   24                 350
  Public Services                                                   1,295                 52                    9                1,356
  Rural Residential                                                   18                   --                   --                 18
  Low Density Residential                                            702                 136                    --                838
  Medium Density Residential                                          26                   --                   --                 26
  High Density Residential                                            28                   --                   --                 28
  Special Planning Area                                              407                 798                  990                2,195
  General Agriculture                                                 --                 186                7,096                7,282
  Surface Mining                                                      --                   --               8,281                8,281
  Future Growth Area                                                  --                   --                   --
  TOTAL                                                             2,901               1,536              27,331               31,768
Source: PMC, City of Ione, Amador County Tax Assessor’s office
Notes: City acreages include acreages within the City limits only. SOI include acreages outside the City limits but within the SOI boundaries.
Planning Area acreages are those outside of the SOI and do not include acreages within the SOI or City limits.
GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING CONSISTENCY
The Zoning Code serves as the primary tool for implementing the City’s General Plan land use
policy. State planning law requires the Zoning Code to be consistent with the General Plan. Each
General Plan land use category must have one or more corresponding zoning district, and the
development standards and land use regulations contained in the Zoning Code must reflect the
policy statements in the Land Use Element. While the General Plan may be somewhat broad in its
discussion of permitted land uses and development intensities, zoning provisions must identify
specific regulations so that property owners and developers can determine how particular properties
can be used and developed. The following table (3-5) identifies the relationships between land use
categories and zoning districts.
                                                              TABLE 3-5:
                                        GENERAL PLAN/ZONING CONSISTENCY
   General Plan Land Use Category                                              Zoning Code Designation1
  General Agriculture (GA)                                Agricultural (A)
  Public Service (PS)                                     Public Facilities (PF)
                                                          Parks and Community Services (PCS); Public parks
  Parks and Rec (PR)
                                                          may also be allowed in residential zoning districts
  Open Space (OS)                                         Open Space (O-S)
August 2009                                                                                                 City of Ione General Plan
                                                                  3–35

                                                                                                              LAND USE
  General Plan Land Use Category                                                  Zoning Code Designation1
 Rural Residential (RR)                                       One-family dwelling (R-1c)
                                                              One-family dwelling (R-1a, R-1b); Limited multiple-
 Low Density Residential (RL)
                                                              family dwelling: (R-2)
                                                              Limited multiple-family dwelling (R-2); Multiple-family
 Medium Density Residential (RM)
                                                              dwelling (R-3)
 High Density Residential (RH)                                High density multiple-family dwelling (R-4)
                                                              Limited multiple-family dwelling (R-2); Commercial-
 Downtown Transition (DT)
                                                              Transition (C-T)
 Central Business District (CBD)                              Central Business District (C-2)
 General Commercial (GC)                                      Light commercial (C-1); Heavy commercial (C-3)
 Office Commercial (OC)                                       Business professional (BP)
 Special Planning Area (SPA)                                  All
 Future Growth Area (FGA)                                     All
 Light Industrial (LI)                                        Limited manufacturing and industrial (M-1)
 Heavy Industrial (HI)                                        Heavy industrial and mining (M-2)
 Surface Mining (SM)                                          Heavy industrial and mining (M-2)
Note:
1 This list includes base zoning districts. Generally, overlay districts are consistent with all General Plan land use categories and may be
     restricted to certain base zoning districts as stipulated in adopting ordinances.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
The goals of this Element are as follows and are listed subsequently with corresponding policies and
actions.
GOAL LU-1:                   Establish growth patterns that enhance the quality of life in
                             Ione and contribute to a balanced community.
Policy LU-1.1:               Ensure future land use and growth within the Planning Area adheres to the City’s
                             Land Use Principles, as described in this Element.
                             Action LU-1.1.1: Amend the Zoning Code to include the City’s Land Use
                             Principles, as appropriate.
Policy LU-1.2:               Use Master Plans, Specific Plans, and development projects to promote
                             pedestrian and bicycle movement via direct, safe, and pleasant routes that
City of Ione General Plan                                                                                                   August 2009
                                                                     3–36

 LAND USE
               connect destinations inside and outside the plan or project area. (Cross reference:
               CIR 2.2, CIR 2.3, CIR 2.4, CIR 2.5, CIR 2.6, CIR 2.7, CIR 2.8)
Policy LU-1.3: Phase growth based on infrastructure capacity, infrastructure financing, and the
               timing of the design, approval/permitting, and construction of transportation
               facilities and other infrastructure. (Cross reference: PF 1.1.1, PF 1.2, CIR 1.1)
               Action LU-1.3.1: Require market studies, financing plans, phasing plans, and
               other associated studies, as needed, for all new major development applications
               in order to evaluate the need for these projects, their compliance with established
               City policies, and the impact of the development on the City and service
               providers.
Policy LU-1.4: Work with the Amador Local Agency Formation Commission to establish and
               update a Sphere of Influence that reflects the City’s plans for growth and
               expansion. (Cross reference: CIR 1.1, ED 1.1.3, LU 1.10, LU 1.11, LU 1.13, LU
               1.15, LU 1.17)
               Action LU-1.4.1: All applications for annexations, including but not limited to
               Policy Areas and Future Growth Areas (FGA), shall include a comprehensive
               land use plan for the affected territory, including pre-zoning and a plan for
               infrastructure financing and phasing. In considering applications for annexation,
               the City shall consider whether the annexation will accomplish all of the
               following:
               •    Constitute fiscally sound additions to the existing City;
               •    Be consistent with state law and Local Agency Formation Commission
                    policies, standards, and criteria;
               •    Preserve neighborhood identities;
               •    Ensure both land use and circulation connections to the City so as to avoid
                    isolated development with little land use and circulation relationship to the
                    City;
               •    Ensure the provision of adequate municipal services; and
               •    Be consistent with General Plan land use policies.
Policy LU-1.5: Annexations, including but not limited to Policy Areas and Future Growth Areas
               (FGA), should contribute to the orderly planning of the community, including
               promoting the City’s ultimate community vision and ensuring a well designed
               circulation system. (Cross reference: CIR 1.1, ED 1.1.3, LU 1.10, LU 1.11, LU 1.13,
               LU 1.15, LU 1.17)
August 2009                                                                   City of Ione General Plan
                                            3–37

                                                                                  LAND USE
Policy LU-1.6:     Encourage landowner and/or resident-initiated annexations that are consistent
                   with the City’s policies and the intent of this General Plan.
Policy LU-1.7:     Implement the Policy Area Plan, depicted as Figure 3-3. Although shown as
                   defined lines, the exact land uses within a Policy Area may be adjusted slightly at
                   the City’s discretion to reflect subsequent more detailed land use planning to
                   ensure implementation consistent with the General Plan. Such changes shall not
                   be considered an amendment to this General Plan.
Policy LU-1.8:     Implement the Castle Oaks Gateway Policy Area Land Use Vision and
                   Policy, which is as follows: (Cross reference: CO 2.1.2, CO 2.4, CO 8.3, CO 9.2)
                   The Castle Oaks Gateway Policy Area is located along existing State Route 104
                   across from Mule Creek State Prison. The total property is approximately 52
                   acres in size. On the west side is Mule Creek; on the south and east are
                   developed areas of the Castle Oaks subdivision and the Castle Oaks Golf
                   Course. The property is nearly flat with few trees. It is located within the City
                   limits.
                   The land use policy and vision for Castle Oaks Gateway Policy Area is for
                   commercial and residential uses, with a maximum capacity of 210 residential
                   units and 70,000 square feet of commercial retail and office uses. Commercial
                   development shall be consistent with the General Commercial land use category.
                   The residential units shall be a mix of Residential Low Density (RL) in the range
                   of 2.1 to 7.0 units per acre; Medium Density Residential (RM) in the range of 7.1
                   to 15 units per acre; and High Density Residential (RH) in the range of 15.1 to 25
                   units per acre.
                   Future land planning through amendment to the existing Castle Oaks Planned
                   Development Master Plan is necessary in order to develop the property. The
                   final land plan shall recognize the impact of development along and proximate to
                   Mule Creek through the use of an open space preserve and/or additional
                   development setbacks. The land plan should provide for easy public access to
                   open space around Mule Creek (preferably full public access), accommodate a
                   trail along the creek for pedestrians and bicycles, and provide linkages (pedestrian
                   and bicycle) between the development and the creek trail and open space. The
                   land plan shall also provide such linkages to the Castle Oaks golf course to the
                   south.
Policy LU-1.9:     Implement the Downtown Policy Area Land Use Vision and Policy, which is
                   as follows: (Cross reference: CIR 2.2, CIR 2.3, CIR 2.4, CO 2.4, CO 8.3, ED 3.1, ED
                   5.2, LU 3-1)
                   The Downtown Policy Area extends north of State Route 124; west of South
                   Mill Street; south to State Route 104; and east to North Arroyo Seco Street.
                   State Routes 104 and 124, and Sutter Creek run through the Downtown. Main
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                  3–38

 LAND USE
            Street serves as the primary hub of the Downtown. The Downtown Policy Area
            is approximately 75 acres in size. It is characterized by commercial structures
            with historic architecture, general commercial uses, as well as residential uses and
            a small park. Truck traffic traveling through Downtown on SR-104 and SR-124
            pose a safety hazard to pedestrians and structures within this area. Much of the
            Downtown falls within the 100-year floodplain.
            The land use policy and vision for the Downtown Policy Area is to preserve the
            historic architecture and character of the area while allowing for intensification of
            retail, office, and residential uses to enhance the economic viability of the area
            and the area’s vibrancy. Additional mixed-use development is anticipated in this
            area, with residential uses above first floor retail and commercial uses. General
            Plan land use designations for this area include a mix of Central Business District
            (CBD), Downtown Transition (DT), General Commercial (GC), Office
            Commercial (OC), High-Density Residential (RH), Low-Density Residential
            (RL), and Open Space (OS).
            The Central Business District (CBD) land uses are characterized by a vertically
            and/or horizontally integrated mix of retail, office, professional, and service uses
            that serve daily shopping needs. Retail uses will generally dominate the ground
            floor. Development is pedestrian friendly with gathering places for both daytime
            and nighttime activities.      When residential uses are present in the CBD, the
            minimum density allowed is 7.1 units per acre and the maximum allowed density
            is 25.0 units per acre. The Floor Area Ratio (FAR) within the Central Business
            District will range from a minimum of 0.5 to a maximum of 3.5.
            The Downtown Transition (DT) land use designation is intended as a transitional
            land use category from existing residential uses to more intensive commercial
            uses. The designation respects the existing residential nature of the area but
            recognizes that market demands and land owner desires will drive conversion of
            the property to commercial office and/or retail. As such, existing residential uses
            are allowed to continue in perpetuity, and new homes on vacant lots may be
            built. Further, properties may be developed or redeveloped into commercial
            uses either through the conversion of residential structures to commercial
            operation or wholesale redevelopment of parcels with new commercial
            structures. The mixing of commercial and residential uses, either vertically or
            horizontally, on the same parcel is also permissible. The maximum FAR allowed
            is 1.5. When residential uses are developed, the allowed density range is between
            3.1 and 25.0 units per acre.
            Future planning for all or part of this area is necessary in the form of a
            Downtown Master Plan or Specific Plan (Downtown Plan). The Downtown
            Plan should take into consideration the West Ione Roadway Improvement
            Strategy (WIRIS), which will redirect truck traffic currently going through
            Downtown around the Downtown, thereby alleviating traffic hazards in the
August 2009                                                           City of Ione General Plan
                                         3–39

                                                                                 LAND USE
                   Downtown and facilitating circulation throughout the City. The Downtown
                   Plan should also include a Parking Plan to allow for parking flexibility to help
                   maintain the density and vibrancy of the Downtown.
                   The Downtown Plan should include provisions to protect the historic
                   architecture and character of the area. The Plan should ensure retail uses on the
                   outer edges of the Downtown, such as shopping center retail, supports
                   Downtown core retail around Main Street rather than detract from it.
                   The Downtown Plan should aim to make the Downtown more pedestrian
                   friendly and add bicycle lanes where feasible, with linkages to other parts of the
                   City. In addition, the future Downtown planning efforts should aim to maximize
                   public access to Train Park and to open space areas around Sutter Creek and
                   where possible, provide for pedestrian and bicycle trails along the creek.
Policy LU-1.10:    Implement the Industrial Park Policy Area Land Use Vision and Policy,
                   which is as follows: (Cross reference: CIR 2.1, CIR 2.2, CIR 2.4, CO 3.1, CO
                   5.1.2, CO 5.2, CO 8.3, CO 9.1, CO 9.2, ED 1.3.1, LU 1.4, LU 1.5, NS 3.2, NS
                   3.3)
                   The Industrial Park Policy Area is bounded by a rail line to the north, Open
                   Space to the west, the City limits and SOI boundary to the south, and South
                   Church Street/State Route 124 to the east. The total property is approximately
                   313 acres in size. Several railroad spurs cross the property. The northern
                   portion of this Policy Area falls within the 100-year floodplain (see Glossary of
                   this General Plan for definition of 100-year floodplain). Numerous trees and
                   vegetation covers the central and southern parts of this Policy Area. Mining
                   operations abut this Policy Area to the south. The eastern part of this Policy
                   Area falls within City limits, while the western portion falls outside of City limits
                   but within the City’s Sphere of Influence.
                   The Industrial Park Policy Area is designated Special Planning Area (SPA). The
                   land use policy and vision for the Industrial Park Policy Area is for a
                   predominant development pattern of light and heavy industrial uses, with some
                   commercial and office development as well. The General Plan Land Use
                   Designation for this area is Special Planning Area (SPA). Light industrial
                   development in this area should be consistent with the General Plan land use
                   classification of Light Industrial (LI) and shall have FAR’s ranging from a
                   minimum of 0.25 to a maximum of 0.75. Heavy industrial development shall be
                   consistent with the Heavy Industrial (HI) designation and shall have FAR’s
                   ranging from a minimum of 0.10 to a maximum of 0.75. General commercial
                   should be consistent with the General Commercial designation, with FAR’s
                   ranging from a minimum of 0.25 to a maximum of 1.0. Office Commercial shall
                   have FAR’s ranging from 0.35 to a maximum of 1.5. The maximum
                   development capacities for this Policy Area are as follows:
City of Ione General Plan                                                                  August 2009
                                               3–40

 LAND USE
            •    Light Industrial: 2,134,440 square feet;
            •    Heavy Industrial: 4,003,164 square feet;
            •    Office: 2,012,472 square feet;
            •    Retail-Commercial: 1,439,658 square feet
            Office development in this Policy Area is encouraged to be of high quality –
            Class A in nature, however other classes of office space are permitable (e.g.,
            Class B, incubator office/research and development). Industrial uses in this
            Policy Area may include warehousing/storage, manufacturing, and other
            industrial uses. Commercial-retail development in this Policy Area is encouraged
            to include regional serving retail, such as automobile sales, a hotel, and other
            regional serving retail uses. Restaurants, including fast food restaurants, are
            allowed in this Policy Area. Retail activities are best located along State Route
            124 and office uses should be used as buffers between the heavier industrial uses
            and residential uses to the north.
            Future land planning shall be substantially consistent with the Conceptual Land
            Use Plan for the Industrial Park Policy Area, as contained in Figure 3-14. Future
            land planning in this Policy Area shall recognize that the West Ione Roadway
            Improvement Strategy (WIRIS) calls for establishment of a major section of the
            City’s western roadway backbone (e.g., the “Bypass”) through the Policy Area.
            As such, this road will serve as a central spine through the industrial park. There
            will be no direct access to properties from this road unless permitted by both the
            City and Caltrans. However, the City deems it desirable and strongly encourages
            Caltrans to allow the maximum possible access from the WIRIS to the Industrial
            Park. There will be a loop road system providing access to properties in this
            Policy Area from the central spine, with two points of connection on either end
            of the Policy Area as determined in consultation with Caltrans.
            Future land planning should include sidewalks on all roads in the Policy Area to
            provide for pedestrian circulation. The land plan should provide for easy public
            access (pedestrian and bicycle) from development to the open space area (6.75
            acres) located in the northern part of the Policy Area and to the open space area
            located to the west of the Policy Area, in the Old Stockton Road Policy Area, as
            well as to the north into the central City. The land plan should also
            accommodate a Class 1 bike trail along the northern boundary of the Policy Area
            along the Union Pacific rail line, with linkages (pedestrian and bicycle) to open
            space areas located in the northern part of the Industrial Park Policy Area (See
            Bikeways and Trails Map in Circulation Element, Figure 4-2).
            Land planning should consider that the existing heavy rail lines may be
            retrofitted in the future and pose opportunities for shipping and serve as
August 2009                                                           City of Ione General Plan
                                         3–41

                                                                                LAND USE
                   connections between Ione and the greater region, State, and nation. The land
                   plan shall be designed to protect heritage trees within the Policy Area pursuant to
                   the City’s tree preservation ordinance.
                   The land plan shall recognize the proximity to the south of mining operations
                   and include decreases in development density and intensity, special setbacks from
                   the mining operations, and/or notifications in subsequent property deeds about
                   the proximity of these uses and operations and the right of these operations to
                   continue.
                   Future land planning for this Policy Area should avoid development in the
                   floodplain. Annexation is required to develop portions of the Policy Area
                   currently outside of the City.
Policy LU-1.11:    Implement the Old Stockton Policy Area Land Use Vision and Policy, which
                   is as follows (Cross Reference: CO 3.1, CO 5.1.2, CO 5.2, CO 8.3, CO 9.1, CO
                   9.2, LU 1.4, LU 1.5, LU 2.4.2, NS 3.2, NS 3.3)
                   The Old Stockton Road Policy Area is east of Old Stockton Road. A rail line
                   runs across the northern most portion of the Policy Area east-west. The Policy
                   Area is approximately 190 acres in size. The northern part of the Policy Area
                   falls within the floodplain. The Policy Area has some rolling topography. It has
                   been used for cattle grazing, agricultural uses, and open space. To the north of
                   the Policy Area is agricultural land designated Farmland of Statewide
                   Importance. To the east is open space, and to the west and south are mining
                   operations. The Policy Area falls outside of the City limits within the Sphere of
                   Influence.
                   The Old Stockton Policy Area is designated Special Planning Area (SPA). The
                   land use policy and vision for the Old Stockton Road Policy Area is to allow for
                   rural residential development and open space. The General Plan Land Use
                   Designation is Special Planning Area (SPA). Residential development in this
                   Policy Area should be consistent with the Rural Residential (RR) General Plan
                   designation, with a density range of 0.1 to 2.0 units per acre. This Policy Area
                   has a maximum residential capacity of 119 units, envisioned to be located on the
                   western part of the Policy Area. The eastern portion of the Policy Area is to
                   remain Open Space, although there is some flexibility in the configuration of the
                   open space and future land planning will determine the configuration of the open
                   space. Annexation is required to develop this area.
                   Future land planning shall be substantially consistent with the Conceptual Land
                   Use Plan for the Old Stockton Policy Area, as contained in Figure 3-15. Future
                   land planning should recognize the proximity to mining operations to the west
                   and south, to agricultural operations to the north, and to the rail line in the
                   northern area of the Policy Area, through decreases in development density and
                   intensity, special setbacks, and/or notifications in subsequent property deeds
City of Ione General Plan                                                                 August 2009
                                               3–42

 LAND USE
                about the proximity of these uses and operations and the right of these
                operations to continue. Development should be avoided within the floodplain
                within the Old Stockton Road Policy Area.
                The land plan shall be designed to protect heritage trees within the Policy Area
                pursuant to the City’s tree preservation ordinance.
                The land plan should provide for easy public access to open space east of the
                development, and provide linkages between the development and the open space
                areas. Future planning shall provide linkages and a pedestrian/bicycle/equestrian
                trail to the extent possible, between the development and adjacent open space
                area.
Policy LU-1.12: Implement the Preston Reuse Policy Area Land Use Vision and Policy,
                which is as follows:
                The Preston Reuse Policy Area is located north of the intersection of State Route
                104 and Waterman Road. The Policy Area is approximately 17 acres in size. To
                the north of the Policy Area is the Preston Youth Correctional Facility and the
                CAL FIRE Academy. To the southeast of the Policy Area is future high-density
                housing and to the southwest is existing low-density residential. The property is
                owned by the State of California and has some existing residences historically
                used by staff of the Preston Youth Correctional Facility. The Policy Area has a
                slight slope up toward the north. The Policy Area is located within the City
                limits.
                The land use policy and vision for the Preston Reuse Policy Area is to maintain
                low density residential units within the Policy Area while adding office
                development with a maximum residential capacity of 25 units and a maximum
                office capacity of 760,000 square feet. Residential uses within the Policy Area
                shall be consistent with the Low Density Residential (RL) General Plan
                designation, which has a density range of 2.1 to 7.0 units per acre. Office
                development in this area shall be consistent with the Office-Commercial (OC)
                General Plan designation, with floor area ratios in the range of 0.35 to a
                maximum of 1.5. Future land planning, either as a Specific Plan or Planned
                Development Master Plan, is necessary in order to develop the Policy Area.
Policy LU-1.13: Implement the Q Ranch Policy Area Land Use Vision and Policy, which is
                as follows (Cross Reference: CO 2.1.2, CO 2.4, CO 5.2, CO 8.3, CO 9.1, CO 9.2,
                LU 1.4, LU 1.5, LU 2.4.2, NS 3.2, NS 3.3)
                The Q Ranch Policy Area is located north along State Route 104. The Policy
                Area is approximately 439 acres in size. Collins Road forms most of its eastern
                boundary. Irish Hill Road crosses the northwest corner of the Policy Area.
                Immediately east of Q Ranch is Mule Creek State Prison. To the west of the
                Policy Area are historic mining operations, and to the north is Future Growth
August 2009                                                             City of Ione General Plan
                                            3–43

                                                                                 LAND USE
                   Area. The Policy Area is located outside the City limits but within the Sphere of
                   Influence.
                   The Q Ranch Policy Area is designated Special Planning Area (SPA). The Policy
                   Area has slopes, although almost all of the Policy Area is sloped less than 30
                   percent. Dry Creek runs through the Policy Area, generally in the north-south
                   direction. Several ponds are located on the site, north of the end of Collins
                   Road. A significant portion of the site falls within a 100-year floodplain,
                   extending out on both sides of Dry Creek. There are many oak trees within the
                   Policy Area. Portions of the site have been used for grazing and agricultural
                   operations, with one area of the site having undergone voluntary clean-up of
                   contaminated soil.
                   Because of Q Ranch’s location along State Route 104 northwest of Downtown
                   Ione, the Policy Area serves as a gateway to the City and is one of the first areas
                   that residents and visitors see as they enter the City from the north and west.
                   The area across State Route 104 from Q Ranch is agricultural and is designated
                   for continued agricultural uses in the General Plan update, much of it being
                   Prime Farmland and Farmland of Statewide Importance. Combined, this stretch
                   of State Route 104 serves as a visual corridor and gateway to Ione.
                   The land use policy and vision for the Q Ranch Policy Area is to allow for
                   clustered residential development, create public open space and maintain
                   agriculture within the floodplain areas and usable agricultural sites, and to
                   provide parkland and other public amenities on site.                The residential
                   development pattern shall be consistent with the Conceptual Land Use Plan in
                   Figure 3-9 and maximum unit count established in this policy, with flexibility in
                   the density to allow for clustering of units as clustering may be necessary to avoid
                   site constraints. A maximum residential capacity of 850 units is permitted on the
                   site.
                   Future land planning, either as a Specific Plan or Planned Development Master
                   Plan, is necessary in order to develop the Policy Area, and annexation is required.
                   Any Specific Plan or Planned Development Master Plan for this site shall be
                   substantially consistent with the Conceptual Land Use Plan for the Q Ranch
                   Policy Area, as contained in Figure 3-16. Such a land plan shall recognize the
                   impact of development proximate to Dry Creek through the use of an open
                   space preserve and/or additional development setbacks. The land plan shall
                   provide for easy public access to open space around Dry Creek and around
                   ponds within the Policy Area, and accommodate a trail along the creek area for
                   pedestrians, bicycles, and equestrian use. Future planning should provide
                   linkages, to the extent possible, between the Dry Creek trail and open space and
                   the Mule Creek trail and open space in the vicinity of the Ringer Ranch Policy
                   Area.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                  August 2009
                                               3–44

 LAND USE
                The land plan shall be designed to protect heritage trees within the Policy Area
                pursuant to the City’s tree preservation ordinance.
                The land plan shall recognize the proximity to existing agricultural operations on
                Q Ranch, historic mining operations to the west, and Mule Creek State prison to
                the east, that are identified in the General Plan as continued operations in
                perpetuity, through decreases in development density and intensity, special
                setbacks, and/or notifications in subsequent property deeds about the proximity
                of these uses and operations and the right of these operations to continue. The
                land plan shall recognize the proximity to future General Commercial uses along
                State Route 104 at Collins Road to the east of Q Ranch.
                The land plan will be subject to a visual analysis and shall protect the scenic
                views offered by Q Ranch from State Route 104 by situating development in a
                manner that least impacts the viewshed wherever possible, and providing a visual
                buffer setback from State Route 104. Future study of the floodplain may change
                the FEMA approved boundaries of the 100-year floodplain. Such changes may
                be allowed through the plan review process, however while these changes may
                increase the developable area, they shall not, in and of themselves, increase the
                development capacity of the Policy Area beyond the 850 units identified herein.
Policy LU-1.14: Implement the Ringer Ranch Policy Area Land Use Vision and Policy,
                which is as follows (Cross Reference: CIR 1.1, CO 2.1.2, CO 2.4, CO 3.1, CO 8.3,
                CO 9.1, CO 9.2, LU 2.4.2)
                The Ringer Ranch Policy Area is located along existing State Route 104 across
                from the entrance to Mule Creek State Prison. The total Policy Area is
                approximately 139 acres in size. On the east side is Mule Creek; on the south is
                the Castle Oaks golf course and subdivision and the Silva Policy Area; on the
                west is Five Mile Drive. The Policy Area is wooded on the west side, with few
                trees on the rest of the Policy Area. The Policy Area is fairly flat and has
                historically been used for grazing and agricultural uses. It is located within the
                City limits.
                The land use policy and vision for the Ringer Ranch Policy Area is for a
                predominant development pattern of residential uses in the Low Density
                Residential (RL) range of 2.1 to 7.0 units per acre and a maximum residential
                capacity of 670 units; however, higher density residential uses may be allowed,
                provided the capacity of 670 units is not exceeded. Additional commercial retail
                and office opportunities along Highway 104 exist, consistent with the General
                Commercial land use category with a potential development capacity of 50,000
                square feet.
                Future land planning, either as a Specific Plan or Planned Development Master
                Plan, is necessary in order to develop the Policy Area. Such a land plan shall
                recognize the impact of development along and proximate to Mule Creek
August 2009                                                              City of Ione General Plan
                                            3–45

                                                                                  LAND USE
                   through the use of an open space preserve and/or additional development
                   setbacks. The land plan shall provide for easy public access to open space areas
                   around Mule Creek, accommodate a trail along the creek for pedestrians and
                   bicycles, and provide linkages (pedestrian and bicycle) between the development
                   and the creek trail and open space. The land plan shall also provide such
                   linkages to the Castle Oaks golf course to the southeast.
                   The land plan shall be designed to protect heritage trees within the Policy Area
                   pursuant to the City’s tree preservation ordinance.
                   The land plan shall also recognize the proximity to existing agricultural
                   operations to the west that are identified in the General Plan as continued
                   operations in perpetuity through decreases in development density and intensity,
                   special setbacks, and/or notifications in subsequent property deeds about the
                   proximity of agricultural operations and the right of these operations to continue.
                   The land plan and circulation planning shall also reflect the connection of Golf
                   Links Drive to existing State Route 104. The City’s Circulation Plan calls for this
                   connection to be made at the intersection of Collins Road and Highway 104;
                   however, the City may consider relocating the connection to align with the
                   entrance to Mule Creek State Prison based upon further circulation study,
                   consultation with Caltrans, future improvements to Five Mile Drive, and the
                   results of land planning of adjacent policy areas.
Policy LU-1.15:    Implement the Silva Policy Area Land Use Vision and Policy, which is as
                   follows (Cross Reference: CO 2.1.2, CO 2.4, CO 3.1, LU 1.4, LU 1.5, LU 2.4.2,
                   NS 3.2, NS 3.3)
                   The Silva Policy area is located south and abutting the Ringer Ranch Policy Area
                   and west of the Castle Oaks golf course and subdivision. The total Policy Area is
                   approximately 105 acres. Five Mile Drive forms the western and southern
                   boundary of the Policy Area. Mule Creek runs through the Policy Area, running
                   east-west across it. To the south of the Policy Area is a proposed community
                   park site. The Policy Area is located outside the City limits but within the Sphere
                   of Influence.
                   The site is nearly flat, with little slope. The Policy Area has historically been used
                   for various agricultural activities. Much of the site has few or no trees, with the
                   exception of areas along Five Mile Drive and riparian corridor along Mule Creek,
                   which have large oak trees. Lands immediately on both sides of Mule Creek fall
                   within the 100-year FEMA flood zone.
                   The land use policy and vision for the Silva Policy Area is for Residential Low-
                   Density (RL), ranging from 2.1 to 7.0 units per acre and a maximum residential
                   capacity of 552 units. Higher density residential uses may be allowed, provided
                   the capacity of 552 units is not exceeded. Additional neighborhood-serving retail
City of Ione General Plan                                                                    August 2009
                                                 3–46

 LAND USE
                and office opportunities exist, consistent with the General Commercial land use
                category with a potential development capacity of 20,000 square feet.
                If the Policy Area is developed in the City at a future date, both annexation into
                the City and land planning will need to be completed, either as a Specific Plan or
                Planned Development Master Plan.
                The land plan shall be designed to protect heritage trees within the Policy Area
                pursuant to the City’s tree preservation ordinance.
                The land plan shall recognize the proximity of the policy area and future
                development to existing and continued agricultural operations to the west that
                are identified in the General Plan through decreases in development density and
                intensity, special setbacks, and/or notifications in subsequent property deeds
                about the proximity of agricultural operations and the right of these operations
                to continue.
Policy LU-1.16: Implement the State Route 124 Corridor Policy Area Land Use Vision and
                Policy, which is as follows: (Cross Reference: CO 2.1.2, CO 2.4, CO 3.1, CO 8.3, CO
                9.2, NS 3.2, NS 3.3)
                The State Route 124 Corridor Policy Area extends northeast from the
                Downtown along State Route 124. Waterman Road serves as its northern and
                northeastern boundaries. The total Policy Area is approximately 247 acres in
                size. To the north of the Policy Area is the Preston Youth Correctional Facility,
                the Preston Reuse Policy Area, and the CAL FIRE Academy; to the east is Open
                Space; to the south are residential uses; and to the west is the Downtown Policy
                Area. The State Route 124 Corridor Policy Area generally slopes up toward the
                northeast. Sutter Creek runs through the southern portion of this Policy Area,
                with floodplains extending on both sides of Sutter Creek within this Policy Area.
                There are numerous trees in this Policy Area. The western part of this Policy
                Area falls within City limits, while the eastern portion falls outside of City limits
                but within the City’s Sphere of Influence.
                The land use policy and vision for the State Route 124 Corridor Policy Area is
                for a predominant development pattern of residential uses in the Low Density
                Residential (RL) range of 2.1 to 7.0 units per acre, with some residential uses in
                the High Density Residential (RH) range of 15.1 to 25 units per acre. The
                maximum residential capacity for this Policy Area is 1,176 low density residential
                units and 326 high-density residential units.
                Future land planning, either as a Specific Plan or Planned Development Master
                Plan, is necessary in order to develop the Policy Area, and annexation is required.
                There is some flexibility in the configuration of residential uses in this Policy
                Area and future land planning will determine the configuration of residential
                uses. Clustering of residential units may be necessary to avoid site constraints.
August 2009                                                                City of Ione General Plan
                                            3–47

                                                                                 LAND USE
                   Such a land plan shall recognize the impact of development along and proximate
                   to Sutter Creek through the use of an open space preserve and/or additional
                   development setbacks. The land plan should provide for easy public access to
                   open space areas around Sutter Creek, accommodate a trail along the creek for
                   pedestrians and bicycles, and provide linkages (pedestrian and bicycle) between
                   the development and the creek trail and open space. The land plan shall also
                   provide such linkages to the open space to the east and north of the Policy Area.
                   The land plan shall be designed to protect heritage trees within the Policy Area
                   pursuant to the City’s tree preservation ordinance.
Policy LU-1.17:    Implement the Triangle Policy Area Land Use Vision and Policy, which is as
                   follows: (Cross Reference: CO 3.1, CO 8.3, ED 1.3.1, LU 1.4, LU 1.5)
                   The Triangle Policy Area is bounded by State Route 124 to the west, State Route
                   104 to the east and Brickyard Road to the north. The southern boundary is
                   generally State Route 88, with the exception of an area south of SR 88 at Buena
                   Vista Road that is part of the Policy Area. The Policy Area is approximately 990
                   acres in size. To the north of the Policy Area is Howard Park and residential
                   uses; to the west are mining operations; to the east is open space; and to the
                   south is mining and open space. The Policy Area has rolling hills, with some
                   steep slopes, and is heavily wooded in areas. A rail line cuts through the Policy
                   Area’s northern area, running east-west. Some of the Policy Area has been used
                   for mining operations and as the County dump. The Policy Area is located
                   outside of the City limits and the Sphere of Influence, within the General Plan
                   Planning Area.
                   The land use policy and vision for the Triangle Policy Area is to maintain mining
                   operations while establishing industrial, office, and commercial uses within the
                   Policy Area, with a maximum industrial capacity of 4.17 million square feet, a
                   maximum office capacity of 2.45 million square feet, and a maximum retail
                   capacity of 610,000 square feet. Office development in this area shall be
                   consistent with the Office-Commercial (OC) General Plan designation, with
                   floor area ratios in the range of 0.35 to a maximum of 1.5. Industrial
                   development in this area shall be consistent with the Light Industrial (LI) and
                   Heavy Industrial (HI) General Plan designations, with Floor Area Ratios in the
                   range of 0.25 to 0.75 for LI and 0.10 to 0.75 for HI. Commercial development
                   in this area shall be consistent with the General Commercial (GC) General Plan
                   designation, with floor area ratios in the range of 0.25 to 1.0.
                   Future land planning, either as a Specific Plan or Planned Development Master
                   Plan, is necessary in order to develop the Policy Area due to the intensive
                   infrastructure planning needs, and annexation is required. Future land planning
                   should take into consideration the residential area to the north of the Policy Area
City of Ione General Plan                                                                 August 2009
                                                3–48

 LAND USE
               through decreases in development density and intensity and special setbacks to
               avoid land use conflicts.
               Land planning should provide for pedestrian and bicycle linkages between future
               uses on the site and Howard Park to the north, maximizing public access to the
               park from the Triangle Area.
               Land planning should take into consideration the proposed Buena Vista Casino
               several miles to the south of the Triangle Policy Area. Commercial opportunities
               exist along the State Routes, particularly at the intersections of SR 88 and Buena
               Vista Drive.
               The land plan shall be designed to protect heritage trees within the Policy Area
               pursuant to the City’s tree preservation ordinance and other sensitive habitat.
GOAL LU-2: Achieve a balanced and integrated land use pattern throughout
               the community.
Policy LU-2.1: Use and maintain the Land Use Map to designate the location and extent of each
               land use designation within the Planning Area.
               Action LU-2.1.1: Regularly evaluate the mix of land uses as the City grows, and
               update the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance as needed to ensure an
               appropriate balance of land uses.
               Action LU-2.1.2: Regularly update the General Plan Land Use Map and other
               related maps in the General Plan, as warranted, with the latest parcel information
               from the Amador County Assessor’s Office, regardless of General Plan
               Amendment activity. Updates to the parcel lines, when no adjustments have
               been made with respect to land uses, shall not constitute an amendment of the
               General Plan.
               Action LU-2.1.3: Amend the Zoning Code text to include the appropriate
               findings required for General Plan land use and text amendment requests. (Cross
               reference: ED 1.6)
               Action LU-2.1.4: Regularly update the General Plan Land Use Map and other
               related maps in the General Plan with the final approved specific land use
               designations for each General Plan Policy Area, replacing the Specific Planning
               Areas (SPA) designations after final land plans are approved for each Policy
               Area.
August 2009                                                               City of Ione General Plan
                                           3–49

                                                                                  LAND USE
Policy LU-2.2:     Develop a fiscally sound strategy to encourage a mix of uses that meets the City’s
                   needs and provides sufficient tax base to maintain desired community service
                   levels.
                   Action LU-2.2.1: Designate adequate commercial, office, and industrial land
                   uses throughout the City during project review and as part of annual review of
                   the General Plan.
Policy LU-2.3:     Maintain a strong jobs-housing ratio with a diverse job base and corresponding
                   housing stock within the Planning Area. Improve the relationship and proximity
                   of jobs to housing and commercial services.
                   Action LU-2.3.1: Identify target businesses and industries that diversify the
                   City’s employment base and create incentives to locate in Ione. (Cross reference:
                   ED 2.1, ED 2.3)
Policy LU-2.4:     Promote high quality, efficient, and cohesive land utilization that minimizes
                   negative impacts (e.g., traffic congestion and visual blight) and environmental
                   hazards (e.g. flood, soil instability) on adjacent areas and infrastructure and
                   preserve existing and future residential areas from encroachment of incompatible
                   activities and land uses.
                   Action LU-2.4.1: Establish development standards in the Zoning Code to
                   address compatibility between existing and proposed development.
                   Action LU-2.4.2: Minimize impacts between urban and agricultural uses
                   through the use of buffers, increased setbacks, roadways, decreased densities,
                   landscaping, and/or other appropriate methods to avoid conflicts. (Cross Reference:
                   LU 1.11, LU 1.13, LU 1.14, LU 1.15)
                   Action LU-2.4.3: Promote the disclosure of potential land use compatibility
                   issues in all parts of the City, such as noise, dust, odors, etc., in order to provide
                   potential purchasers with the information necessary to make informed decisions
                   about the Policy Area and its future land uses. (Cross reference NS 1.2)
                   Action LU-2.4.4: Work with utility providers to coordinate location of
                   transmission lines and substations during development review. (Cross reference PF
                   11.1)
Policy LU-2.5:     Maintain consistency between the land use categories of this General Plan and
                   the City Zoning Code.
                   Action LU-2.5.1: Update the Zoning Code Text and Map to reflect new land
                   use designations and distributions throughout the City as established in this
                   General Plan.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                    August 2009
                                                3–50

 LAND USE
                Action LU-2.5.2: Regularly audit, and update as necessary, any provisions of
                the Code that may be inconsistent with the General Plan and its subsequent
                amendments.
Policy LU-2.6:  Development located adjacent to lands designated for Public Services shall
                include appropriate setbacks, fencing, and landscaping to avoid land use
                conflicts.
Policy LU-2.7:  Ensure that public facilities located adjacent to areas designated for development
                include proper setbacks and landscape screening to avoid incompatibilities and
                provide shielding between uses.
Policy LU-2.8:  Require an urban/agriculture buffer between development and existing
                agricultural uses. Design each buffer area to match the specific needs of each
                urban/agriculture interface, and to take into account the specific urban and
                agricultural uses. Buffers may be established through the use of increased
                setbacks, roadways, barriers, landscaping or other appropriate methods to avoid
                conflicts. Development of this buffer must be done in consultation with
                Amador County and will not require the taking of existing agricultural land nor
                impede existing agricultural uses.
Policy LU-2.9:  Residential development projects and projects categorized as sensitive receptors
                shall be located an adequate distance from existing and potential sources of toxic
                emissions such as freeways, major arterials, industrial sites, and hazardous
                material locations. “Adequate distance” will be based on site-specific conditions,
                on the types and amounts of potential toxic emissions, and other factors.
Policy LU-2.10: Require new air pollution point sources (such as, but not limited to, industrial,
                manufacturing, and processing facilities) to be located an adequate distance from
                residential areas and other sensitive receptors. “Adequate distance” will be based
                on site-specific conditions, the type and location of sensitive receptors, on the
                types and amounts of potential toxic emissions, and other factors.
GOAL LU-3: Preserve and regenerate Ione’s historic Downtown.
Policy LU-3.1:  Improve the character and quality of existing Downtown development through
                the revitalization of blighted and underutilized properties. (Cross reference LU 1.9)
                Action LU-3.1.1: Encourage the upgrading, beautification, revitalization, infill
                development, and appropriate reuse of existing commercial areas Downtown.
                (Cross reference ED 3.1.1)
August 2009                                                               City of Ione General Plan
                                             3–51

                                                                                     LAND USE
                   Action LU-3.1.2: Encourage the intensification of land uses in Downtown
                   Ione, including residential over retail and office, and new residential and
                   commercial development Downtown.
                   Action LU-3.1.3: Establish a Downtown Master Plan, Area Plan, or Specific
                   Plan to ensure the long-term vibrancy of Downtown, protect its historic
                   architecture, intensify land uses, enhance walkability, and develop bicycle and
                   pedestrian linkages to surrounding areas. Include a Parking Plan as part of the
                   Downtown Plan. (Cross reference CIR 1.8)
                   Action LU-3.1.4: Encourage parking in shared surface lots, parking structures,
                   or in off-site facilities to create a diversity of uses that transforms the Downtown
                   and the surrounding area into a positive, rich environment. (Cross reference CIR
                   1.8)
                   Action LU-3.1.5: As part of the Downtown Plan conduct a survey of property
                   within the Downtown to determine where potential land assembly issues may
                   occur and work with property owners to actively solve the problem together,
                   with mutual benefit.
                   Action LU-3.1.6: Complete and certify Redevelopment Plans that establish the
                   Downtown area as a Redevelopment Area. (Cross reference ED 3.3)
Policy LU-3.2:     Continue, improve, and expand City efforts to identify sub-standard areas of the
                   City and work with property owners to improve their properties.
Policy LU-3.3:     Support the assembly of land for new development where the fragmentation of
                   parcels or the limited size of existing parcels acts as a deterrent to new
                   development.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                     August 2009
                                                  3–52

  CIRCULATION
INTRODUCTION
Circulation refers to the ability of people and goods to safely and
efficiently move about the community. Mobility is essential to a      Please turn to Page 4-2 for a
community’s success and quality of life for its residents. Ione       complete listing of contents
faces several circulation challenges with congestion and hazards      covered in this Element,
                                                                      with page number
resulting from truck traffic traveling through downtown Ione on       references.
State Routes 104 and 124, and disconnected and limited
pedestrian and bicycle facilities.
The City will build a circulation system that makes it easier and safer to move throughout the
City by focusing on developing a region-serving roadway connection which does not pass
through downtown, and by developing a network of pedestrian and bicycle routes
throughout the community.
August 2009                                                            City of Ione General Plan
                                              4–1

                                                                     CIRCULATION
                                         IN THIS SECTION
      •   Introduction (Page 4-1)
      •   Vision (Page 4-2)
      •   Purpose (Page 4-2)
      •   Related Plans and Programs (Page 4-2)
      •   Relationship to Other General Plan Elements (Page 4-4)
      •   Setting, Issues, and Considerations (Page 4-4)
      •   Issues this Element Attempts to Solve (Page 4-5)
      •   The Circulation Plan (Page 4-6)
      •   Goals, Policies, and Actions (Page 4-12)
VISION
An efficient and accessible transportation system in Ione will enhance commerce, increase
safety, and encourage pedestrian, equestrian, bicycle, and golf cart traffic. The roadway
network will be designed to accommodate the City’s growth needs and to serve residents,
visitors, and businesses. The transportation network will provide options to accommodate
both local traffic through the City and regional truck traffic around the City to enhance
circulation, decrease traffic congestion, and increase safety in and around Ione. Pedestrian,
bicycle, and equestrian linkages will be integrated into the circulation system.
PURPOSE
The Circulation Element describes existing and future transportation conditions and systems.
The Element establishes goals, policies, and actions that will guide the City’s circulation
system, including the roadway network and bicycle and pedestrian facilities. The text, maps,
and diagrams in this Element are the basis for the development of the City’s transportation
network.
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
The Circulation Element relates closely to several other plans and programs, including the
following:
Amador County Transportation Commission (ACTC) and the Amador
County Pedestrian and Bicycle Transportation Plan
ACTC serves as the Regional Transportation Planning Authority for Amador County. The
primary responsibilities of the ACTC include the administration of Transportation
City of Ione General Plan                                                        August 2009
                                                   4–2

  CIRCULATION
Development Act funds and other state and federal transportation funding within Amador
County. ACTC works in partnerships with other agencies and municipalities within its
jurisdiction including the County and the cities of Ione, Jackson, Amador City, Plymouth
and Sutter Creek.       ACTC facilitates implementation of the Countywide Regional
Transportation Plan and the Amador County Pedestrian and Bicycle Transportation Plan.
West Ione Roadway Improvement Strategy (WIRIS)
The West Ione Roadway Improvement Strategy (WIRIS) is a planned project for creating a
backbone roadway system on the west side of the City. This new system of roadways will
help alleviate congestion, improve safety, improve quality of life, and enhance economic
development by improving current operations as well as accommodating future traffic
volumes forecast for the area in and around the City of Ione. WIRIS improvements consist of
a combination of a new roadways and improvements to existing roadways.
Proposed bikeway and sidewalk projects list (City of Ione, 2008)
The City has a list of proposed bikeway and sidewalk projects that includes 31 sidewalk
improvements and 20 bike lane improvements. The majority of these facilities are proposed
for the downtown area.
Amador Rapid Transit System (ARTS)
Bus service in the region is provided by the Amador Rapid Transit System (ARTS). Bus
service is available between Ione, Sutter Hill, and Camache, with several stops in Ione,
including Downtown. ARTS also provides bus service into Sacramento.
Safe Route to School Program (SR2S)
SR2S is a grant program that helps fund the construction of sidewalks where there are none in
locations that provide routes to schools.
Dial-A-Ride Program
A Dial-A-Ride Program provides bus riders, residents, and visitors with vanpool
transportation within the City.
Capital Improvement Plan (CIP)
The City uses a Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) to prioritize and fund circulation
improvements. Local and regional impact fees are used to fund vehicular and non-vehicular
improvements.
August 2009                                                         City of Ione General Plan
                                            4–3

                                                                   CIRCULATION
More information about these plans and studies is provided in the General Plan Update
Background Report, Appendix A.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
The Circulation Element is a mandatory element of the General Plan that is closely related to
several of the other elements of this General Plan. It addresses the circulation system as
necessitated by the increase in development described in the Land Use Element. Trails,
bikeways, and pedestrian paths are discussed in conjunction with the Conservation and Open
Space Element. The Circulation Element also relates to the Noise and Safety Element with
regard to increasing safety for pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists and minimizing noise
impacts from vehicle traffic. Issues, goals, policies, and actions related to infrastructure as
required by the State General Plan Guidelines are addressed in the Public Facilities Element.
Where appropriate, cross-references are provided to alert the reader to the applicable policies
or actions in other elements.
SETTING, ISSUES, AND CONSIDERATIONS
ROADWAYS
Figure 4-1 displays the major roadways within the Planning Area, along with the functional
classification for each roadway as a State Route or local route. State Routes 104 and 124 run
through downtown Ione and serve as truck routes. Through the downtown, these routes are
narrow for trucks, with on-street parking and tight turns in key locations, causing safety
hazards and impairing circulation in Ione. The West Ione Roadway Improvement Strategy
(WIRIS) identifies improvements to the City circulation system on the west side of the City
that address circulation in and around the City and improve safety.
PUBLIC TRANSIT
Bus service in the region is provided by the Amador Rapid Transit System (ARTS) and a Dial-
A-Ride Program is available. Bus service is available on weekdays, with no service currently
available on weekends. (Please see Related Plans and Programs section earlier in this Element
for more information about these services).
PARK AND RIDE LOTS
Park and Ride Lots are parking lots (typically free) where commuters park their vehicles and
transfer to public transportation or a carpool to continue their commute. The City’s Park and
Ride lot is located on the northwest corner of the intersection of West Main Street and South
Sacramento Street.
City of Ione General Plan                                                          August 2009
                                             4–4

  CIRCULATION
PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE ROUTES
The City currently has bicycle lanes along Shakeley Lane from Fairway Drive to east of Oak
Street. The City has a list of proposed bikeway and sidewalk projects. The majority of these
facilities are proposed for the downtown area and around schools to provide safe bicycle and
pedestrian routes for students to walk or bike to
school.
RAILROADS
Ione has one major freight railroad line, located in the
southern and western edges of the City. This main
line, owned by Union Pacific, connects the City to the
main line in Galt. From this freight line, there are
several spur lines that connect to industrial property
south of the City. Many of these lines are privately
owned and maintained. Where the Union Pacific line
ends near Depot Road, it becomes the Amador Central                     Railroad Line
line, which continues up to Martell.
Implementation
The City uses a Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) to prioritize and fund circulation
improvements. Local and regional impact fees are used to fund vehicular and non-vehicular
improvements. Additional funding for the CIP comes from a variety of sources, including but
not limited to State gas tax, grant funding from Caltrans, State and federal transportation
funds, and in some cases, the City’s General Fund.
ISSUES THIS ELEMENT ATTEMPTS TO SOLVE
The Circulation Element must address a wide variety of issues in order to improve the
circulation conditions in Ione. The primary issues that this Element attempts to solve, which
were identified during the preparation of the General Plan, are listed below.
    •    Improving traffic flow on existing roadways through roadway and intersection
         improvements.
    •    Reducing vehicle congestion on the City’s roadways by promoting other modes of
         transportation.
August 2009                                                            City of Ione General Plan
                                             4–5

                                                                      CIRCULATION
    •    Making the City’s streets more pedestrian-friendly by improving sidewalks and by
         providing pedestrian routes linking neighborhoods, schools, Downtown, parks, and
         open space.
    •    Creating bikeways that are safe for a wide range of cyclists, including children and
         families, and children riding to school.
    •    Creating safe and convenient street crossings for bicyclists and pedestrians, especially
         in and around the Downtown and schools.
    •    Creating a complete transportation network that link all parts of the Planning Area
         together with a variety of interconnected and overlapping modes and travel options,
         including golf carts.
    •    Developing a road system that differentiates between local traffic needs and regional
         and truck traffic needs and provides efficient and safe transportation options for both.
    •    Developing a road system that is easily navigated and sensible to visitors through
         intelligent project design, road naming systems, and similar features. Avoid street
         designs that create meandering roadways that do not have a clear and direct path and
         “skewed” intersections where roads come together at angles that are not perpendicular
         to each other.
    •    Providing efficient movement, in addition to employee access, for the City’s business
         sector so that it may remain competitive and successful.
    •    Balancing the needs for an efficient and reliable roadway network with existing
         conditions, especially in the older areas of the City where existing buildings are located
         close to streets and insufficient room for roadway expansion may exist.
    •    Ensuring that local roads through residential neighborhoods are properly designed for
         connectivity and slower speeds.
THE CIRCULATION PLAN
The future circulation system of Ione is comprised of both the text of this Element and the
accompanying circulation maps (Figures 4-1, 4-2, 4-3); Circulation Plan with Roadway
System, and Bikeways and Trails; which describe the major roadways and bikeways and trails
within the General Plan Planning Area. While some of the development standards for these
facilities are left to implementation plans and studies, the Circulation Element lays the
groundwork and defines the role various modes of transportation will play in the movement
of people and goods around the City. The Circulation Plan also addresses pedestrian and
bicycle mobility in Ione.
City of Ione General Plan                                                             August 2009
                                                4–6

  CIRCULATION
ROADWAYS
Figure 4-1 illustrates the City’s primary roadway network system (both existing and planned
improvements), including State Routes, Parkways, major roads, and connector roads. The
roadway system has been designed in conjunction with the planned land uses and
corresponding development capacity identified in the Land Use Element. Figure 4-2
illustrates the roadway sizing that is needed to meet the Level of Service goals that are
established in this Element.
State Routes
State Route (SR) 104 extends from SR 99 north of Galt in Sacramento County, through Ione,
to SR 88 south of Ione, within the Planning Area. SR 88 extends east from San Joaquin
County to Alpine County and runs through the southern portion of the Planning Area. SR
124 connects from SR 16 northeast of Ione, through the City, to SR 88.
Within the City, segments of SR 104 are identified by the local street name of Preston Avenue
and SR 124 is identified as Main Street. Within the City, both SR 104 and 124 provide access
to local streets as well as residential and commercial uses via driveways. The corner of Main
Street and Preston Avenue is planned for improvements to remove a corner that poses a safety
hazard.
Outside the City in the Planning Area, segments of SR 104 are identified by the street name of
Foothill Boulevard.
Parkways
Parkways serve both local and regional travel and provide for more expedient vehicular travel
than most arterials, collectors, and local roads. Planned WIRIS roadway segments and Golf
Links Drive are both Parkways. Planned Parkways will help serve future development,
including the Industrial Park Policy Area, Castle Oaks development, Ringer Ranch Policy
Area, Silva Policy Area, and the Triangle Policy Area (see Figure 4-1 and the Policy Area
maps in the General Plan Land Use Element).
Arterials
Arterials provide for cross-town and regional travel and carry heavy volumes of traffic. Major
arterials within the City include SR 104 and 124. In the Planning Area, arterials include
Michigan Bar Road and Buena Vista Road.
August 2009                                                           City of Ione General Plan
                                              4–7

                                                                  CIRCULATION
Collector Roads
Collector roads link different parts of the City with one another. Generally, collector roads
carry light to moderate traffic volumes and have speed limits in the 25 to 35 mile-per-hour
range. In the City, collector roads include West Marlette Street, Shakeley Lane, Castle Oaks
Drive, Fairway Drive, Sutter Lane, and Five Mile Drive. Collector road improvements and
extensions are planned to serve the State Route 124 and Triangle Policy Areas, with planned
improvements to Waterman Road and into the Triangle Policy Area (see Figure 4-1).
Local Roads
Local roads provide for circulation within neighborhoods. A few examples of local roads
include Albatross Drive, Glenbrook Drive, West Jackson Street, and Raymond Drive.
Roadway improvements and an extension is planned for Collings Road for future
development in the Q Ranch Policy Area (see Figure 4-1). New local roads will be designed
in conjunction with subsequent land plans, Specific Plans, and other plans for future
development, including development within the Policy Areas.
City of Ione General Plan                                                        August 2009
                                             4–8

 CIRCULATION
             FIGURE 4-1: CIRCULATION MAP
August 2009                              City of Ione General Plan
                         4–9

                                                     CIRCULATION
                          FIGURE 4-2: ROADWAY SIZING
City of Ione General Plan                                   August 2009
                                    4–10

  CIRCULATION
PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE CIRCULATION
The City’s vision is to become a pedestrian and bicycle-
friendly community, where children can walk and ride
their bicycles safely to school and where families can easily
walk and bicycle to parks, open space, and around the
community. To achieve this goal, the City will provide
safe and convenient sidewalks, bicycle lanes, and bike and
pedestrian trails that connect residential, commercial,
schools, parks, and open space.
Figure 4-3 shows the City’s major, backbone bikeways
and trails. The bikeways and trail identified on the map
are conceptual in nature and their exact locations may vary
upon construction.           Additional neighborhood-level
bikeways and pedestrian trails, sidewalks, and bicycle lanes
will connect to the major pedestrian and bicycle trails, but
are not shown on Figure 4-3 as they will be planned and
                                                                               Bicycle Lane
designed as part of Specific Plans, Master Plans, other
project plan reviews, and as part of improvements to the
existing roadway system. The Conservations and Open Space Element addresses the use of
Open Space in greater detail and provides provisions for the incorporation of public access
trails into Open Space.
The Bikeways and Trails plan creates trails along creeks wherever possible, including multi-
use trails (pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian) along Dry Creek in the Q Ranch Policy Area
and along Mule Creek in the Ringer Ranch Policy Area. Bikeways and trails will also connect
to the planned community park on Five Mile Drive and along the southern boundary of the
                              City to Howard Park and Downtown (Figure 4-3). Some of the
                              bikeways are planned as Class I facilities, to be located outside of
       Bicycle Facilities
                              the street right of way, while others are planned as Class II
  Class I: A paved route not  facilities, with bike lanes to be within the street right of way.
  on a street or roadway
  and expressly reserved for
  bicycle traversing an
  otherwise unpaved areas.
  Class II: A corridor
  expressly reserved for
  bicycles on a street or
  roadway in addition to
  any lanes for use by
  motorized vehicles.
August 2009                                                                City of Ione General Plan
                                                4–11

                                                          CIRCULATION
                          FIGURE 4-3: BIKEWAY AND TRAILS MAP
City of Ione General Plan                                        August 2009
                                         4–12

 CIRCULATION
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
The goals of this element are as follows and are listed subsequently with corresponding
policies and actions.
GOAL CIR-1: Develop a roadway system that:
                   1) Accommodates future land uses at the City’s desired level
                       of service;
                   2) Coexists with other travel modes, includes biking,
                       walking, and golf carts;
                   3) Protects residential areas from excessive traffic; and
                   4) Contributes to the quality, safety, and connectivity of the
                       City’s residential, Downtown, commercial, office, and
                       industrial areas.
Policy CIR-1.1:    Implement the Circulation Plan, shown as Figure 4-1 and Figure 4-2. (Cross
                   reference: LU 1.3, LU 1.4, LU 1.14)
                   Action CIR-1.1.1: For development projects, require the dedication of right-
                   of-way and the installation of roadway improvements as part of the review
                   and approval of development projects.
                   Action CIR-1.1.2: Require that prior to issuance of building permits, all
                   development projects that must perform new roadway construction or road
                   widening complete the backbone roadways necessary for all phases of the
                   development project such that adequate transportation infrastructure is
                   available prior to the arrival of the first resident, unless otherwise approved
                   by the City Engineer. Backbone roadways are defined as those collector and
                   arterial roadways providing service within or to new development.
                   Action CIR-1.1.3: For major roadway projects, allow for improvement
                   phasing such that roadway lanes are constructed based on traffic demand,
                   with planned additional lanes being constructed once traffic demand reaches
                   levels that require the additional lanes to be constructed in order to meet
                   Level of Services specified in Policy CIR-1.3. (Cross reference CIR 1.3)
August 2009                                                               City of Ione General Plan
                                              4–13

                                                                   CIRCULATION
                  Action CIR-1.1.4: All new roadways and roadways that are being expanded
                  must include sidewalks for pedestrians. In addition, crosswalks adequate to
                  ensure pedestrian safety must be provided as determined by the City
                  Engineer.
                  Action CIR-1.1.5: Require development projects to provide funding or to
                  construct roadway/intersection improvements to implement the City’s
                  Circulation Plan and Bikeways & Trails Plan. At the City’s discretion,
                  consider the payment of established traffic impact or similar fees to provide
                  compliance with the requirements of this policy with regard to those facilities
                  included in the fee program, provided that the City finds that the fee
                  adequately funds all required roadway and intersection improvements. If
                  payment of established fees is used to provide compliance with this policy,
                  the City may also require the payment of additional fees if necessary to cover
                  the fair share cost of facilities not included in or fully funded by the fee
                  program.
Policy CIR-1.2:   All new projects must be consistent with the West Ione Roadway
                  Improvement Strategy (WIRIS). Implement the findings and preferred route
                  alignment outlined in the WIRIS.
                  Action CIR-1.2.1: Work with Amador Transportation Commission (ACTC)
                  and other regional agencies to aggressively pursue funding for WIRIS from all
                  available sources.
                  Action CIR-1.2.2: Require development projects along the F and G segments
                  to construct the roadway and pay their fair share of the cost of the
                  improvements.
Policy CIR-1.3:   Seek to maintain operations on all roadways and intersections at Level of
                  Service (LOS) E or better at all times, with the exceptions listed in Policy
                  CIR-1.4. LOS E should be maintained even during peak travel times, unless
                  maintaining this LOS would, in the City's judgment, be infeasible and/or
                  conflict with the achievement of other goals or unless maintaining this LOS
                  would not, in the City’s judgment, adequately serve the City’s circulation
                  needs, per Policy CIR-1.4. (Cross reference CIR 1.1.3, CIR 1.4)
                  Action CIR-1.3.1: Coordinate with ACTC on the RTP update to revise the
                  RTP LOS policies consistent with proposed Policies CIR-1.3 and CIR-1.4.
                  Action CIR-1.3.2: Coordinate with Caltrans on the update to the SR 104 and
                  SR 124 Transportation Concept Reports to acknowledge the limitations of
City of Ione General Plan                                                           August 2009
                                            4–14

 CIRCULATION
                widening SR 104 and SR 124 through the City of Ione reflected by a lower
                LOS policy consistent with proposed Policies CIR-1.3 and CIR-1.4.
Policy CIR-1.4: In addition, exceptions to Policy CIR-1.3 may be allowed by the City
                Council where requiring a higher LOS or allowing a lower LOS would result
                in clear public benefits. Specific exceptions granted by the City Council shall
                be added to the list of exceptions below, depicted in Figure 4-4, and updated
                as needed (Cross reference CIR 1.4):
                •   Main Street, Church Street, Preston Avenue, and Ione Street– LOS F;
                •   All Parkways (Golf Links Drive, WIRIS Segments, F, G, H, and I) –
                    LOS D
                Action CIR-1.4.1: Establish traffic volume thresholds in line with this Policy
                that once reached, trigger intersection and roadway improvements.
                Regularly monitor traffic in and adjacent to the City to determine when
                these traffic volume thresholds are reached.
Policy CIR-1.5: Encourage the creation of a road system that is easily navigated.
                Action CIR-1.5.1: Require development projects to design local road
                intersections such that roads are perpendicular to each other (at right angles)
                or round-about intersections, unless there are natural features or special
                circumstances that prohibit perpendicular or round-about intersection design.
                Action CIR-1.5.2: Require development projects to design local roads that
                have clear and direct paths, not meandering roadways. Prohibit the use of cul-
                de-sacs in development projects unless specific circumstances require the use
                of a cul-de-sac or make a cul-de-sac the most viable option.
                Action CIR-1.5.3: Work with Caltrans, Amador County, and the United
                States Postal Service to provide local street addresses for properties located on
                State Routes 104 and 124 within the
                City limits. Within the City, SR
                104 is identified by the local street
                name of Preston Avenue and South
                Ione Street. SR 124 within the City
                is identified as Main Street and
                South Church Street.
                Action CIR-1.5.4: Work             with
                Caltrans to provide adequate access
                                                                         Preston Ave
August 2009                                                            City of Ione General Plan
                                           4–15

                                                                     CIRCULATION
                  for properties on State Route 124 and State Route 88, and the future
                  realignment of State Route 104 (segments F and G of the WIRIS roadway
                  system) to provide for additional connectivity (see Figure 4-1).
                  Action CIR-1.5.5: Coordinate with ACTC as regular updates to the Amador
                  County Short Range Transit Plan are conducted to determine whether there
                  are unmet transit needs in the City of Ione. Reasonable transit enhancements
                  could include additional busses to existing transit routes or new routes to
                  serve future development.
Policy CIR-1.6:   Where existing intersections cause traffic flow delays, consider modifying
                  such intersections to round-about intersections if such improvements would
                  improve traffic flows and livability.
Policy CIR-1.7:   Design the circulation system serving the City’s industrial areas to safely
                  accommodate heavy truck traffic.
Policy CIR-1.8:   As part of a Downtown Master Plan or similar Downtown Plan, develop a
                  Parking Management Plan. (Cross reference ED 3.1.4, LU 1.9, LU 3.1.3, LU
                  3.1.4)
                  Action CIR-1.8.1: Adopt Parking Standards for Downtown that allow for
                  reduced parking requirements than in other parts of the City and allow for
                  greater parking flexibility, such as shared parking allowances. (Cross reference
                  ED 3.4.1)
Policy CIR-1.9:   Discourage the creation of private roadways, except when the roadways are
                  constructed to public roadway standards and private maintenance is assured.
Policy CIR-1.10: Encourage maximum block lengths that provide multiple vehicular paths and
                  increase pedestrian circulation around the City at the neighborhood level.
                  The City’s preferred block length is less than 800 feet. Block lengths between
                  800 and 1,000 feet may be acceptable on a case-by-case basis, and block
                  lengths greater than 1,000 feet are generally considered unacceptable.
                  Action CIR-1.10.1:         Revise maximum block length standards in the
                  City’s street design and/or improvement standards.
                  Action CIR-1.10.2:         When blocks are designed at lengths greater than
                  1,000 feet, design shall include mid-block pedestrian and emergency vehicle
                  connections.
City of Ione General Plan                                                            August 2009
                                             4–16

 CIRCULATION
Policy CIR-1.11: Support the use of golf carts as a mode of transportation within the City by
                 continuing to allow golf carts on specific roadways, and updating and
                 expanding the number of roadways on which golf carts are allowed, in
                 compliance with State and federal transportation safety laws.
Policy CIR-1.12: Work with regional agencies and transit providers to support transit
                 programs.
Policy CIR-1.13: Evaluate potential crossings of Sutter Creek to alleviate traffic levels on
                 existing roadways.
                 Action CIR-1.13.1:         Review all new development projects adjacent to
                 Sutter Creek for the potential to provide bridges or other crossings to
                 enhance traffic flow and improve community-wide circulation.
GOAL CIR-2: Establish an extensive, complete, smooth, interconnected,
                 and continuous pedestrian and bicycle network that is a safe
                 and attractive option for local trips or recreation and that
                 connects to the City’s neighborhoods, parks and schools,
                 employment areas, and retail centers.
Policy CIR-2.1:  Create a system of sidewalks, off-street trails and multi-use paths, as generally
                 illustrated on Figure 4-3, that are used for walking, bicycling, and equestrian
                 use that are attractive, natural, and safe transportation corridors. (Cross
                 reference LU 1.10, CO 8.3)
Policy CIR-2.2:  Consider how all plans and projects affect all modes of transportation,
                 including bicyclists and pedestrians. (Cross reference LU 1.2, LU 1.9, LU 1.10)
                 Action CIR-2.2.1: Seek to maintain sidewalk pedestrian operations and
                 intersections at Level of Service B or better at all times, including peak travel
                 times, unless maintaining this Level of Service would, in the City's judgment,
                 be infeasible and/or conflict with the achievement of other goals, as generally
                 illustrated on Figure 4-5.
                 Action CIR-2.2.2: Seek to maintain Class II bicycle facility operations and
                 intersections at Level of Service C or better at all times, including peak travel
                 times, unless maintaining this Level of Service would, in the City's judgment,
                 be infeasible and/or conflict with the achievement of other goals, as generally
                 illustrated on Figure 4-6.
August 2009                                                             City of Ione General Plan
                                            4–17

                                                                      CIRCULATION
                  Action CIR-2.2.3: Seek to maintain off-street trails, multi-use paths, and Class
                  I bicycle facility operations and intersections at Level of Service A or better at
                  all times, including peak travel times, unless maintaining this Level of Service
                  would, in the City's judgment, be infeasible and/or conflict with the
                  achievement of other goals, as generally illustrated on Figure 4-7.
                  Action CIR-2.2.4: Establish intersection delay thresholds for pedestrians and
                  bicyclists in line with this Policy that once reached, trigger improvements for
                  bicyclists and pedestrians. Regularly monitor intersection delays in and
                  adjacent to the City to determine when these delay thresholds are reached.
Policy CIR-2.3:   Require bicycle and pedestrian connections to public transit systems at stops;
                  carpool/vanpool park-and-ride lots; and activity centers (e.g., schools,
                  community centers, higher-density residential areas, Downtown, parks,
                  employment centers, and commercial centers). (Cross reference CO 8.3.1, LU
                  1.2, LU 1.9, PF 8.3)
Policy CIR-2.4:   In designing development projects, design for the pedestrian first. (Cross
                  reference LU 1.2, LU 1.9, LU 1.10)
                  Action CIR-2.4.1: Require pedestrian circulation routes to be designed into
                  all land plans and subdivisions to ensure that access for the pedestrian is
                  provided. Pedestrian routes shall be interconnected and may include open
                  spaces, parks, and trails as otherwise required by the City.
                  Action CIR-2.4.2: Require and site pedestrian crossings of major roads at key
                  intersections and at locations that provide priority and efficiency to the
                  pedestrian.
                  Action CIR-2.4.3: Ensure safe, efficient pedestrian connections are made
                  between the sidewalk, parking areas, and entrances to stores, offices, and
                  other uses as part of development design review. (Cross reference NS 6.1.1)
Policy CIR-2.5:   Provide sidewalks throughout the City.
                  Meandering sidewalks are discouraged, except
                  where necessary to accommodate site-specific
                  features such as trees or habitat. (Cross
                  reference LU 1.2)
                  Action CIR-2.5.1: Complete the sidewalks in
                  the existing community where ROW exists,
                  using grants or other funding sources.                     Provide Sidewalks
City of Ione General Plan                                                                August 2009
                                              4–18

 CIRCULATION
Policy CIR-2.6: Provide safe and convenient bicycle access to all parts of the community.
                (Cross reference LU 1.2)
                Action CIR-2.6.1: Pursue all available sources of funding for the development
                and improvement of bicycle facilities. Develop projects and secure funding
                to improve pedestrian and bicycle safety and access around schools.
Policy CIR-2.7: Provide bike lanes or other bike facilities along all arterials, connectors, and
                on local roadways when necessary and feasible to provide for interconnected
                routes. On-street bike routes may be provided on roadways as deemed
                necessary by the City. (Cross reference LU 1.2)
Policy CIR-2.8: Promote bicycling and walking as a safe and attractive activity. Educate all
                road users to share the road and interact safely. (Cross reference LU 1.2, NS
                2.2.2)
                Action CIR-2.8.1: Continue Safe Routes to Schools programs and complete
                associated sidewalk and, crosswalk improvements. (Cross reference PF 8.3)
                Action CIR-2.8.2: Maintain roadways and bicycle-related facilities so they
                provide safe and comfortable conditions for the bike rider, including
                maintaining lane striping for bike lanes and routes.
                Action CIR-2.8.3: Minimize road construction impacts by coordinating bike,
                and pedestrian facilities with roadway construction whenever feasible.
                Action CIR-2.8.4: Ensure traffic-calming projects are appropriate for bicycle
                and pedestrian users (e.g., address roundabout or bulb-out designs that push
                cyclists into traffic).
                Action CIR-2.8.5: Provide signage, alternative routes, etc. during
                construction activities affecting bikeways to ensure the safety of cyclists.
                Action CIR-2.8.6: Enforce traffic laws to improve the safety and comfort of
                all road users, with a particular focus on behaviors and attitudes that cause
                motor vehicle/bicycle crashes.
                Action CIR-2.8.7: Identify a funding source that will provide at least one
                crossing guard for each elementary and middle school in the City. Work
                with school districts to identify joint funding solutions and other partnership
                opportunities that facilitate pedestrian safety around schools
August 2009                                                           City of Ione General Plan
                                           4–19

                                                                     CIRCULATION
Policy CIR-2.9:   Consult with ACTC to ensure that local bikeways and trails connect to
                  regional bikeways and trails to provide for a regional bikeway and trail
                  system in support of the Amador County Bicycle and Pedestrian Master
                  Plan.
GOAL CIR-3: Fund the vehicular and the bicycle and pedestrian circulation
                  systems adequately to provide all desired services and meet
                  required level of service standards.
Policy CIR-3.1:   Assess fees sufficient to cover the fair share portion of all new development
                  impacts on the local and regional transportation system and bicycle and
                  pedestrian circulation system, including both development and maintenance
                  of vehicular and non-vehicular circulation facilities.
                  Action CIR-3.1.1: Periodically undertake a detailed analysis of the
                  transportation improvements needed as growth occurs and the costs
                  associated with those improvements by reviewing and updating the City’s
                  Capital Improvement Plan (CIP). Update development impact fees as
                  necessary to ensure full funding of all required improvements.
                  Action CIR-3.1.2: For new development, as a condition of approval, establish
                  a road maintenance assessment district or require the new development to
                  annex into an existing maintenance district to provide a funding source to
                  maintain road improvements, new roads, and bicycle/pedestrian facilities as a
                  result of new development.
                  Action CIR-3.1.3: The City’s Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) shall be
                  updated to include costs to widen SR 124 between Washington Street and
                  WIRIS, and SR 124 between WIRIS and Buena Vista Road, to four-lanes to
                  provide LOS E or better operations.
Policy CIR-3.2:   Assess fees sufficient to cover maintenance costs of the existing circulation
                  system and other circulation projects in areas already constructed, including
                  roadways, pedestrian and bicycle facilities.
                  Action CIR-3.2.1: Establish a road maintenance assessment district to provide
                  a funding source to maintain road improvements and fund vehicular,
                  pedestrian, and bicycle improvements.
Policy CIR-3.3:   When a Redevelopment Area is adopted by the City, set aside a portion of
                  tax increment financing to be allocated toward circulation improvements
City of Ione General Plan                                                           August 2009
                                             4–20

 CIRCULATION
                (vehicular and non-vehicular), in the Redevelopment Area. (Cross reference
                ED 3.3)
Policy CIR-3.4: Continue to work with ACTC to update development impact fees for
                regional transportation improvements.
Policy CIR-3.5: Require proposed new development projects to analyze their contribution to
                increased traffic and to implement improvements necessary to address their
                impact on facilities not covered by a fee program.
Policy CIR-3.6: Aggressively pursue State and federal funding to implement all aspects of the
                City’s Circulation Plan.
Policy CIR-3.7: Continue participation in the Safe Routes To School Program to help fund
                pedestrian and bicycle improvements that provide routes to schools.
GOAL CIR-4: Provide a circulation system that is properly maintained and
                maximizes safety for all users.
Policy CIR-4.1: Maintain and repair streets, trails, and other
                circulation components according to
                priorities established on an annual basis.
                Action CIR-4.1.1: Develop and implement
                a comprehensive system to monitor and
                evaluate the conditions and maintenance
                needs of the existing transportation
                                                                      Roadway in Ione
                network. Inventory and categorize the
                City-maintained roads by road type and condition using a pavement
                management system.
August 2009                                                        City of Ione General Plan
                                           4–21

                                                         CIRCULATION
                     FIGURE 4-4: VEHICULAR LEVEL OF SERVICE MAP
City of Ione General Plan                                       August 2009
                                       4–22

 CIRCULATION
              FIGURE 4-5: PEDESTRIAN (SIDEWALKS, CROSSWALKS,
      AND OTHER NON-TRAIL PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES) LEVEL OF SERVICE MAP
August 2009                                            City of Ione General Plan
                                  4–23

                                                        CIRCULATION
                  FIGURE 4-6: BICYCLE LOS FOR CLASS II FACILITIES
City of Ione General Plan                                         August 2009
                                      4–24

 CIRCULATION
 FIGURE 4-7: OFF-STREET TRAILS AND CLASS I FACILITIES LEVEL OF SERVICE MAP
August 2009                                             City of Ione General Plan
                                  4–25

  CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
INTRODUCTION
Conservation of natural resources, open space, parks, and trails
provides lands and facilities that offer enjoyment and beauty to the    Topics included in this Element
                                                                        include agriculture, air quality,
residents of the community. Incorporating each of these elements        flooding, land reclamation, land
throughout the City will provide a place for active and passive         use, minerals, recreation, scenic
recreation, help to preserve natural resources, and improve air         resources, soil conservation,
quality. Planning within the City of Ione aims to preserve natural      trails system, water supply, and
resources and open spaces including waterways, air quality,             wildlife. Refer to page 5-2 for a
                                                                        listing of contents covered in
agricultural areas, wildlife and plant species and habitats, as well as this Element.
areas used for recreation.
Natural resources support urban life by providing necessary biological, mineral, and water resources
and high quality lands for agricultural and recreational uses. Ensuring quality management and
protection of the City’s numerous natural resources will contribute to Ione’s environmental health as
well as to quality of life for residents. The City wishes to ensure long-term sustainability while
evaluating new opportunities and techniques in conservation and the preservation of open space.
August 2009                                                                   City of Ione General Plan
                                                 5–1

                                     CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
                                          IN THIS SECTION
      •   Introduction (Page 5-1)
      •   Vision (Page 5-2)
      •   Purpose (Page 5-2)
      •   Related Plans and Programs (Page 5-3)
      •   Relationship to Other General Plan Elements (Page 5-5)
      •   Setting, Issues, and Considerations (Page 5-6)
      •   Issues this Element Attempts to Solve (Page 5-10)
      •   Goals, Policies, and Actions (Page 5-10)
VISION
Conservation of air and water quality, wildlife and plant habitat, natural resources, recreational areas,
and agricultural lands is a priority in planning within and around Ione. The City is surrounded by
natural areas and exists on the boundary between the Central Valley of California and the foothills
of the Sierra Nevada Mountains. Planning and development in Ione will be well-coordinated to
preserve and protect the highest level of environmental and natural resource quality and quantity for
current and future generations. Human use and enjoyment of natural resources is incorporated
through the preservation of agricultural lands, the development of parks, trails and other active and
passive recreational opportunities, and the preservation of resources such as water.
Ione maintains a rural atmosphere through visual corridors that include rangeland, farmland, and
recreational open space. Open space serves multiple purposes, including visual enhancement, water
protection and flood control, recreation, non-motorized vehicle trails, wildlife through ways, and
neighborhood definition. Planning and design for open space is done in conjunction with planning
for development and with an eye to cohesive land use in City and the region. Since much of the
open space within the area is outside of the City limits, coordination with Amador County, property
owners, and residents is essential in preserving these lands. Open space is retained and, in select,
appropriate locations, developed with amenities (such as trails and water access) to increase value for
the community. In some areas commercial uses such as rangeland and farmland operations allow
the land to remain economically productive while serving open space needs.
PURPOSE
This Element identifies the need for and ways to protect, maintain, and enhance existing natural
resources, open space and natural recreational areas, as well as to create additional areas for the
enjoyment of residents and the protection of the environment. This Element fulfills the
conservation and open space element requirements for the General Plan. The goals, policies, and
actions provided are intended to achieve the City’s vision to provide open space areas that are
accessible to all members of the community, while fostering the preservation of Ione’s many
valuable natural resources, including wildlife habitat, water resources, soils, and mineral resources. It
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                   5–2

  CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
also attempts to balance the present needs of resource users with the need for resource conservation
for the common good. This Element establishes a policy framework and action program for the
improvement, expansion, and maintenance of the City’s open space, recreation, and natural
resources.
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
The Conservation Element relates to several other plans and programs, including the following:
National Environmental Policy Act
The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) is a federal environmental review process for
projects that have a federal nexus (e.g., impact federal resources or lands, receive federal funding, or
require federal approval or permits). NEPA requires federal agencies to integrate environmental
values into their decision-making processes by considering the environmental impacts of their
proposed actions and reasonable alternatives to those actions.
Federal Endangered Species Act
The Federal Endangered Species Act (FESA) is a federal law that protects species that are
endangered or threatened with extinction. FESA prohibits the “take” of endangered or threatened
wildlife species. “Take” is defined as harassing, harming (including significantly modifying or
degrading habitat), pursuing, hunting, shooting, wounding, killing, trapping, capturing, or collecting
wildlife species or any attempt to engage in such conduct (16 USC 1532, 50 CFR 17.3).
Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (404 Permits)
Section 404 of the Clean Water Act regulates the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of
the United States (waters of the U.S.), including wetlands and vernal pools. Activities in waters of
the U.S. that are regulated under this program include fill for development, water resource projects
(such as dams and levees), infrastructure development (such as highways and airports) and mining
projects.
Section 401 of the Clean Water Act (Water Quality Certification)
Section 401 of the Clean Water Act requires a State Water Quality Certification for all federal permit
or license applications for any activity that may result in a discharge into a water body in order to
ensure compliance with state water quality standards. Most Certifications are issued in connection
with section 404 permits for dredge and fill discharges. The Central Valley Regional Water Quality
Board issues Section 401 water quality certifications for projects in Ione.
Section 402 of the Clean Water Act (NPDES Permits)
Section 402 of the Clean Water Act establishes permit programs to authorize discharge of storm
water and treated wastewater to surface water(s) of the United States, referred to as the National
August 2009                                                                   City of Ione General Plan
                                                 5–3

                                    CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). The Regional Water Quality Control Board,
Central Valley Region, issues and administers NPDES permits.
City of Ione Wastewater Master Plan
The City is pursuing a Wastewater Master Plan, which will include proposals for wastewater service
provision in the City. The Master Plan will address wastewater treatment, disposal, and reuse facility
needs. The Plan will include steps to meet treatment requirements, determine repair and replacement
needs, and improve reliability and performance of wastewater facilities.
Amador Water Agency Urban Water Management Plan
The Amador Water Agency was formed for the purpose of providing water and wastewater services
to the residents of Amador County. While the Agency provides both services, only water service is
provided to residents of Ione. Surface water from the Mokelumne River, located in the California
Sierra Nevada Mountains, is the primary source of water for Ione. The Urban Water Management
Plan addresses the Agency’s water supplies and water demands over a range of normal and
emergency conditions.
Mokelumne/ Amador/ Calaveras                               Integrated          Regional         Water
Management Plan (IRWMP)
The IRWMP reflects the Mokelumne, Amador, and Calaveras region’s goals for ensuring a reliable
water supply, reduction in flood-related impacts, and preservation of water quality and the
environment. Completed in 2006, it takes a regional approach to resource management and spans
several watersheds.
California Environmental Quality Act
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) is the State’s environmental review process that
requires public agencies to identify the significant environmental effects of a project and either avoid
or mitigate the significant environmental effects, where feasible. California Endangered Species
Act
The California Endangered Species Act is the State’s listing of endangered and threatened species. It
requires state agencies to consult with the California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG) when
preparing CEQA documents to ensure that the state lead agency actions do not jeopardize the
existence of listed species.
California Fish and Game Code
The California Fish and Game Code contains laws and regulations relating to California's fish,
wildlife and plants and their habitats. The Code is administered by the California Department of
Fish and Game.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                  August 2009
                                                  5–4

  CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
Surface Mining and Reclamation Act
The Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA) addresses the need for a continuing supply of
mineral resources and to prevent or minimize the negative impacts of surface mining to public
health, property and the environment. SMARA’s requirements apply to all surface mining operations
in California that disturb more than one acre or remove more than 1,000 cubic yards of material
including prospecting and exploratory activities, dredging and quarrying, streambed skimming,
borrow pitting, and the stockpiling of mined materials.
Quimby Act
State legislation allows local jurisdictions to require the dedication of land for park and recreation
purposes. This Element establishes the City’s parkland dedication requirement.
Amador County Park and Recreation Master Plan
The Amador County Recreation Agency (ACRA) is a joint powers authority consisting of Amador
County; the Amador County Unified School District; the cities of Amador, Ione, Jackson, Plymouth,
and Sutter Creek; and the Community Services Districts for Volcano and Camanche. ACRA
provides park and recreation services in the County. The Master Plan helps identify parks and
recreation opportunities and create an overall vision for meeting recreation needs.
City of Ione Parks and Recreation Commission
The City has a Parks and Recreation Commission that oversees matters regarding park and
recreation facilities in the City. The Commission is responsible for planning, establishing parks
standards, review and creation of recreational programs, and other aspects of management of parks
and recreation services in the City.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
The Conservation and Open Space Element of the Ione General Plan is related to several other
elements. The Circulation Element identifies routes for all modes of circulation including
pedestrians and bicyclists. These routes will connect to recreational trails discussed in this Element.
The Land Use Element aims to identify the appropriate mix and dispersion of land uses, including
agricultural and recreational uses. Where possible, facilities such as schools will provide recreational
uses for the entire community. Preservation of Ione’s historical resources is addressed in the
Economic Development Element.
August 2009                                                                   City of Ione General Plan
                                                  5–5

                                     CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
SETTING, ISSUES, AND CONSIDERATIONS
PARKS AND RECREATION
Recreational opportunities are provided throughout Ione;
planned trailways will serve equestrians, bicyclists,
walkers, runners and others.             Greenbelts among
developed areas will contain connecting trails and paths.
Small parks provide play areas and gathering spaces for
neighborhoods, while larger parks provide opportunities
for swimming, tennis, sports fields and activities.
Additional year-round recreation options are available
through organized activities, indoor recreation facilities
and community centers.
                                                                              Park Facilities
Additional recreational opportunities for residents and
visitors include the Castle Oaks Golf Course. The course is a public, 18-hole championship golf
course. The course is situated on the historic Preston Farmlands, and overlooked by Preston Castle.
                                              TABLE 5-1:
                  SUMMARY OF PARKS AND FACILITIES IN THE CITY OF IONE
                            Park Site             Acres             Park Type
                 Grover Park (Pioneer Park)         2.0         Neighborhood Park
                          Heath Knoll               0.2           Landscape Area
                         Perry Earl Park            1.0         Neighborhood Park
                          Howard Park              89.7          Community Park
                           Train Park               0.3         Neighborhood Park
                         Oakridge Park              0.3         Neighborhood Park
                Source: ACRA, 2006.
AGRICULTURE AND SOILS
The City of Ione does not contain a substantial amount of agricultural resources, or lands used for
agriculture, within the City limits. Agriculture in the City’s Sphere of Influence and Planning Area is
typically limited to native pasture (dry), irrigated pasture, small grains (wheat and barley) and field
crops (such as sugar beets, alfalfa, safflower, beans, and corn). Additional vineyards and orchards are
located nearby as well. However, large areas throughout the planning area contain Prime Farmland
and other valuable farmlands, as designated by the Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program.
Refer to Figure 5-1 for the locations of agricultural lands within the planning area.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                     August 2009
                                                  5–6

  CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
A total of 55 different soils types occur within the Planning Area. In general, soils in the City and
surrounding Planning Area do not posses characteristics that are favorable to agricultural purposes,
however; there are areas of valuable farmlands and high quality soils in some portions of the
Planning Area. Generally, the majority of soils in the Planning Area are classified as severe (limited
capability) relative to septic tank and leach field capability. Qualities which limit soils for agricultural
uses and development purposes include steep slopes, nearness of bedrock to the surface, high
erosion potential, poor drainage, stones and rocks in the soil, low water holding capacity, low
fertility, poor soil structure, and damage caused by flooding.
NATURAL RESOURCES AND WATERWAYS
Natural resources within the planning area include waterways and wetlands, forested and wooded
areas, and can also include croplands or agricultural areas that support wildlife. Vegetation types
within the Planning Area include cropland, forests and woodlands, shrublands and grasslands. The
predominant woodland within the Planning Area is blue oak series.
According to the California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB) and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, several dozen special-status plant and animal species have the potential to occur within
Amador County. This includes species listed as Endangered, Threatened, and Species of Concern.
Some special-status species which may occur in the Planning Area are vernal pool fairy shrimp,
Central Valley steelhead and Chinook salmon, California tiger salamander, California red-legged
frog, northwestern pond turtle, Swainson’s hawk, golden and bald eagles, western burrowing owl,
and other species.
Special habitats, including vernal pools and other seasonal wetlands also have the potential to occur
in annual grassland habitat, found in the Planning Area. Wetlands are present within the City and
greater Planning Area and provide a variety of functions to the community. Wetlands in the
Planning Area have important ecological functions in that they support unique assemblages of
specially adapted plant and animal species. In addition to their ecological functions, wetlands
provide important water filtration, storage and recreational functions.
Major streams and flood corridors in the Ione area
offering riparian habitat include Sutter Creek and Mule
Creek, which flow into Dry Creek west of the City (see
Figure 5-2). Creeks provide important ecosystem
functions including habitat for diverse and abundant
plant and animal life and are considered movement
corridors for animals. Additionally, creeks and streams
invite hiking, exploring and even gold panning.
Surface water from the Mokelumne River, located in the
Sierra Nevada Mountains, is the primary source of water                         Sutter Creek
for Amador County. The Amador Water Agency (AWA)
provides wholesale, retail, raw, and treated domestic water to the area. For Ione, water is stored at
the Ione Reservoir before being piped to the Ione Water Treatment Plant.
August 2009                                                                     City of Ione General Plan
                                                  5–7

                             CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
                          FIGURE 5-1: AGRICULTURAL LANDS
City of Ione General Plan                                August 2009
                                       5–8

 CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
            FIGURE 5-2: WATERWAYS AND FLOOD PLAINS
August 2009                                      City of Ione General Plan
                             5–9

                                       CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
ISSUES THIS ELEMENT ATTEMPTS TO SOLVE
This Element identifies several issues related to achieving the City’s conservation, agriculture, open
space, parks and trails vision. The following issues are addressed by the objectives, goals, and
policies found in this element of the General Plan:
    •    Protecting wildlife and wetlands areas, including waterways and reservoirs intended for
         human use.
    •    Encouraging the City and various public agencies to work together to establish natural
         resource protection areas both inside and outside of the City.
    •    Reducing the impacts of new development on the use of water and aggregate resources.
    •    Maintaining continuous and uninterrupted habitat areas where possible in order to allow
         species migration and minimize habitat and species isolation.
    •    Establishing additional open space for outdoor recreation, especially in currently
         undeveloped areas.
    •    Enhancing existing parks and trails to provide a premier park system with a variety of
         facilities, landscaping types, natural resource areas and recreational uses – dispersed
         throughout the community.
    •    Preserving agricultural lands for agricultural uses within the Planning Area.
    •    Maintaining high air quality within the City and reducing Ione’s contribution to greenhouse
         gas emissions.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
The goals of this Element are as follows and are listed subsequently with corresponding policies.
GOAL CO-1:             Protect and preserve diverse wildlife and plant habitats,
                       including habitat for special-status species
Policy CO-1.1:         Protect rare, threatened, and endangered species and their habitats in accordance
                       with State and federal law.
                       Action CO-1.1.1: As appropriate to the characteristics of the proposed
                       development, project location, and environmental conditions, incorporate
City of Ione General Plan                                                                    August 2009
                                                   5–10

 CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
               significant habitat preserves and interconnected wildlife corridors in new
               development areas to provide ample space for animal movement.
               Action CO-1.1.2: Review projects through the entitlement process and CEQA
               analysis to ensure that they comply with State and federal policy for biological
               resources.
               Action CO-1.1.3: For areas planned to be preserved, the City shall require that
               preserved habitats have interconnections with other habitat areas, to the extent
               feasible, in order to maintain the viability of the preserved habitat to support the
               special-status species identified. The determination of the design and size of the
               “interconnections” shall be made by the City, as recommended by a qualified
               professional, and will include consultation with the California Department of Fish
               and Game and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
               Action CO-1.1.4: For proposed private and public projects in which special-
               status species are found, likely to occur, or where the presence of species can be
               reasonably inferred, the City shall require feasible mitigation of impacts to ensure
               that the project does not contribute to the decline or viability of the species. Such
               mitigation measures may include providing and permanently maintaining similar
               quality and quantity of replacement habitat, enhancing existing habitat areas, or
               paying in-lieu fees towards to an approved habitat mitigation bank. Replacement
               habitat may occur either on-site or at approved off-site locations. Feasible
               mitigation shall be determined by the City after the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
               (USFWS) and the California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG) are provided
               an opportunity to comment. Mitigation shall emphasize a multi-species approach
               to the maximum extent feasible. This may include development or participation in
               a habitat conservation plan (HCP).
               Action CO-1.1.5: The City shall require a biological resources evaluation for
               private and public development projects in areas identified to contain or possibly
               contain listed plant and/or wildlife species based upon the City's biological
               resource mapping provided in the General Plan EIR or other technical materials.
               This evaluation shall be conducted prior to the authorization of any ground
               disturbance.
               Action CO-1.1.6: Coordinate with Amador County and adjoining jurisdictions,
               as well as with federal and state agencies such as Caltrans, to assure regional
               connectivity of open space and wildlife corridors.
Policy CO-1.2: Promote educational programs that inform the public about natural resources.
               Action CO-1.2.1: Consult with non-profit groups, educational institutions, and
               other agencies as available to provide environmental education programs that
               inform the public about the City’s natural resources.
August 2009                                                               City of Ione General Plan
                                           5–11

                                    CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
                   Action CO-1.2.2: Establish a network of interactive signs and other permanent
                   educational features in preserved natural areas and open space areas, where feasible
                   and public access is provided. Educational features should include pertinent
                   natural history information and development of these features may be conducted
                   with input from non-profit groups, educational institutions and other agencies.
GOAL CO-2: Preserve and maintain creek corridors and wetland preserves
                   with useable buffer zones throughout new development areas.
Policy CO-2.1:     Consult with relevant State and local agencies, property owners, and local interest
                   groups to restore, enhance, and preserve creeks in and around the City of Ione.
                   Public and private projects shall be required to avoid impacts to wetlands if
                   feasible. If avoidance is not feasible, projects shall achieve no net loss of wetlands,
                   consistent with State and federal regulations.
                   Action CO-2.1.1: Restrict or modify as part of the project approval and
                   environmental review process proposed development in areas that contain
                   wetlands, as defined by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers approved delineations as
                   necessary to ensure the continued health and survival of special-status species and
                   sensitive areas.
                   Action CO-2.1.2: Require setbacks and buffers for all development within areas
                   containing wetlands or for development which will occur adjacent to wetlands or
                   waterways. (Cross reference LU 1.8, 1.13, 1.14, 1.15, 1.16)
                   Action CO-2.1.3: Consult with non-profit groups, educational institutions, and
                   other agencies as available to provide environmental education programs that
                   inform the public about the City’s creeks, wetlands and other special habitat areas.
Policy CO-2.2:     The City shall require that drainage improvements discharging into areas of
                   wetlands to be preserved are, to the maximum extent feasible, designed to mimic
                   the undeveloped surface water flow conditions of the area in terms of seasonality,
                   volume, flow velocity, and water quality. (Cross reference PF 3.1.4)
Policy CO-2.3:     Applications for new development projects shall have been coordinated with local,
                   state, and federal agencies in order to determine when natural creek corridors can
                   handle projected storm flows and when separate stormwater facilities should be
                   constructed. Applicants shall demonstrate that agency consultations have been
                   undertaken that projects will take into account issues including flow velocity,
                   sediment load, and volume.
Policy CO-2.4:     Require the preservation of existing creek locations, topography, and meandering
                   alignment. Minor adjustments to creek alignments may be approved on a case by
City of Ione General Plan                                                                     August 2009
                                                5–12

 CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
               case basis, provided the quality and integrity of the habitat are maintained. (Cross
               reference LU 1.8, LU 1.9, LU 1.13, LU 1.14, LU 1.15, LU 1.16)
               Action CO-2.4.1: Encourage projects that contain creeks, or are located adjacent
               to creeks, to be designed for visibility and, as appropriate, access. Utilize low-
               impact trails, such as raised walkways, wherever access to wetlands, creeks and
               waterways is planned.
               Action CO-2.4.2: Ensure that direct and indirect adverse impacts to wetland
               habitats are minimized by environmentally sensitive project siting and design.
               Action CO-2.4.3: Establish standards for private projects allowing public access
               in the floodplain and buffers along creek corridors and preserves, where not
               precluded by habitat preservation requirements. Require open-view fencing for all
               residential development adjacent to creeks and wetlands.
GOAL CO-3: Preserve high-quality trees throughout the City.
Policy CO-3.1: Conserve existing native and non-invasive trees for their historic, economic,
               aesthetic, educational, and environmental value. (Cross reference LU 1.10, LU 1.11,
               LU 1.13, LU 1.14, LU 1.15, LU 1.16, LU 1.17)
Policy CO-3.2: The City shall require preservation of all trees of 36” dbh or greater on
               development sites, unless health, safety, or access requirements do not allow for
               preservation of such trees. All development is required to fully mitigate the
               removal of any trees by replanting.
Policy CO-3.3: Promote trees as economic and
               environmental resources for the use,
               education, and enjoyment of current
               and future generations. Encourage
               property owners to plant and maintain
               healthy stands of trees.
Policy CO-3.4: Improve overall landscaping quality
               and sustainability in all areas visible to
               the public through the creation of
               development        guidelines     and/or             Oak Tree in Howard Park
               standards that establish minimum
               planting provisions for landscaped areas within new developments.
August 2009                                                              City of Ione General Plan
                                            5–13

                                     CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
                   Action CO-3.4.1: Create landscaping guidelines which address the appropriate
                   species to be utilized, spacing and location of plantings and reduction of water
                   required for irrigation and to ensure the long-term viability of planted areas.
                   Action CO-3.4.2: Work with local agencies, non-profits, and interest groups to
                   develop a local tree list, identifying species which should be used for replacements
                   and other landscaping to be used as a guideline for all tree plantings within the
                   City.
GOAL CO-4: Protect the quantity and quality of the City’s water resources
Policy CO-4.1:     Promote water conservation within existing and future urban uses.
                   Action CO-4.1.1: Implement standards that require water conserving appliances
                   and fixtures in all new development.
                   Action CO-4.1.2: Work with the local water provider to encourage the
                   preservation of water for local residences and businesses (e.g., educational
                   materials). (Cross reference PF 4.1.4)
                   Action CO-4.1.3: Require planting of drought-tolerant and native vegetation as
                   part of new development projects.
Policy CO-4.2:     Encourage the use of treated wastewater to irrigate parks, golf courses, and
                   landscaping. In new development areas, the use of treated wastewater for irrigation
                   may be applied as a condition of approval subject to State permitting. (Cross
                   reference PF 3.1.2)
Policy CO-4.3:     Protect surface and ground water from major sources of pollution, including
                   hazardous materials contamination and urban runoff.
                   Action CO-4.3.1: Restrict hazardous materials storage in the 100-year floodplain
                   to prevent surface water contamination. (Cross reference NS 5.3)
                   Action CO-4.3.2: Educate the community on laws governing the proper
                   handling of hazardous materials, especially those laws that pertain to discharging
                   materials into creeks.
                   Action CO-4.3.3: Install appropriate signage to deter the discharge of hazardous
                   materials into storm drains.
                   Action CO-4.3.4: Future land uses anticipated to utilize hazardous materials or
                   waste shall be required to provide adequate containment facilities to ensure that
City of Ione General Plan                                                                    August 2009
                                                  5–14

 CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
               surface water and groundwater resources are protected from accidental releases.
               (Cross reference NS 5.3.1)
Policy CO-4.4: Minimize erosion into stream channels resulting from new development in urban
               areas, consistent with State law. (Cross reference PF 3.1.4)
               Action CO-4.4.1: Require development projects to contain urban runoff control
               strategies and requirements that are consistent with Drainage Master Plans and the
               City’s urban runoff management program.
               Action CO-4.4.2: Require development within newly urbanizing areas to
               incorporate runoff control measures into their site design or to participate in an
               area-wide runoff control management effort, consistent with standards developed
               by the City.
               Action CO-4.4.3: Encourage new development to incorporate features such as
               grassy swales, multi-use retention or detention basins, and integrated drainage
               systems to enhance water quality. (Cross reference PF 3.1.5)
               Action CO-4.4.4: New development projects shall be required to incorporate the
               use of best management practices (BMPs) in order to protect receiving waters
               from the adverse effects of construction activities, sediment and urban runoff.
               BMPs shall be developed and incorporated in the project prior to approval by the
               City.
Policy CO-4.5: The City shall incorporate Storm Water, Urban Runoff, and Wetland Mosquito
               Management Guidelines and Best Management Practices into the design of water
               retention structures, drainage ditches, swales, and the construction of mitigated
               wetlands in order to reduce the potential for mosquito-borne disease transmission.
Policy CO-4.6: The City shall continue to cooperate and participate with the County, other cities,
               and the Regional Water Quality Control Board regarding compliance with the joint
               National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit or any subsequent permit
               and support water quality improvement projects in order to maintain compliance
               with regional, state and federal water quality requirements.
August 2009                                                                 City of Ione General Plan
                                            5–15

                                  CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
GOAL CO-5: Support the environmentally sensitive extraction of minerals
                   and the subsequent reclamation of mined areas.
Policy CO-5.1:     Ensure that the environmental effects of mining and reclamation on aquifers,
                   streams, scenic views, and surrounding residential uses are prevented or
                   minimized.
                   Action CO-5.1.1: Regulate surface
                   mining operations within the City
                   limits as required by California's
                   Surface Mining and Reclamation Act
                   of 1975 (SMARA), Public Resources
                   Code Section 2207 (relating to annual
                   reporting requirements), and State
                   Mining and Geology Board regulations                      Surface Mining
                   for surface mining and reclamation practice.
                   Action CO-5.1.2: Coordinate mining operations and urban development to
                   minimize conflicts between residents and mining, particularly where mining is
                   conducted before urbanization. (Cross reference LU 1.10, LU 1.11)
Policy CO-5.2:     Eliminate residual hazards to the public health and safety. (Cross reference LU 1.10,
                   LU 1.11, LU 1.13, NS 8.1)
                   Action CO-5.2.1: Establish and require minimum setbacks of future and
                   reauthorized surface mining from adjoining residential land uses.
                   Action CO-5.2.2: Review proposed residential and sensitive land uses adjacent to
                   existing or proposed mining operations for adequate buffering and establish
                   setbacks where necessary to ensure public safety from such uses.
GOAL CO-6: Conserve the natural resources and quality of life within the
                   community by reducing local and global air quality impacts.
Policy CO-6.1:     Promote infill development as a means to limit vehicle trips and reduce the
                   environmental impacts of new development and land use patterns.
Policy CO-6.2:     Increase energy conservation Citywide. (Cross reference H 7.1)
                   Action CO-6.2.1: Develop educational programs to increase energy conservation
                   at the household and business levels.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                              5–16

 CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
               Action CO-6.2.2: Develop programs to conserve energy resources at City-
               operated facilities.
               Action CO-6.2.3: Encourage the development of energy efficient buildings and
               subdivisions.
               Action CO-6.2.4: Work with local utility providers to make the public aware of
               energy rebate programs.
               Action CO-6.2.5: Work with community organizations to encourage the
               inclusion of energy efficient systems in remodels and retrofits of existing
               development.
Policy CO-6.3: Promote the development and use of advanced energy technology and building
               materials in Ione. (Cross reference H 7.1.2, PF 11.3)
Policy CO-6.4: Promote energy rebate programs offered by local energy providers as a way to
               bring energy efficiency into older neighborhoods and developments. (Cross reference
               H 7.1.3)
Policy CO-6.5: The City supports local, regional, and statewide efforts to reduce the emission of
               greenhouse gases linked to climate change.
               Action CO-6.5.1: The City will complete a Greenhouse Gas Inventory that
               provides an inventory of greenhouse gas emissions from manmade sources in the
               City.
               Action CO-6.5.2: The City will prepare a Climate Action Plan (CAP) that
               identifies desired goals for reducing manmade greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions,
               establishes resiliency and adaptation programs to prepare for potential impacts of
               climate change, and provides a phased implementation plan to achieve these goals.
               The CAP will establish a greenhouse gas emissions reduction target of 15%
               percent below 2007 levels by 2020, consistent with California Assembly Bill 32, the
               Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (AB32) and the guidance provided in the
               associated California Air Resources Board Climate Change Scoping Plan approved
               in December 2008. The CAP will also outline a strategy to achieve 1990 GHG
               levels by 2020 and an 80% reduction from 1990 GHG levels by 2050 in
               accordance with California State Executive Order S-3-05.
Policy CO-6.6: The City shall collaborate and consult with regional organizations and local
               jurisdictions within the City to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
August 2009                                                             City of Ione General Plan
                                             5–17

                                     CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
GOAL CO-7: Promote waste reduction, reuse, recycling, and composting
Policy CO-7.1:     Support recycling efforts by developing a set of programs to educate residents on
                   recycling and provide recycling services. (Cross reference PF 7.1)
                   Action CO-7.1.1: Work with local waste service providers to ensure that all
                   residents receiving services are aware of waste disposal programs, recycling
                   programs and green waste services.
                   Action CO-7.1.2: Continue to provide curbside recycling and green waste service
                   to all residential properties in Ione. Where this service is not provided, ensure
                   franchise agreements with local providers (ACES Waste Inc. and Amador Disposal
                   Service) include these services to all areas within the City boundaries.
                   Action CO-7.1.3: Encourage all office, commercial, and multi-family complexes
                   to provide recycling bins and collection service for paper, plastic, glass, and metal.
                   Action CO-7.1.4: Provide recycling centers at City facilities (e.g., City Hall,
                   libraries) that are available to the public free-of-charge.
                   Action CO-7.1.5: Provide locations for household hazardous wastes to be
                   recycled.
                   Action CO-7.1.6: Ensure that all construction projects include plans for the
                   disposal of unused materials, the maximum amounts of source reduction, and
                   encourage the utilization of recycled materials to the maximum extent feasible
                   Action CO-7.1.7: Work with the Amador County Unified School District to
                   support recycling at school sites by placing easily accessible recycling bins,
                   providing educational programs on recycling, and using recycled products.
                   Action CO-7.1.8: Ensure that as much of the City’s office supply purchases are
                   comprised of recycled or reusable products as possible. Encourage public agencies
                   and local businesses to recycle as much as possible.
Policy CO-7.2:     Meet state mandates for solid waste reduction and recycling.
                   Action CO-7.2.1: Implement the State’s source reduction and recycling element
                   (required by the California Integrated Waste Management Act) and the household
                   hazardous waste element (required by PRC 41500-41510).
City of Ione General Plan                                                                     August 2009
                                                  5–18

 CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
GOAL CO-8: Create a system of public parks and recreation facilities and
               programs including a network of trails that meets the needs of
               all residents
Policy CO-8.1: Review all proposals for new
               residential development to ensure each
               project complies with the City’s
               standards for parkland dedication. All
               park lands designated for parks or
               recreational use shall be reviewed by
               the City to determine adequacy for
               parks use.
               Action CO-8.1.1: Require developers
               of all new residential development to                         Park Facilities
               dedicate parkland at a rate of at least five acres of land per 1,000 population. When
               necessary, provide an in-lieu payment option, which allows the developer to fund
               the acquisition of acceptable land equal to the dedication requirement. Calculate
               required parkland dedication exclusive of required open space.
               Action CO-8.1.2: Encourage the development of parks adjacent to school sites
               and other quasi-public and public facilities. (Cross reference PF 2.2, PF 8.3)
               Action CO-8.1.3: Establish a procedure for determining an appropriate in lieu
               fee amount that ensures adequate funds to purchase required parkland for which
               in lieu fees are paid.
               Action CO-8.1.4: Adopt and maintain a Noxious Weed Ordinance. The Noxious
               Weed Ordinance shall include regulatory standards for construction activities that
               occur adjacent to natural areas to inhibit the establishment of noxious weeds
               through accidental seed import.
Policy CO-8.2: Ensure that adequate and reliable funding sources are established for the long-term
               maintenance of parks and trails.
               Action CO-8.2.1: Ensure that sufficient funding for maintenance of parks is
               assured prior to approval of any Final Subdivision Map that includes public parks
               and/or related facilities.
               Action CO-8.2.2: If required to meet necessary parks and recreation funding
               needs of the City, the City shall create a fee and assessment program to provide
               increased funding for existing and planned parks. This could include local or
               regional bond measures or assessment districts, public or private grants or
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                           5–19

                                    CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
                   partnerships, homeowners associations, or other methods deemed appropriate by
                   the City.
Policy CO-8.3:     Work towards the creation of a complete network of trails and pathways
                   connecting major areas of the city, which is accessible for all residents. (Cross
                   reference CIR 2.1, LU 1.8, LU 1.9, LU 1.10, LU 1.11, LU 1.13, LU 1.14, LU 1.16,
                   LU 1.17)
                   Action CO-8.3.1: Wherever feasible, provide pedestrian and bicycle linkages
                   between existing and future park facilities. (Cross reference CIR 2.3)
                   Action CO-8.3.2: Support the development of trails in open space areas, and
                   natural areas used for passive recreation.
                   Action CO-8.3.3: Work with property owners of open space and agricultural
                   areas in the Planning Area to establish a mechanism to allow for public access to
                   such open space areas, in coordination with planned trails systems in the area.
GOAL CO-9: Protect open space areas, including preservation of scenic
                   views.
Policy CO-9.1:     Create a City-wide standard for the dedication of open space for all development
                   projects and maintaining open space.
                   Action CO-9.1.1: Review all proposals for new development to ensure
                   compliance with the City’s standards for open space. (Cross reference LU 1.10, LU
                   1.11, LU 1.13, LU 1.14, LU 1.16)
                   Action CO-9.1.2: Although some recreational uses are allowed in open space
                   areas, the parkland dedication requirements are separate from and in addition to
                   open space dedication requirements.
                   Action CO-9.1.3: Open space can include turf areas, agricultural uses, greens,
                   dog parks, some drainage areas, community gardens and other uses, which will be
                   considered on a case-by-case basis by the City.
Policy CO-9.2:     Maximize the potential benefits of natural resource mitigation lands within urban
                   development. (Cross reference LU 1.8, LU 1.10, LU 1.11, LU 1.13, LU 1.14, LU
                   1.16)
                   Action CO-9.2.1: As part of the tentative subdivision map, Planned
                   Development, or Specific Plan process in newly developing areas, encourage
                   projects to accomplish the following:
City of Ione General Plan                                                                  August 2009
                                               5–20

 CONSERVATION & OPEN SPACE
                i.  Align roads, trails, and public spaces to take advantage of vistas over open
                    space; and locate trails through open spaces where possible, to maximize these
                    areas as passive recreational uses, and to minimize the destruction of open
                    space areas.
                ii. Locate public parks adjacent to open space lands to create a greater sense of
                    open space and to take advantage of opportunities for scenic vistas and trail
                    connections.
                Action CO-9.2.2: Through the development review process, incorporate design
                features that increase visual access to natural resources. (Cross reference LU 1.13)
Policy CO-9.3:  Where land designated or proposed to be designated for parks or open space
                contains Native American, historical, cultural and sacred sites, the City shall
                consult with the tribe as to the level of confidentiality required to protect the site
                and as to appropriate dignity to afford the site in any management plan.
GOAL CO-10: Conserve agricultural resources within and around the City and
                promote development which does not interfere with ongoing
                agricultural operations.
Policy CO-10.1: Ensure minimal loss of agricultural lands within the Ione Planning Area through
                preservation of existing lands and through mitigation measures where necessary.
Policy CO-10.2: The City shall not approve projects resulting in the loss of prime agricultural lands
                unless it makes findings that the benefits of the project outweigh the impacts
                associated with the loss of such agricultural lands.
Policy CO-10.3: Support infill development, wherever possible, in order to minimize the
                conversion of agricultural lands when there are usable lands within already
                urbanizing areas.
Policy CO-10.4: Limit leapfrog development and support development in areas where a logical
                extension of public facilities is possible.
Policy CO-10.5: The City shall not support the development or conversion of any parcel subject to
                a Williamson Act contract until said contract has been terminated through the
                nonrenewal method pursuant to Government Code Section 51245.
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                              5–21

  NOISE & SAFETY
INTRODUCTION
In order to promote a safe and high quality community, the City
must ensure that risks associated with noise and natural hazards are Please turn to Page 7-2 for a
minimized. This element of the Ione General Plan addresses issues complete listing of contents
related to noise and safety in the community. The setting and covered in this Element, with
known issues related to these topics is described, and frames the page number references.
goals and policies set forth to address such issues. Additional
information related to the setting can be found in the General Plan Background Report, bound
under a separate cover. Goals, policies and actions are identified which minimize the exposure to
excess noise and reduce foreseeable hazards within the City of Ione.
Noise, for the purposes of this General Plan, is considered any unwanted sound that interferes with
an individual’s ability to perform a task or enjoy an activity. While there are sounds that are
considered desirable, this element is intended to address unwanted sounds that impact the health,
safety, and welfare of the community. Removing or reducing significant sources of noise will
improve quality of life for Ione’s residents, employees, and visitors.
August 2009                                                               City of Ione General Plan
                                                 6–1

                                                                  NOISE & SAFETY
                                           IN THIS SECTION
      •    Introduction (Page 6-1)
      •    Vision (Page 6-2)
      •    Purpose (Page 6-2)
      •    Related Plans and Programs (Page 6-2)
      •    Relationship to Other General Plan Elements (Page 6-8)
      •    Setting, Issues, and Considerations (Page 6-8)
      •    Issues this Element Attempts to Solve (Page 6-13)
      •    Goals, Policies, and Actions (Page 6-14)
Safety is an important aspect in ensuring the general well being of City residents, and it encompasses
the prevention of and response to damages caused by manmade and naturally occurring hazards.
Ione currently faces a range of safety issues including flooding, wildfires, hazardous materials,
geologic and traffic hazards, and crime. The City’s prevention of and response to these issues will
determine its success in maintaining and attracting residents, businesses and tourists.
VISION
Ione will retain the character and quality of a small town. Residents will continue to benefit from
quiet, safe neighborhoods. The quality of life, and the comfort and safety enjoyed by residents,
visitors, and business owners and operators within the City will remain without the exposure to
unnecessary risks associated with natural and manmade hazards or intrusion of harmful levels of
noise.
PURPOSE
The purpose of this Noise and Safety Element is to identify and remedy both present and
anticipated concerns regarding major sources of noise and safety issues within and surrounding the
City. The goals, policies, and actions provided will, when implemented, ensure the comfort and
safety of residents in the Planning Area. This element will identify viable solutions to minimize
annoyance, potential risk of death, injuries, property damage, economic hardship, and social
displacement resulting from noise and safety hazards.
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
The Noise and Safety Element relates to several other plans and programs, including the following:
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                    6–2

  NOISE & SAFETY
California Noise Control Act and Guidelines
The California legislature enacted the Noise Control Act to address unwanted and hazardous noise
as a public health and welfare issue through noise control, prevention, and abatement. The State
Office of Noise Control in the Department of Health Services established criteria and guidelines for
use in setting standards for human exposure to noise. This Element is consistent with those
provisions.
California Building Code (CBC)
The California Building Standards Code is comprised of twelve parts that incorporate public health
and safety standards used in the design and construction of buildings in California. The CBC is
administered by the California Building Standards Commission. The codes also include standards for
energy efficiency and access compliance for persons with disabilities. Seismic design standards
provide regulations for earthquake safety in the construction of all buildings in California. Specific
wildland-urban interface fire protection standards provide for protection of structures located in
areas prone to wildfires. In addition, changes to building standards for persons with disabilities were
adopted to introduce federal Department of Justice (DOJ) certification requirements. California
continues to strive for barrier-free design in buildings to ensure they are accessible to, and usable by,
everyone.
California Occupational Safety and Health Administration
In accordance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 8 Sections 1270 “Fire Prevention” and
6773 “Fire Protection and Fire Fighting Equipment” the California Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (Cal OSHA) has established minimum standards for fire suppression and emergency
medical services. The standards include, but are not limited to, guidelines on the handling of highly
combustible materials, fire housing sizing requirements, restrictions on the use of compressed air,
access roads, and the testing, maintenance and use of all fire fighting and emergency medical
equipment.
California Fire Code and International Fire Code
The California Fire Code and International Fire Code contain regulations relating to construction,
maintenance, and use of buildings. Topics addressed in the codes include fire department access,
fire hydrants, automatic sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems, fire and explosion hazards safety,
hazardous materials storage and use, provisions intended to protect and assist fire responders,
industrial processes, and many other general and specialized fire-safety requirements for new and
existing buildings and the surrounding premises. The codes also contain specialized technical
regulations related to fire and life safety.
California Health and Safety Code
State fire regulations are set forth in Sections 13000 et seq of the California Health and Safety Code,
which includes regulations for building standards, fire protection and notification systems, fire
August 2009                                                                    City of Ione General Plan
                                                  6–3

                                                                  NOISE & SAFETY
protection devices such as extinguishers, smoke alarms, high-rise building, childcare facility
standards, and fire suppression training.
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) Standards
Caltrans standards establish construction specifications associated with Caltrans facilities and rights-
of-way related to transportation noise and safety. The following are the Caltrans rights-of-way in
Ione: State Routes 104 and 124 intersect within the center of downtown Ione. State Route 88 is also
within the Planning Area of this General Plan. These three state highways are under the jurisdiction
of Caltrans and any changes associated with these roadways, or their right-of-ways, must be
approved by Caltrans.
Central Sierra Planning Council (CSPC)
CSPC is an association of local governments in the four-county Region. Its members include the
counties of Alpine, Amador, Calaveras, and Tuolumne as well as the cities of Amador City, Angels,
Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, Sonora, and Sutter Creek. The CSPC serves as a forum for the study and
resolution of regional issues.
Amador County Transportation Commission (ACTC)
ACTC serves as the Regional Transportation Planning Authority for Amador County. The primary
responsibilities of the ACTC include the administration of Transportation Development Act funds
and other state and federal transportation funding within Amador County. ACTC works in
partnerships with other agencies and municipalities within its jurisdiction including the County and
the cities of Ione, Jackson, Amador City, Plymouth and Sutter Creek. ACTC facilitates
implementation of the Countywide Regional Transportation Plan and the Amador County
Pedestrian and Bicycle Transportation Plan.
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
CEQA is the State’s environmental review process that requires public agencies to identify the
significant environmental effects of a project, including potential noise and safety hazards and either
avoid the significant environmental effects, where feasible, or mitigate the significant environmental
effects, where feasible. This General Plan and all qualifying projects within the Ione General Plan
Planning Area will be subject to environmental analysis consistent with CEQA.
Plans and activities of the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA)
FEMA is the federal agency charged with preparing the nation for all hazards and effectively
managing federal responses and recovery efforts following any national incident (e.g., major flood,
earthquake, tornado, or hurricane). FEMA also initiates proactive mitigation activities, trains first
responders, and manages the National Flood Insurance Program and the U.S. Fire Administration.
FEMA will coordinate with the City’s designated emergency responders.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                  August 2009
                                                 6–4

  NOISE & SAFETY
California Emergency Management Agency (CEMA)
CEMA coordinates overall state agency response to major disasters in support of local government.
The office is responsible for assuring the state’s readiness to respond to and recover from natural,
manmade, and war-caused emergencies, and for assisting local governments in their emergency
preparedness, response and recovery efforts. CEMA will review the City’s local Emergency
Management Plan.
Local Floodplain Management Regulations
Title 18.04 of the City’s Municipal Code includes regulations to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare of the community through the establishment of floodplain management regulations. These
regulations were adopted in order to protect human life and health, minimize the need for expensive
flood control projects, minimize flood damages including business interruption, damage to public
facilities or other potential losses due to flooding. These regulations pertain to any area subject to
flood hazards. Any development that is proposed in flood hazard areas must first obtain a
development permit as required by the City’s Floodplain Management regulations.
Local Emergency Management Plan
As provided for in State law, local jurisdictions are required to establish plans and ordinances
addressing emergency management operations. This includes identifying hazards that may pose a
major threat to the City and how to address these potential threats should an emergency occur.
CEMA provides requirements and guidelines for such plans. The City of Ione utilizes the
Countywide Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan as its local emergency management plan. This plan is
described below.
Amador County Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan
The Amador County Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan is a multi-jurisdictional plan that includes the
County and the communities of Amador City, Ione, Jackson, Plymouth, and Sutter Creek. The
purpose of hazard mitigation and this Plan is to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and
property from natural hazards and their effects in Amador County. The plan acknowledges that
Amador County is vulnerable to several natural hazards including wildfires, floods, and drought.
Each hazard is identified, profiled, and analyzed in the plan. The plan and planning process lay out
the strategy that will enable Amador County to become less vulnerable to future disaster losses.
This plan has been formally adopted by each participating entity and is required to be updated a
minimum of every five years.
Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act (1972)
This legislation establishes a series of earthquake fault zones along and around surface traces of
active fault lines. Local agencies are required to regulate development within these zones to prevent
the construction of buildings used for human occupancy on surface traces of active faults. While
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                                 6–5

                                                                   NOISE & SAFETY
there are no active faults within the Planning Area, the General Plan must evaluate the potential.
There are faults located east of the Planning Area, as shown in Figure 6-1.
Measure M (2008)
Measure M established a one-half cent sales tax in Amador County for fire protection and
emergency medical response services, with the proceeds allocated to local fire districts in the
County. The Amador Fire Protection Authority (AFPA), a Joint Powers Authority, provides
oversight of the program.
Seismic Hazards Mapping Act (1990)
This legislation addresses non-surface fault rupture earthquake hazards, including liquefaction and
seismically-induced landslides. It includes specific criteria for approving development projects that
occur within a seismic hazard zone. While there are no seismic hazards identified within the
Planning Area, the General Plan must evaluate the potential, as Amador County lies between two
active seismic regions.
Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (1975)
The California Department of Conservation Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA),
provides a comprehensive surface mining and reclamation policy that permits the continued mining
of minerals, as well as the protection and subsequent beneficial use of the mined and reclaimed land.
The purpose of SMARA is to ensure that adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized
and that mined lands are reclaimed to a useable condition and readily adaptable for alternative land
uses.
Plans and Actions of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA)
The EPA regulates cleanup of groundwater contamination and other pollutants that may be unsafe
to humans and the natural environment. There are two cleanup sites within the City and Planning
Area, which must comply with the regulations of the EPA. These are the Q Ranch and the MP
Associates, Inc. site. These sites are discussed further, below.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                August 2009
                                                  6–6

 NOISE & SAFETY
            FIGURE 6-1: REGIONAL FAULT ZONES
August 2009                                  City of Ione General Plan
                          6–7

                                                                NOISE & SAFETY
RELATIONSHIP            TO   OTHER GENERAL PLAN
ELEMENTS
The Noise and Safety Element works in conjunction with the
other elements of this General Plan. Most specifically, it
relates to the Public Facilities Element with the mutual goal
of timely public service and infrastructure provision, and to
the Land Use Element, which promotes development
policies to ensure land use compatibilities including potential           Noise at stock car races
noise and safety issues through appropriate land use planning              can reach 130 decibels.
and site design. Portions of this element also relate to the
                                                                      How Loud Is It? Sound Levels
Circulation Element when projecting transportation noise               for Common Noise Sources
sources and addressing safety at interfaces between different
                                                                                              Noise Level in
modes of travel.                                                         Activity
                                                                                                  Decibels
                                                                Limit of Hearing             0 dB
SETTING, ISSUES, AND CONSIDERATIONS                             Normal Breathing
                                                                Soft Whisper
                                                                                             10 dB
                                                                                             30 dB
                                                                Library                      40 dB
NOISE                                                           Refrigerator
                                                                Rainfall
                                                                                             50 dB
                                                                                             50 dB
                                                                Washing Machine              50-75 dB
Noise can come from two types of sources: mobile and            Normal Conversation          60 dB
stationary.                                                     Hair Dryer                   60-95 dB
                                                                Alarm Clock                  65-80 dB
                                                                Power Mower                  65-95 dB
    •    Mobile source noises are generally associated with     Dumpster Pickup              80 dB
         transportation, such as roadway traffic, trains, and   (@ 50’)
                                                                Garbage Disposal             80-95 dB
         aircraft. The most significant mobile sources of       Noisy Restaurant             85 dB
         noise in Ione are State Routes 104, 124 and 88 and     Train Approaching            85-90 dB
         other major roadways. Typical noises from railways     (Engines)
                                                                Tractor                      90 dB
         include the locomotive engine noise, track noises,     Shouting in Ear              110 dB
         and warning horn sounds. Each of these noise           Loud Rock Concert            120 dB
         sources is discussed in greater detail later in this   Stock Car Race               130 dB
                                                                Jet Engine at Takeoff        150 dB
         element and policies have been incorporated into this
         General Plan to address these and other noise          These are typical noise levels. Distance
         sources.                                               from the source will reduce the noise
                                                                level. A 10 dB increase doubles
                                                                perceived loudness. Continued
    •    Stationary sounds can be pin-pointed and do not        exposure to noise above 85 dB can
         move. Examples of stationary sources in Ione           cause hearing loss; the maximum
         include general service commercial areas (such as      exposure to 85 dB noise in the
                                                                workplace is eight hours. A single
         automobile repair), outdoor machinery (such as
                                                                exposure to 140 dB noise can cause
         heating/air conditioning systems, which may be         some hearing loss. Source: National
         found in both residential and commercial areas),       Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.
         outdoor recreational facilities (such as Howard Park,
         Castle Oaks Golf Club, and outdoor play areas at schools), agricultural operations and
         machinery, and industrial operations such as blasting, mining, drilling, and use of heavy
         equipment that may occur in industrial or mining areas. Noise generated at construction
City of Ione General Plan                                                                        August 2009
                                                  6–8

  NOISE & SAFETY
         sites also falls within the category of stationary sound. Each of these noise sources is
         discussed in greater detail later in this element and policies and actions have been
         incorporated into this General Plan to address these and other noise sources.
Generally speaking, any land use where activities of people can be disrupted or annoyed by loud
noises is considered noise-sensitive. For example, a residential land use, where people live, sleep,
and study, is considered sensitive to noise because noise can disrupt these activities (the passing
train, for instance, whose engine noise or warning horn can disrupt sleep).
GENERAL SERVICE COMMERCIAL AND LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USES
Noise sources associated with service commercial uses such as automotive repair facilities, car
washes, loading docks, lumber yards, etc., are found at various locations within the City. The noise
emissions of these types of uses are dependent on many factors, and are therefore difficult to
quantify precisely. Nonetheless, noise generated by these uses contributes to the ambient noise
environment in the immediate vicinity of these uses and should be considered where either new
noise sensitive uses are proposed nearby or where similar uses are proposed in existing residential
areas.
A number of uses throughout Ione, from dry cleaners to gas stations, maintain stocks of hazardous
substances on site, leading to the potential for the accidental release of these substances. Vehicles
and rail cars carrying hazardous materials on the railroad lines within the Planning Area and on SR
104, 124 and 88 can bring the risk of an accident involving hazardous substances to large areas of
Ione, including downtown.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Areas in and around the City have historically been used for agricultural and mining activities, as well
as uses such as gas stations that have the potential for contamination. Agricultural production of
crops may cause contamination from fertilizers and pesticides, and mineral extraction may lead to
contamination of arsenic and other hazardous materials.
There are several sites listed in the State of California Department of Toxic Substances Control
database within the Planning Area. In particular, there are several Leaking Underground Fuel Tank
(LUF) cleanup sites in Ione, and one Spills, Leaks, Investigation, and Cleanups (SLIC) site. The
California State Waterboard regulates LUF and SLIC sites, investigating and regulating non-
permitted discharges. In addition to LUF and SLIC sites, the Q Ranch, located at 3391 State Route
104 is performing voluntary clean-up of contaminated soil in a localized area of the property, and
MP Associates at 6555 Jackson Valley Road is undergoing cleanup, according to the State database
(http://www.geotracker.waterboards.ca.gov/, January 27, 2009).
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                                 6–9

                                                                   NOISE & SAFETY
SURFACE MINING FACILITIES
Clay, coal, sand, and gravel mines are located in the Ione
Planning Area, as the area is rich in both metallic and
non-metallic mineral resources. There are various mining
and processing facilities within the Planning Area,
including the Uniman Mines, the largest mining operation
near the City, located south of Ione. Operations at
mining facilities typically consist of the excavation of
material using front-loaders and/or self-elevating                           Surface Mining
scrapers, the transfer of that material via truck or
conveyor to the processing plant, where it is crushed and screened into various sized products, and
the load-out of the material via heavy trucks or trains.
The noise generation of such facilities varies by size, type of equipment, and hours of operation, but
noise from processing plant equipment is sufficient to create nuisance to sensitive land uses. Issues
associated with these types of uses include early startup hours and the high noise generation of the
mining and processing equipment.
Potential safety hazards related to surface mining include the release of gases, dust in suspension,
and airborne particles. In addition, mining operations can cause ground-borne vibrations from the
machines and explosions. Mining operations can also leave behind large empty pits if not backfilled.
ROADWAY TRAFFIC
Major roadways within the Planning Area include State Routes 104, 124, and 88, and other major
local roadways. State Routes 104 and 124 bisect the downtown area of Ione. This results in noise
generated by heavy trucks and other state highway traffic within the City. Arterials and collector
streets generally have higher volumes of traffic than neighborhood streets and produce greater noise
disturbances within the City. Some arterials and collector streets within Ione are Preston Avenue,
Church Street, Main Street, West Marlette Street, Shakeley Lane, Waterman Road and Market Street.
State Route 88 is also a major roadway serving the greater Ione area.
Several businesses and industrial land uses in the Planning Area use and transport hazardous
materials as a part of their operations, including transportation of loads on the highways, which run
through downtown Ione. These roadways require trucks to make tight turns, in close proximity to
downtown buildings. As traffic and population increase, the potential for accidents involving
hazardous materials and trucks also increases. Noise and safety issues are associated with the
routing of state highways through the downtown area.
RAIL SYSTEM AND RAILROAD CROSSINGS
A Union Pacific rail line runs along the southern boundary of the City connecting Ione with Galt.
Historically this rail line has served mining and industrial properties, but it is no longer active.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                6–10

  NOISE & SAFETY
Policies in this Element address noise and safety issues associates with use of the rail line should this
line become active.
Several at-grade railroad crossings exist within the Planning Area. South Church Street is crossed by
Amador Central Line and Old Stockton Road is crossed by the Union Pacific line. All rail crossings
are signalized to alert drivers and pedestrians to oncoming rail traffic, although only some have
crossing arms.
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Recreational areas within the community are often
generators of noise. The City’s recreational facilities
include small parks with benches and historical exhibits
and one major recreation facility, Howard Park. Howard
Park includes soccer fields, softball, baseball and little
league diamonds, half-court basket ball, tennis courts, a
Bocci ball court, a playground, and roller hockey area. In
addition, a variety of equestrian facilities are located at the
park including stables, corrals, an arena, and historic
racetrack. Noise generated by these uses depends on the
age and number of people using the respective facility at a
given time, and the types of activities in which they are                    Howard Park
engaged. School playing field activities tend to generate
more noise than those of neighborhood parks, as the intensity of school playground usage tends to
be higher. At organized events such as ball games with large crowds and public address systems, the
noise generation is often significantly higher. As with service commercial uses, the noise generation
of parks, school playing fields, and the golf course is variable.
MULE CREEK STATE PRISON
The Mule Creek State Prison (MCSP) is a prison housing adult male inmates. The prison is located
in the northern portion of the City, away from the general community, and houses almost 4,000
inmates. Safety issues include the escape of potentially violent inmates. Noise issues include
recreation noise and noise from a public address system. Related noise and safety issues include
worker shift changes where at certain times there is a large number of personnel going in and out of
the facility.
PRESTON YOUTH CORRECTIONAL FACILITY
The Preston Youth Correctional Facility is a juvenile prison housing male wards. The prison is
located at 201 Waterman Road, within the City limits just north of downtown. Safety issues include
the escape of potentially violent inmates. Noise issues include recreation noise and noise from a
public address system.
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                                   6–11

                                                                   NOISE & SAFETY
CAL FIRE ACADEMY
The CAL FIRE Academy, located at 4501 Preston Road, provides training in fire protection, fire
prevention, law enforcement, administration, resource management, and fire crew management.
Potential noise and safety issues include the use of helicopters, flammable liquids, flammable
structures, off-road vehicles, live-fire weapons range, and other activities during training.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
During construction and demolition associated with projects within the Planning Area, noise from
construction activities would add to the noise environment in the immediate project vicinity.
Activities involved in construction would generate maximum noise levels typically ranging from 85
to 90 dB at a distance of 50 feet. Although construction activities can vary in duration, they are
generally temporary in nature and typically occur during normal daytime working hours. Increased
noise from truck traffic also typically results from construction activities.
FLOODING AND DRAINAGE
Flooding has been a documented hazard in the Planning Area since the 1860s. The City is located in
the Sacramento-San Joaquin Drainage Basin. Major streams in the area include Sutter Creek, which
flows through the center of town, and Mule Creek, which is located at the western city limits. To the
west of the City both of these creeks flow into Dry Creek, which flows north of the City, and
through the Q Ranch. The City of Ione’s flood concerns occur mostly where portions of Sutter
Creek flow through the City. Storm water runoff can also pose flooding problems during heavy
rains.
WILDFIRES
The City is located in an area susceptible to risk of wildland fires. The entire County is classified as
moderate to very high fire hazard severity based on CAL FIRE analysis of fuels, terrain and weather.
The rural setting coupled with hot, dry summers, dense clusters of trees as well as dry grasses
present the potential for wildland fire. Fire season typically occurs from early spring to late fall when
the rainy season ends and moisture content diminishes causing vegetation to dry. Wildland fires are
primarily associated with the wildland-urban interface (i.e. areas where development is placed next to
wildlands). As Ione grows, greater potential for exposure to wildland fires could occur. Additionally,
several of the proposed developments in the Planning Area are abundant in natural vegetation,
which have the potential to ignite and pose safety risks to adjacent and surrounding developments.
The California Building Code contains specific regulations for construction in areas of urban-
wildland interface, in order to prevent damages related to wildfires.
Fire protection is provided by the City of Ione Fire Department, the Amador Fire Protection
District, the Mule Creek State Prison Fire Department, and CAL FIRE. The services provided by
these agencies are addressed in the Public Facilities Element of this General Plan.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                     August 2009
                                                  6–12

  NOISE & SAFETY
SEISMIC
Amador County lies between two seismically active regions. There is a potential for the generation
of damaging earthquakes along faults to the west of the County. The eastern Amador County area
contains active faults that are responsible for and form the boundary between each basin or valley
and the neighboring mountain range. The nearest fault to the planning area is the Foothill Fault
System, which is approximately 7 miles to the east (see Figure 6-1). The Foothill Fault System is
considered a potentially active fault capable of an earthquake with a magnitude of 6.5 on the Richter
scale.
EROSION
At least half of the soil types found in the planning area are moderately to very severely prone to
erosion. Erosion may result in hazards including mudslides, soil instability or other issues which
could result in dangerous conditions for residents, and/or damage to structures.
The Ione Police Department (IPD) provides law enforcement services within the City, including
traffic enforcement, patrol, and investigation. IPD relies on Amador County Sheriff for specialized
team services. Law Enforcement and Police Protection are addressed in the Public Facilities
Element of this General Plan.
ISSUES THIS ELEMENT ATTEMPTS TO SOLVE
This Element provides goals, policies, and actions that address the following issues, many of which
were raised at public meetings during creation of the General Plan:
    •    Developing precautions to prevent flooding and drainage issues when possible, and
         measures to minimize damage from flooding when preventative actions are insufficient.
    •    Managing geologic and seismic hazards through rehabilitation and renovation of older
         buildings, and using inspection as a way to ensure new structures will be safe in the event of
         any likely geologic or seismic hazards.
    •    Minimizing the likelihood of traffic and pedestrian accidents by at-grade railroad crossings.
    •    Preparation and response to major emergencies both within the City and region wide events
         that could threaten the community and its residents.
    •    Creating procedures to decrease the likelihood of harm to humans or the ecosystem in the
         event of a release of toxic or hazardous materials.
    •    Addressing both real and perceived safety concerns within the community through design of
         public and private projects, as well as enhanced activities and services.
August 2009                                                                    City of Ione General Plan
                                                  6–13

                                                                                      NOISE & SAFETY
     •   Reducing noise from vehicle traffic, especially in residential areas.
     •   Controlling noise from industrial uses and aggregate operations.
     •   Minimize hazards and noise issues which result from state highway routes through the
         downtown areas of the City.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
The following goals, policies, and actions identify the standards that the City of Ione will use during
planning and development to ensure the safety of residents and to provide an environment free of
excessive noise disturbances. Each of the goals listed is followed by specific policies and actions that
will be carried out and enforced in order to meet the goals and address the issues identified above.
GOAL NS-1:             New development will reduce unnecessary noise disturbances.
Policy NS-1.1:         Establish the Noise Level Performance Standards in Table 6-1 and Table 6-2 to
                       govern maximum allowable sound levels in all new development.
                                                          TABLE 6-1:
          CITY OF IONE EXTERIOR NOISE LEVEL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR
                          NON-TRANSPORTATION NOISE FOR NEW PROJECTS
                   Land Use Type                           Maximum Noise Exposure Level (dBA)
                       Land Use                           7 a.m. to 10 p.m.                    10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
               Single-Family Homes                                     55                                 45
            Multi-Family Residential                                   60                                 45
          Notes: The City may impose noise level standards which are more or less restrictive than those specified above based
          upon determination of existing low or high ambient noise levels.
                                                          TABLE 6-2:
   CITY OF IONE NOISE LEVEL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR ALL NOISE SOURCES,
                    INCLUDING TRANSPORTATION NOISE, FOR NEW PROJECTS
       Noise-Sensitive Land Use                                  Maximum Noise Exposure Level (dBA)
                 Land Use                             Outdoor Activity Areas1                           Interior Spaces
                Residential                                             602                                        45
                 Churches                                               602                                        45
 Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                                         70                                         --
City of Ione General Plan                                                                                                August 2009
                                                              6–14

  NOISE & SAFETY
        Noise-Sensitive Land Use                                       Maximum Noise Exposure Level (dBA)
       Schools, libraries, museums                                            --                                         45
         Nursing Homes/Hospitals                                            602                                          45
Notes:
1- Outdoor activity areas are property locations where an individual spends the most outdoor time or where people are likely to congregate.
Where the outdoor activity area is unknown, the exterior noise level standard shall be applied to the property line of the receiving land use.
Where it is not practical to mitigate exterior noise levels at patio or balconies of apartment complexes, a common area such as a pool or
recreation area may be designated as the outdoor activity area.
2 - Where it is not possible to reduce noise in outdoor activity areas to 60 dBA or less using a practical application of the best available noise
reduction measures, an exterior noise level of up to 65 dBA may be allowed provided that available exterior noise level reduction measures
have been implemented and interior noise levels are in compliance with this table.
The City may impose noise level standards which are more or less restrictive than those specified above based upon determination of existing
low or high ambient noise levels.
Policy NS-1.2:              Ensure the outdoor and indoor areas of new projects will be located, constructed
                            and/or shielded from noise sources in compliance with the City’s noise standards.
                            (Cross reference LU 2.4.3)
                            Action NS-1.2.1: Require new development of noise-creating uses to conform
                            with the City’s maximum noise levels as shown in Table 6-1 and 6-2. (See future
                            noise contours in Figure 6-3).
                            Action NS-1.2.2: Require an acoustical analysis as part of the environmental
                            review process when noise-sensitive land uses are proposed in areas where
                            current or projected exterior noise levels exceed the City’s standards. The
                            acoustical analysis must be prepared by a qualified person experienced in
                            environmental noise assessment and architectural acoustics and must estimate
                            existing and projected cumulative noise levels and compare those levels to the
                            policies in this element.
Policy NS-1.3:              Ensure that proposed development likely to exceed the City’s standards do not
                            create noise disturbance in existing noise-sensitive areas.
                            Action NS-1.3.1: Require an acoustical analysis as part of the environmental
                            review process when proposed non-residential land uses are likely to produce
                            noise levels that exceed the City’s noise standards. The acoustical analysis must
                            be prepared by a qualified person experienced in environmental noise assessment
                            and architectural acoustics and must estimate existing and projected cumulative
                            noise levels and compare those levels to the policies in this element.
Policy NS-1.4:              Mitigate noise created by proposed non-transportation noise sources to comply
                            with the City’s noise standards to the maximum extent feasible.
                            Action NS-1.4.1: Limit construction activity to the hours of 7:00 am to 7:00
                            pm weekdays and 8:00 am to 6:00 pm weekends, when construction is conducted
                            in proximity to residential land uses.
August 2009                                                                                                 City of Ione General Plan
                                                                    6–15

                                                                     NOISE & SAFETY
                   Action NS-1.4.2: Restrict the hours of operation of loading docks, trash
                   compactors and other noise-producing uses in commercial areas with the
                   potential to significantly impact noise-sensitive land uses.
Policy NS-1.5:     Mitigate noise created by the construction of new transportation noise sources to
                   the maximum extent feasible to comply with the City’s standards.
                   Action NS-1.5.1: Require the use of temporary construction noise control
                   measures including the use of temporary noise barriers, temporary relocation of
                   noise-sensitive land uses, or other appropriate measures as mitigation for noise
                   generated during construction of public and/or private projects.
Policy NS-1.6:     Ensure that comfortable noise levels are maintained in high-density, mixed-use and
                   transitional development areas.
Policy NS-1.7:     Emphasize noise mitigation methods other than soundwall installation.
GOAL NS-2:         Maintain a safe community and environment.
Policy NS-2.1:     Strive to reduce levels of risk of injury, death, and property damage resulting from
                   reasonably foreseeable safety hazards in the area.
Policy NS-2.2:     Cooperate and consult with other local, regional, state and federal agencies and
                   with rail carriers in an effort to secure the safety of all residents of the City of Ione.
                   Action NS-2.2.1: Participate in State mutual aid agreements with neighboring
                   cities and counties; State and federal emergency relief agencies; and private
                   enterprises such as Red Cross, Salvation Army and local medical institutions to
                   assist in shelter, relief and first aid operations. Encourage cooperation among
                   adjacent communities to provide backup fire suppression and law enforcement
                   assistance in emergency situations. (Cross reference CIR 2.8)
                   Action NS-2.2.2: Collaborate with Amador County Unified School District and
                   other public entities to offer public safety classes, including but not limited to
                   personal safety, fire safety, and traffic and bicycle safety.
Policy NS-2.3:     Prepare for emergencies and disasters prior to their occurrence.
                   Action NS-2.3.1: Create, adopt and update as needed a local Emergency
                   Management Plan identifying leadership, representatives, coordination and action
                   for responding to emergencies in a timely and efficient manner.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                       August 2009
                                                 6–16

 NOISE & SAFETY
               Action NS-2.3.2: Participate in the Standardized Emergency Management
               System (SEMS) and the National Incident Management System (NIMS) and
               comply with the State of California Emergency Services Act.
               Action NS-2.3.3: Consult with the County and other cities on the update,
               adoption, and implementation of the regional Amador County Multi-Hazard
               Mitigation Plan.
               Action NS-2.3.4: Develop and adopt a pre-disaster ordinance for post-disaster
               recovery and reconstruction that includes provisions for debris clearance,
               damage assessment, demolitions, re-occupancy and building moratorium criteria,
               fee waivers and deferrals and expedited permitting procedures for repair and
               reconstruction.
Policy NS-2.4: Ensure plans are kept current to maintain the City as a safe community in the
               region.
               Action NS-2.4.1: Develop and update risk assessments and emergency
               management provisions to maintain or improve the safety rating of the
               community.
Policy NS-2.5: The City shall require written confirmation from applicable local, regional, state
               and federal agencies that known contaminated sites have been deemed remediated
               to a level appropriate for land uses proposed prior to the City approving site
               development. Alternatively, the City may require applicants to provide an
               approved remediation plan that demonstrates how contamination will be
               remediated prior to site occupancy. This documentation will specify the extent of
               development allowed on the remediated site as well as any special conditions
               and/or restrictions on future land uses.
Policy NS-2.6: Implement measures to address community safety and awareness in the event of
               the escape of potentially violent persons from the Preston Youth Correctional
               Facility or Mule Creek State Prison.
Policy NS-2.7: All new roadway construction projects, or projects requiring new or expanded
               roadways, shall be required to assess impacts to existing railroad crossings and
               provide improvements as necessary to ensure such crossings remain safe for
               vehicles, pedestrians, and bicycles.
GOAL NS-3:     Reduce the possibility of flooding or drainage issues.
Policy NS-3.1: Support and encourage efforts to limit and reduce the potential for community
               flooding from local waterways.
August 2009                                                           City of Ione General Plan
                                           6–17

                                                                     NOISE & SAFETY
                   Action NS-3.1.1: Support the construction of flood control projects to protect
                   residents and properties within the community.
                   Action NS-3.1.2: Participate in the National Flood Insurance Program by
                   updating the Local Floodplain Management Ordinance as necessary to help
                   reduce future flood damage. Participation in the National Flood Insurance
                   Program makes federally backed flood insurance available to homeowners,
                   renters, and business owners in the City of Ione. As part of the update, consider
                   adopting more stringent standards than included in model ordinances as a way of
                   improving flood safety and reducing insurance premiums for property owners.
Policy NS-3.2:     Manage the risk of flooding by discouraging new development in areas which are
                   likely to flood. (Cross reference: LU 1.10, LU 1.11, LU 1.13, LU 1.15, PF 6.1)
                   Action NS-3.2.1: The City shall not approve new development projects that
                   will result in new or increased flooding impacts on adjoining parcels or upstream
                   and downstream areas, unless it can be shown that corresponding improvements
                   to drainage facilities are sufficient to mitigate any potential impacts. Projects
                   shall mitigate for increases in flooding potential through project-related
                   improvements (either on-site or off-site), as approved by the City Engineer.
                   Action NS-3.2.2: The City shall develop specific criteria for development in
                   infill areas of the community at risk of flood damage. Criteria will include
                   specific performance measures needed to protect homes and structures from
                   flood damage, while providing property owners with options for development of
                   properties designated for urban development.
                   Action NS-3.2.3: Preclude development within the 100-year floodplain, as
                   determined by the most recent floodplain mapping available from the Federal
                   Emergency Management Agency or other acceptable source, unless otherwise
                   approved by the City floodplain administrator based on site-specific mitigation.
                   Action NS-3.2.4: On flood-prone parcels, locate development on portions of
                   the site that are not subject to flooding, consistent with other policies of this
                   General Plan or provide an approved grading plan showing no-net-loss of
                   floodplain storage area.
                   Action NS-3.2.5: Require every residential lot to have buildable area sufficient
                   to accommodate a residence and associated structures outside the 100-year
                   floodplain. Discourage the use of fill to create buildable area within the 100-year
                   floodplain, except in extreme circumstances consistent with all other applicable
                   policies and regulations, and after review to determine potential impacts to
                   wildlife, habitat and flooding on other parcels.
                   Action NS-3.2.6: Require vehicular access to the buildable area of all parcels to
                   be at or above the ten-year floodplain elevation.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                   6–18

 NOISE & SAFETY
               Action NS-3.2.7: Preclude the creation of lots whose access will be inundated
               by flows resulting from a ten-year or greater storm event. Bridges or similar
               structures may be used to provide access over creeks or inundated areas, subject
               to applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
               Action NS-3.2.8: Prohibit new and modified bridge structures that will cause
               an increase in water surface elevations of the 100-year floodplain, unless analysis
               clearly indicates that the physical and/or economic use of affected properties will
               not be adversely affected.
               Action NS-3.2.9: The City shall consider including mitigation measures to
               reduce impacts related to significant storm events and flooding resulting from
               global climate change, as applicable.
Policy NS-3.3: Discourage the creation of new parcels when the presence of easements,
               floodplain, marsh or riparian habitat and/or other features would leave insufficient
               land to build and operate structures. This policy shall not apply to open space lots
               specifically created for dedication to the City or another appropriate party for
               habitat protection, flood control, drainage or wetland maintenance. (Cross reference:
               LU 1.10, LU 1.11, LU 1.13, LU 1.15)
Policy NS-3.4: Ensure that adequate drainage exists for both existing and new development.
               Action NS-3.4.1: Require all new urban development projects to either
               incorporate runoff control measures to minimize peak flows of runoff or
               otherwise implement comprehensive drainage plans. (Cross reference: PF 3.1.4, PF
               3.1.5)
               Action NS-3.4.2: Maintain drainage facilities in order to ensure their proper
               operation during storms.
GOAL NS-4:     Reduce the risk of adverse effects to residents or businesses as
               a result of geologic or seismic instability.
Policy NS-4.1: Support efforts by federal, state, and local jurisdictions to investigate local seismic
               and geologic hazards and support those programs that effectively mitigate seismic
               and safety hazards.
               Action NS-4.1.1: Continue to implement the California Building Code to
               ensure that structures meet all applicable seismic standards.
Policy NS-4.2: Ensure that new structures are protected from damage caused by geologic and/or
               soil conditions to the greatest extent feasible.
August 2009                                                                City of Ione General Plan
                                             6–19

                                                                   NOISE & SAFETY
                   Action NS-4.2.1: Continue to require that all new construction projects
                   complete a geotechnical report or conduct other appropriate analysis to
                   determine the soils characteristics and associated development constraints and
                   impose appropriate measures for geologically sensitive areas.
GOAL NS-5:         Reduce serious harm to residents, employees, or the
                   environment as the result of an accidental release of toxic or
                   hazardous substances.
Policy NS-5.1:     Work with public agencies and private companies to identify and work towards
                   elimination of potential hazardous releases and comply with state and federal laws.
Policy NS-5.2:     Consider the potential impact of hazardous facilities on the public and/or adjacent
                   or nearby properties.
                   Action NS-5.2.1: Adopt and update local standards, if necessary, above state
                   and federal requirements, for maximum acceptable exposure for the evaluation
                   of hazardous facilities for potential to create hazardous physical effects on-site
                   and at off-site locations that could result in death, significant injury, or significant
                   property damage.
Policy NS-5.3:     Ensure the safe storage of hazardous materials and waste. (Cross reference: CO 4.3.1)
                   Action NS-5.3.1: During the review and approval process for development
                   plans and building permits, ensure that secondary containment is provided for
                   hazardous and toxic materials. (Cross reference: CO 4.3.4 )
                   Action NS-5.3.2: Require all sites that are suspected or known to contain
                   hazardous materials and/or are identified in a hazardous material/waste search
                   to be reviewed, tested, and remediated for potential hazardous materials in
                   accordance with all local, state, and federal regulations.
Policy NS-5.4:     Ensure that all industrial facilities are constructed, maintained, and operated in
                   accordance with current safety and environmental protection standards.
                   Action NS-5.4.1: Support the continued               enforcement       of    permitting
                   requirements for radioactive materials.
                   Action NS-5.4.2: Enforce public safety standards for the use of radioactive
                   materials, including the placarding of transport vehicles.
Policy NS-5.5:     Ensure public contact with hazardous or toxic materials is limited to the greatest
                   extent possible.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                     August 2009
                                               6–20

 NOISE & SAFETY
               Action NS-5.5.1: Require industries which store and process hazardous or
               toxic materials to provide a buffer zone between the materials and the property
               boundaries; the buffer zone must be sufficient to protect public safety, as
               determined by the City.
               Action NS-5.5.2: Consider the impact of proposed industrial development
               projects with respect to transport of hazardous materials within the city. Locate
               uses requiring substantial transport of hazardous materials to direct such traffic
               away from the city’s residential and commercial areas.
               Action NS-5.5.3: Consult with the Amador County Unified School District in
               the siting of new school facilities, allowing for the location of such facilities at the
               necessary distances from rail lines, hazardous materials sites, and highways, as
               determined by the California Department of Education and Government Code
               standards.
               Action NS-5.5.4: Projects requiring a grading permit or a building permit that
               would result in any earth disturbance that is located in an area likely to contain
               naturally-occurring asbestos (based on mapping developed by the DOC) shall
               prepare an Asbestos Hazard Dust Mitigation Plan that addresses the handling
               and remediation for NOA sites in accordance with all local, state, and federal
               regulations for potential hazardous materials. The Asbestos Hazard Dust
               Mitigation Plan shall include practices to eliminate, to the greatest extent
               possible, the emission of fugitive dust from grading, excavation, and construction
               activity in order to protect workers and area residents.
Policy NS-5.6: Ensure that procedures are in place to reduce the chance of accidents in the
               transport of hazardous materials.
               Action NS-5.6.1: Continue to consult with California Emergency Management
               Agency, the State Department of Toxic Substances Control, the State Highway
               Patrol, Amador County, and other appropriate agencies in hazardous materials
               route planning and incident response.
               Action NS-5.6.2: Request that state and federal agencies that regulate the
               transportation of hazardous materials review regulations and procedures, in
               cooperation with the City, to determine means of mitigating the public safety
               hazard in urbanized areas.
August 2009                                                                City of Ione General Plan
                                            6–21

                                                                     NOISE & SAFETY
GOAL NS-6:         Design neighborhoods and buildings in a manner that prevents
                   crime and provides security and safety for people and property.
Policy NS-6.1:     Use Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) principles in the
                   design of projects and buildings. (Cross reference: CIR 2.4.3)
                   Action NS-6.1.1: Adopt, and update as necessary, development standards and
                   design provisions consistent with current Crime Prevention Through
                   Environmental Design (CPTED) guidelines. Specifically, incorporate provisions
                   to address the following:
                   •   Natural Surveillance. Intended to keep intruders easily observable, natural
                       surveillance provisions maximize visibility of people, parking areas, and
                       building entrances (e.g., doors and windows that look out on to streets and
                       parking areas, pedestrian-friendly sidewalks and streets, front porches,
                       adequate nighttime lighting).
                   •   Territorial Reinforcement. Physical design can create or extend a sphere of
                       influence. Users then develop a sense of territorial control while potential
                       offenders, perceiving this control, are discouraged. This design concept is
                       implemented by features that define property lines and distinguish private
                       spaces from public spaces using landscape plantings, pavement designs,
                       gateway treatments, and fences.
                   •   Natural Access Control. A design concept directed primarily at decreasing
                       crime opportunity by denying access to crime targets and creating a
                       perception of risk for offenders. This design concept is achieved by
                       designing streets, sidewalks, building entrances, and neighborhood gateways
                       to clearly indicate public routes, and also by discouraging access to private
                       areas with structural elements.
                   •   Target Hardening. This is accomplished by adding features that prohibit
                       entry or access, including window locks, dead bolts for doors, and interior
                       door hinges.
Policy NS-6.2:     Implement measures to minimize future roadway conflicts within urbanized areas.
                   Action NS-6.2.1: Partner with Caltrans, Amador County, and ACTC to realign
                   (or otherwise remove) state highways away from the downtown area.
City of Ione General Plan                                                               August 2009
                                                6–22

 NOISE & SAFETY
GOAL NS-7:     Reduce the probability of fire damage to structures.
Policy NS-7.1: The City shall ensure that the Ione Fire
               Department has sufficient resources
               and capabilities to reduce fire hazards,
               assist in fire suppression, and ensure
               efficient emergency medical response.
               (Cross reference: PF 13.1)
               Action NS-7.1.1: Continue to review
               new development for adequate water
               supply and pressure, fire hydrants, and
               access to structures by fire fighting                       Fire Service
               equipment and personnel. (Cross reference: PF 13.2)
               Action NS-7.1.2: Continue to review projects for compliance with the Fire
               Code as part of the building permit process.
               Action NS-7.1.3: The Fire Department shall develop high visibility fire
               prevention programs, including those that provide voluntary home inspections
               and increase awareness of home fire prevention measures.
               Action NS-7.1.4: Require on-site fire suppression systems for new commercial
               and industrial development, as well as multi-family residential development with
               five or more units, to reduce the dependence on fire department equipment and
               personnel.
               Action NS-7.1.5: Continue to maintain, periodically update, and test the
               effectiveness of the City’s Emergency Management Plan.
               Action NS-7.1.6: Require the installation of earthquake-triggered automatic gas
               shut-off sensors in high-occupancy facilities and in industrial and commercial
               structures.
               Action NS-7.1.7: Continue to enforce all codes and ordinances regarding fire
               protection, including building inspection and vegetation management.
               Action NS-7.1.8: Coordinate the design and installation of traffic control and
               calming measures to minimize impacts on emergency vehicle responses.
               Action NS-7.1.9: The City shall require that future projects are not initiated
               without assurance from the Fire Department that sufficient service capacity
               exists for fire protection and emergency medical services. Service capacity
               considers the proximity of fire stations, availability of personnel and equipment,
August 2009                                                               City of Ione General Plan
                                           6–23

                                                                   NOISE & SAFETY
                   water flow and pressure to the site, and adherence to Fire District construction
                   and design requirements. Mitigation as part of the CEQA process is an
                   acceptable method of providing service capacity upgrades to meet fire
                   department needs.
Policy NS-7.2:     All new development shall provide adequate improvements to meet fire flow
                   requirements established by the City. (Cross reference: PF 1.3, PF 1.3.1)
Policy NS-7.3:     Ensure adequate and appropriate mitigation fees to fund fire protection and
                   emergency medical response facilities. (Cross reference: PF 1.3, PF 1.3.1)
Policy NS-7.4:     Reduce the risks associated with wildfires in and around the City.
                   Action NS-7.4.1: Establish fire safe regulations for all new housing
                   developments in areas with high potential for wildfires; to be applied to all such
                   development. Measures shall include brush clearing, planting guidelines, and
                   other measures to reduce the risk of person or property damage in the event of
                   wildfires.
                   Action NS-7.4.2: Set standards for commercial development within areas of
                   Urban Wildland Interface in order to reduce the potential for loss, damage, or
                   personal injury in the event of wildfires. Standards will include appropriate
                   vegetation, brush clearing and other measures.
GOAL NS-8:         Reduce Risks Associated with local surface mining.
Policy NS-8.1:     Ensure public contact with surface mining operations is limited to the maximum
                   extent possible. (Cross reference: CO 5.2)
Policy NS-8.2:     Work with State and federal agencies to ensure proper permitting of any surface
                   mining operations and the safe closure of any mining operations that are ceasing
                   operations.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                     August 2009
                                                  6–24

 NOISE & SAFETY
                FIGURE 6-2: EXISTING NOISE CONTOURS
August 2009                                         City of Ione General Plan
                               6–25

                                         NOISE & SAFETY
This page intentionally left blank.
City of Ione General Plan                           August 2009
                                    6–26

 NOISE & SAFETY
                FIGURE 6-3: FUTURE NOISE CONTOURS
August 2009                                       City of Ione General Plan
                              6–27

                                         NOISE & SAFETY
This page intentionally left blank.
City of Ione General Plan                           August 2009
                                    6–28

  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Economic Development Element of the General Plan is directed toward creating and
maintaining a healthy, diverse economy in Ione that provides a broad range of economic
opportunity for all residents. Economic development hinges on the most basic needs of the
community, including provision of jobs, creation of tax revenues,
and provision of goods and services to the local population. Please turn to Page 7-2 for a
Concentrating efforts on economic development provides more complete listing of contents
retail, commercial, shopping, and job opportunities for Ione covered in this Element, with
                                                                          page number references.
residents and produces more revenue, allowing the City to provide
higher levels of service. Besides benefiting the City, the process of
economic development also increases economic opportunity for local businesses and property
owners. Economic tools are necessary to help revive existing buildings, stimulate new commercial
development and catalyze projects, and meet the needs and desires of residents. Ione will promote
economic development as a way to provide local commercial and employment opportunities, reduce
retail sales leakage to other communities, and improve the quality of life for all City residents.
August 2009                                                                   City of Ione General Plan
                                                7–1

                                              ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                                        IN THIS SECTION
      •   Introduction (Page 7-1)
      •   Vision (Page 7-2)
      •   Purpose (Page 7-2)
      •   Related Plans and Programs (Page 7-3)
      •   Relationship to Other General Plan Elements (Page 7-3)
      •   Setting, Issues and Considerations (Page 7-4)
      •   Issues This Element Attempts to Solve (Page 7-6)
      •   Goals Policies & Actions (Page 7-6)
VISION
As Ione continues to grow, infrastructure and services will support the increasing population and
allow for new commercial retail, office, and general business development. The City will develop
high wage jobs in key economic sectors, such as mining and industry, which benefit both the
business community and the local workforce. The City will focus business attraction, retention, and
expansion efforts on key economic sectors that have the greatest likelihood of success given local
conditions. The local economy of Ione is based on both economic conditions and the unique
history of the community. Cultural resources and the rich heritage and historical character found in
the downtown area remain important features of the City. Special resources such as the Preston
Castle persist as places residents and visitors of the community travel to, both for special events and
to simply enjoy the setting. The natural beauty of the community and its surroundings is a key part
of the community’s identity, and serves as an asset in promoting economic development. The City
will maintain and enhance community quality of life as a key competitive advantage in creating jobs
and business growth.
PURPOSE
This Economic Development Element identifies the City’s strengths and weaknesses as it seeks to
provide a full range of employment, housing, retail/service, and entertainment options to residents.
This Element establishes goals, policies, and actions to improve the City’s prosperity, maintain
regional competitiveness, ensure accessibility to assets, market the City, and encourage more
commercial development and job generating land uses within Ione.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                  August 2009
                                                  7–2

  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
The Economic Development Element relates to several other plans and programs, including the
following:
A Study in Economic Development Strategies for the City of Ione
(2003)
This report contains an analysis of the market potential for business development within with City,
and in particular, the downtown area. The study also forecasts the future outcome of the retail
potential of the City. It identifies retail market demands, what can be supported, and what areas
need improvement to attract adequate retail businesses. This study also makes suggestions for how
the City can work towards these goals in the future, such as incentives and other measures.
Development Impact Fee Study
The City maintains a Development Impact Fee (DIF) Schedule to apply costs associated with service
provision to new developments as they occur. Areas of service including police, fire, emergency
medical service, water, sewer, schools, roadways, City facilities and other infrastructure and services
were considered in the DIF. Regular updates to the DIF Schedule are needed as conditions and
costs change over time.
City of Ione Downtown Revitalization Plan
The Downtown Revitalization Plan was adopted in May 1994. The intent of the plan is to examine
the business climate, land use and infrastructure issues, and to provide a retail and tourism market
analysis as part of the development of a comprehensive strategy for implementing downtown
revitalization. The goals of the Plan include creating a framework for future efforts, to include the
City government, private businesses, and interested citizens and to make the performance of the
business sector a priority. While the general goals of this plan are still relevant, other plans, including
this General Plan, a future Redevelopment Plan, and master planning for the downtown will take
precedence in efforts to develop and improve downtown Ione.
Business and Community Associations
The business and community associations work with the City to promote downtown business
development. The associations encourage economic development through city beautification,
hosting events, and provides marketing for local businesses.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
Economic prosperity requires an adequate supply of land and uses, a strong, adequately trained local
workforce, trade opportunities, a sound infrastructure system, and financing mechanisms. This
Economic Development Element is tied to the Land Use Element through policies related to lot
coverage, density, intensity, and infill of underutilized properties. The Public Facilities Element
August 2009                                                                      City of Ione General Plan
                                                 7–3

                                             ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
relates to the Economic Development Element in establishing goals and policies for the City’s
infrastructure improvements, community services, and public facilities. This Element is also closely
related to the Circulation Element, which contains policies related to improving circulation and
access that support economic development.
SETTING, ISSUES, AND CONSIDERATIONS
RETAIL AND SERVICES
Ensuring sufficient retail and service commercial facilities
is an overarching need of the City. The two primary
shopping areas within the central core of Ione,
downtown and the small shopping center adjacent to
downtown, do not provide complete basic needs,
resulting in residents frequently shopping in other cities.
Various strategies and reports have been utilized in the
City in years past to entice additional retail and service
development, with limited success.
                                                                    Shopping Center adjacent to downtown
Ione’s commercial core generally runs a few blocks along Main Street. An expansion of the
downtown area could include additional blocks along Jackson Street, providing greater retail and
office opportunities. The existing retail buildings and assets are aging, but considered a part of the
charm of Ione’s historic downtown character. Revitalization and intensification of the downtown
would improve the overall image and atmosphere within Ione and would make the downtown more
vibrant and economically stable. Expansion of the downtown retail area would need to consider the
renovation and refurbishment of existing buildings, as well as development standards necessary to
entice development and reuse of such facilities and parking
SMALL TOWN QUALITY OF LIFE
Ione’s small population, central downtown area, and numerous historic resources provide residents
and visitors with a sense of community and local character. While the City aims to make room for
more development, economic development efforts will balance the needs of the existing population
and the anticipated growth. Downtown businesses will remain focused on providing goods and
services to the residents of Ione.
ENTERTAINMENT AND TOURISM
The City is seeking additional means of providing both entertainment to its residents and regional
attractors to increase tourism and visitation to the community. These are high priorities for both
downtown and Citywide commercial development, as established in community meetings and via
direction provided by the City Council.
The Castle Oaks Golf Course is one of two golf courses located in Amador County that attracts
visitors from throughout the region. Howard Park and the Ed Hughes Memorial Arena provide a
City of Ione General Plan                                                                         August 2009
                                                 7–4

  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
wide range of recreation opportunities which bring people to Ione. Howard Park includes regional
sports facilities for soccer and baseball. The Arena hosts many special events for local and regional
groups, drawing visitors to the City. Ione’s scenic vistas and open spaces draw bicyclers to the
region. Additionally, Ione has several historical attractions, including the Preston School of Industry
(known as The Castle) and the historic downtown. There are several lakes in the region with fishing,
camping, and boating, such as Pardee Reservoir, Camanche Reservoir, and Lake Amador. Special
events in Ione include Ione Homecoming (an annual community picnic celebration and parade at
Howard Park), street fairs, Christmas parade, and other community celebrations and gatherings. As
Ione grows, these attractions can provide a backbone to tourism-generated income.
EMPLOYMENT
Major employers in the City include the State of California, who employs workers at the Mule Creek
State Prison, the Preston Youth Correctional Facility, and the CAL FIRE Training Academy. Since
these state facilities operate at all times and bring workers from throughout the region, many
opportunities exist for attracting these employee’s retail and restaurant spending. Additional
employers within the City and the surrounding area include mining and agricultural operations and
community service employment. Development opportunities exist for industrial and office
development in the Industrial Park and Triangle Policy areas (see Land Use Element), and for office
uses downtown, in the Preston Reuse Policy Area (see Land Use Element), and other parts of the
City. As these areas are developed or intensified, more employment opportunities will become
available in the City.
HISTORIC SITES
The Preston Castle is a treasured resource and attraction for the City of Ione. Built between 1890
and 1894, the Castle is the most significant example of Romanesque Revival architecture in the
Mother Lode. The facility is listed as California Registered Historical Landmark No. 867 and on the
National Register of Historic Places (NPS-75000422). It was originally built to house the Preston
School of Industry. However, new facilities were completed for the school in 1960 and the castle
was closed.
Additional historic sites and features of the City include the Ed Hughes Memorial Arena and
racetrack, located at Howard Park. The racetrack is one of the oldest of its kind still in existence.
Additionally, the Ione Community Cemetery, next to Howard Park on Church Street, reflects the
pioneer history of Ione and dates back to 1852. Numerous buildings in downtown Ione represent
Ione’s history and present a resource and attraction for the City.
August 2009                                                                   City of Ione General Plan
                                                 7–5

                                               ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
ISSUES THIS ELEMENT ATTEMPTS TO SOLVE
This Element provides goals, policies, and actions that address the following issues, many of which
were raised at public meetings during creation of the General Plan:
    •    Downtown buildings are a treasured historic resource, and maintenance and preservation of
         such resources are critical to the success of downtown.
    •    Sales revenues which could support the community are being lost as shoppers travel to
         surrounding areas to make many purchases.
    •    Ione provides attractions for tourists but lacks sufficient entertainment and dining options to
         support residents and visitors to the community.
    •    Parking requirements in downtown are a negative factor for attracting businesses to Ione.
    •    The City should achieve a jobs-housing balance by ensuring a balanced supply of job
         generating land uses and residential uses.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
The goals of this element are as follows and are listed subsequently with corresponding policies and
actions:
GOAL ED-1: Diversify Ione’s economy by facilitating and encouraging land
                     uses providing substantial and sustainable fiscal benefits to the
                     City and residents.
Policy ED-1.1:       The City shall ensure an adequate supply of commercially viable land for future
                     development.
                     Action ED-1.1.1: As part of the General Plan Annual Report, identify need for
                     additional locations for office, industrial and retail uses.
                     Action ED-1.1.2: Target grants, redevelopment programs, and other incentives
                     to underutilized and vacant sites more adequately suited for vibrant and successful
                     revenue-generating uses.
                     Action ED-1.1.3: The City shall pursue annexation of lands within the Sphere of
                     Influence as necessary to ensure an adequate supply of developable land,
                     consistent with LAFCo proceedings. (Cross reference: LU 1.4, LU 1.5)
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                   7–6

 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Policy ED-1.2: The City shall improve the viability of commercial retail and office space within
               the community.
               Action ED-1.2.1: Offer incentives to business owners and property owners for
               facade improvements, historic rehabilitation, and other building improvement
               programs in the downtown.
Policy ED-1.3: The City shall support the retention and ongoing operation of mining and
               industrial uses within and around the City, including the successful neighboring of
               such uses with surrounding areas.
               Action ED-1.3.1: Actively work with property owners and developers to
               facilitate development of the planned industrial and office parks in the Industrial
               Park and Triangle Policy Areas south of the central City and elsewhere as
               designated by this General Plan. (Cross reference: LU 1.10, LU 1.17)
               Action ED-1.3.2: Foster retail and restaurant uses to support new industrial and
               office development.
               Action ED-1.3.3: Require heavy industrial uses and mining to include transitions
               in intensity, buffers, or other methods to reduce potential impacts on residential
               uses. Buffers may include land designated for other uses, such as agriculture,
               commercial, or open spaces.
Policy ED-1.4: The City shall support non-profit business and merchant associations which aim to
               promote a strong business base, encourage joint marketing, and improve the City’s
               business climate.
               Action ED-1.4.1: Collaborate with local businesses and merchant associations to
               promote and advertise local events and attractions.
               Action ED-1.4.2: Work with local non-profit and historical preservation groups
               and others to identify potential tourism-oriented market opportunities and to
               develop strong links between local businesses and regional tourist markets.
Policy ED-1.5: The City shall provide a variety of housing types within and around Ione to
               support a diverse economy, including entry-level housing, senior housing options,
               and executive housing. (Cross reference: H 5.5.1)
Policy ED-1.6: The City shall update the Zoning Code to provide flexibility within the downtown
               and downtown transition areas to facilitate economic development, including
               home-based businesses and telecommuting. (Cross reference: LU 2.1.3)
August 2009                                                                City of Ione General Plan
                                            7–7

                                              ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
GOAL ED-2: Encourage expansion of retail and services to meet local
                   demands and generate tax revenues for the City.
Policy ED-2.1:     The City shall support and foster increased commercial activity among businesses
                   within the community. . (Cross reference: LU 2.3.1)
                   Action ED-2.1.1: Work with local business organizations, merchant groups, and
                   local brokers and developers to attract companies that will serve Ione’s specialty
                   retail, some regional needs (e.g., electronics, home décor, crafts and art, fashion-
                   oriented department stores, children’s stores, beauty and spa), and other amenities
                   to serve the community (e.g., restaurants, coffee shops, specialty businesses,
                   ethnically diverse enterprises, and services).
Policy ED-2.2:     The City shall strategically locate regional retail and commercial properties to take
                   advantage of the local and regional transportation corridors (e.g., State Routes 104
                   and 124).
Policy ED-2.3:     The City shall identify and target retail expansion and attraction efforts on
                   companies and institutions that provide jobs with benefits and competitive wages
                   for Ione residents. (Cross reference: LU 2.3.1)
Policy ED-2.4:     The City shall promote local Ione businesses by encouraging residents and
                   employees to obtain their goods and services locally.
Policy ED-2.5:     The City shall promote its growing labor force and availability of both land and
                   infrastructure as assets to attract new businesses to the community.
GOAL ED-3: Revitalize downtown and other existing businesses with a mix
                   of uses and gathering places and attractions for daytime and
                   nighttime activities.
Policy ED-3.1:     The City shall continue to improve the downtown in order to create an
                   economically diverse and financially successful district with offices, businesses,
                   retail, services, entertainment, residential uses, and public spaces. (Cross reference: LU
                   1.9)
                   Action ED-3.1.1: Encourage re-occupation              of  existing    buildings     within
                   downtown. (Cross reference: LU 3.1.1)
City of Ione General Plan                                                                      August 2009
                                                  7–8

 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
               Action ED-3.1.2: Prepare a Downtown
               Marketing        Plan     or      Economic
               Development Plan that targets potential
               new businesses, including restaurants,
               retail, high quality commercial, and
               entertainment venues.
               Action ED-3.1.3: Promote “buy local”
               campaigns to encourage Ione residents to
               shop in Ione’s businesses instead of
               traveling to other communities to make                      Downtown Ione
               purchases.
               Action ED-3.1.4: Complete an assessment of infrastructure deficiencies in the
               downtown and ensure that infrastructure is adequate to support planned intensity
               and density of land uses, including provision of adequate parking. (Cross reference:
               PF 1.1, CIR 1.8)
               Action ED-3.1.5: When historic architectural resources that are either listed in or
               determined eligible for inclusion in the NRHP or the CRHR, or the local historical
               registry, are proposed for demolition or modification, require an evaluation of the
               proposal to determine whether the project proposal would result in an adverse
               impact on the historic resource. If an adverse impact to the resource is identified,
               feasible measures shall be identified to mitigate the impact, which may include
               modification of the design, reuse of the structure, or avoidance of the structure.
               Action ED-3.1.6: Promote community participation in the preservation of
               historic resources in the City.
Policy ED-3.2: The City shall encourage an entertainment district in downtown, with a theater
               complex, restaurants, and other entertainment uses.
Policy ED-3.3: The City shall use Redevelopment and other financial tools to enhance economic
               development. (Cross reference: CIR 3.3, H 4.4, LU 3.1.6)
               Action ED-3.3.1: Create and utilize a Redevelopment Agency to coordinate and
               implement downtown improvement projects.
               Action ED-3.3.2: Finalize the City’s Redevelopment Plan and establish a
               Redevelopment District within Ione.
               Action ED-3.3.3: Work with property owners and developers to attract private
               investment to redevelopment sites.
August 2009                                                               City of Ione General Plan
                                             7–9

                                              ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                   Action ED-3.3.4: Supplement private and public funds through use of
                   Community Development Block Grants and other outside funding mechanisms
                   whenever possible to stimulate economic development in the City.
Policy ED-3.4:     The City shall utilize infrastructure strategies that support development in infill
                   areas including vacant and under utilized lots within the downtown area. (Cross
                   reference: H 4.5)
                   Action ED-3.4.1: Continue to revise the Zoning Code to provide flexibility for
                   special infill and redevelopment situations including incentives for development
                   within the downtown area. (Cross reference: CIR 1.8.1)
GOAL ED-4: Attract and retain a balance of businesses that provide a full
                   range of quality career choices, serving entry-level as well as
                   highly trained workers
Policy ED-4.1:     The City shall increase the number of jobs within Ione by coordinating economic
                   development efforts with the needs of local businesses.
                   Action ED-4.1.1: Provide labor market information to local educational
                   institutions and youth and adult training agencies for planning and curricula
                   purposes on an annual basis.
                   Action ED-4.1.2: Promote and support business activities that support schools,
                   such as school partnerships, City student internships, faculty internships, and job
                   shadowing.
                   Action ED-4.1.3: Foster an on-going connection with existing industries to
                   retain businesses by effectively responding to concerns, whenever possible.
Policy ED-4.2:     The City shall encourage Ione residents and employees to live and work in the
                   community.
                   Action ED-4.2.1: Work with local businesses and merchant groups to support
                   “jobs first” and “first hire” programs to optimize hiring Ione residents.
                   Action ED-4.2.2: Promote housing development for all income-levels which are
                   compatible with the employment opportunities within the City. (Cross reference: H
                   4.2)
Policy ED-4.3:     The City shall establish programs to attract new businesses.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                 7–10

 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
               Action ED-4.3.1: Annually update the Framework for Planning, Entitlement
               Review, and Development, providing developers and interested landowners with
               the information necessary to quickly apply for development permits within the
               City.
               Action ED-4.3.2: Identify target businesses and retail sectors which will be most
               compatible with the needs of the community and the existing business and retail
               options available to residents.
               Action ED-4.3.3: Establish a process or program to provide expedited review of
               development applications for targeted projects in key development sites.
GOAL ED-5: Promote the City as a regional destination with a recognizable
               City identity and brand, while retaining the small town quality
               of life.
Policy ED-5.1: The City shall increase the number of visitors to Ione by promoting the many
               attractions and activities within the City.
               Action ED-5.1.1: Partner             with
               regional tourist destinations to
               promote Ione as a family destination
               or day-trip from nearby hotels,
               wineries, and casinos.
               Action ED-5.1.2: Advertise the many
               activities and diverse resources of Ione
               including, but not limited to, the
               Castle, historic downtown, Howard
               Park,        equestrian opportunities,
               wineries, golfing, bicycling, lakes,                      The Castle
               fishing, camping and other outdoor
               recreational opportunities.
               Action ED-5.1.3: Create a recognizable city brand, which emulates the resources
               of the community and draws interest from a diverse population of visitors.
Policy ED-5.2: The city shall protect and enhance the historic character of the downtown. (Cross
               reference: LU 1.9)
               Action ED-5.2.1: Identify programs such as historic tax credits which could
               provide support to the City’s preservation efforts.
August 2009                                                             City of Ione General Plan
                                             7–11

                                             ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                   Action ED-5.2.2: Seek out grants and participate in federal and state historic
                   preservation programs, including Main Street USA and Preserve America, in order
                   to provide funding and resources for downtown redevelopment and improvement.
                   Action ED-5.2.3: Develop historic preservation and sign ordinances that allow
                   flexibility to property owners to maintain and enhance their buildings downtown
                   while preserving their historic character.
                   Action ED-5.2.4: Develop pattern books and other design manuals to assist
                   property owners in developing effective and cost efficient façade enhancements of
                   existing buildings.
Policy ED-5.3:     The City shall enhance entertainment options for residents and visitors.
                   Action ED-5.3.1: Work with local businesses to host special events within the
                   downtown and at key attractions, such as Howard Park and the Castle.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                 August 2009
                                               7–12

  PUBLIC FACILITIES
INTRODUCTION
Creating a successful, healthy community requires good land use
planning, development of sound infrastructure systems, and the Please turn to Page 8-2 for a
provision of public services to meet the needs of the community. complete listing of contents
This Element of the Ione General Plan addresses issues related to the covered in this Element, with
                                                                          page number references.
public facilities serving the community. The setting and known issues
related to these topics is described, and frames the goals and policies
set forth to address such issues. Additional information related to the setting can be found in the
General Plan Background Report, bound under a separate cover. Goals, policies and action items are
identified which ensure that the planned local government services are adequate to serve the
community and to meet expectations and needs of residents and businesses.
This Element of the General Plan addresses the following public facilities:
    •    Water Service;                                 •   Civic Buildings;
    •    Sewer Service;                                 •   Electricity & Gas;
    •    Stormwater Drainage;                           •   Communications;
    •    Solid Waste;                                   •   Police and Fire Protection
    •    Public Schools & Libraries                     •   Cemeteries
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                                8–1

                                                                PUBLIC FACILITIES
                                            IN THIS SECTION
       •    Introduction (Page 8-1)
       •    Vision (Page 8-2)
       •    Purpose (Page 8-3)
       •    Related Agencies, Plans and Programs (Page 8-3)
       •    Relationship to Other General Plan Elements (Page 8-6)
       •    Setting, Issues, and Considerations (Page 8-6)
       •    Issues this Element Attempts to Solve (Page 8-11)
       •    Goals, Policies, and Actions (Page 8-11)
VISION
Ione’s public facilities and infrastructure will continue to be able to adequately serve the demands of
the community. Public facilities in Ione will continue to support and enhance the quality of life for
residents and the ongoing success of industry and commerce. The current infrastructure and
facilities should remain in excellent condition to serve all residents, workers, and visitors. In
addition, long-term planning and future development activities will guide the expansion of public
facilities and services.
All properties within the City will have adequate utility service, including water, sewer, drainage,
solid waste, electrical and natural gas systems to support the population and protect property and the
environment. The City will strive to resolve any infrastructure and facilities issues with other
agencies through partnerships and collaboration. Ione will have adequate capacity for water
demands, sewer treatment, and storm water drainage.
Quality education will be available to people of all ages. School and library facilities will meet the
needs of a growing population. New schools will be built to serve neighborhoods and school plans
will be designed with shared facilities (such as gyms, parks, and libraries) to reduce cost and optimize
use. Events and activities coordinated with local and regional schools will support a cohesive social
community within the City. Adults may continue life long learning and vocational training at a local
community college, preferably located in Ione.
Ione will provide high quality, reliable, and quick emergency response and public safety services.
Proactive efforts, such as patrols, inspections, and risk management, will reduce the number of
emergencies. In addition, faster and better response will ensure that lives are saved and property is
protected.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                    August 2009
                                                     8–2

  PUBLIC FACILITIES
PURPOSE
The Public Facilities Element identifies the types and levels of service necessary to support a healthy
and viable community. Public services are an important part of the health and well-being of the
community, as everyone depends on their provision. The goals, policies, and action items provided
in this element will ensure that the City provides high levels of reliable service to its residents,
workers, and visitors.
RELATED AGENCIES, PLANS AND PROGRAMS
The related agencies, plans, and programs section provides a brief summary of the other factors that
may influence how the City’s General Plan policies are implemented.
CITY OF IONE
Capital Improvement Program (CIP)
The City of Ione maintains a CIP that identifies multi-year capital projects and equipment purchases
that will enhance the City’s major facilities and operations. The CIP also includes planning schedules
and identifies potential financing options.
Wastewater Master Plan
The City of Ione is pursuing a Wastewater Master Plan, which will include proposals for wastewater
service provision in the City. The Master Plan will address wastewater treatment, disposal, and reuse
facility needs. The Plan will include steps to meet treatment requirements, determine repair and
replacement needs, and improve reliability and performance of wastewater facilities.
City of Ione Police Department
The Ione City Police Department (PD) provides law enforcement services, including traffic
enforcement, patrol, and investigation. The Ione PD relies on Amador County Sheriff’s Office for
specialized team services. The Ione PD jurisdiction includes all areas within the City limits and it
provides mutual aid to the Sheriff’s office for the unincorporated area within the City’s SOI, as well
as a larger service area. As areas are annexed into the City, they are served by the Ione PD.
City of Ione Fire Department
The City of Ione Fire Department (FD) provides fire prevention, fire protection, fire suppression,
basic life support (BLS), low-angle rescue, and water rescue services. For calls involving emergency
medical services, FD provides BLS response until American Legion Ambulance Service arrives to
perform advanced life support and ambulance transport. The FD provides services to all areas
within the city limits, including both of the prisons and the state fire academy (all are located within
the city limits), plus a primary response area defined through an automatic aid agreement with
Amador Fire Protection District. Emergency calls for the entire County are received by the Amador
August 2009                                                                    City of Ione General Plan
                                                  8–3

                                                             PUBLIC FACILITIES
County Sheriff’s Office, which transfers calls to the fire dispatch center at CAL FIRE in Camino.
The FD is then dispatched for all calls within its primary response area.
The FD has a Master Plan with set goals and objectives to outline its future. The Master Plan lists
out specific time frames for implementing certain tasks, based on an immediate, short, medium, and
long range plans spanning up to 20 years. Typical goals include specifying equipment needs, staffing
goals, improving fire protection coverage, infrastructure upgrades, and new facilities.
AMADOR COUNTY & REGION
Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo) of Amador County
LAFCos are State-mandated quasi-judicial countywide commissions. They oversee boundary
changes of cities and special districts, the formation of new agencies, and the consolidation or
reorganization of special districts and cities. Amador LAFCo will consider any subsequent changes
to the City’s Sphere of Influence boundary, annexation requests, or changes to service districts or
boundaries affecting the City.
Amador County Sheriff’s Office
The Amador County Sheriff’s Office (ACSO) provides patrol, investigation and dispatch services.
The Sheriff’s Office serves areas outside of the city, and is also responsible for responding to law
enforcement calls and provides patrol and investigative services in unincorporated Amador County.
ACSO also provides emergency 911, law enforcement, and ambulance dispatch services throughout
Amador County, and operates the Amador County Jail.
Amador County Unified School District (ACUSD)
The City of Ione is served by the Amador County Unified School District (ACUSD). ACUSD
operates two public schools, Ione Elementary and Ione Junior High, within the City limits.
Amador Water Agency
Water service to Ione is provided by the Amador Water Agency (AWA). The City gets its water
from the Tanner Reservoir, transported via the Ione Pipeline, to the Ione Water Treatment Plant,
where the water is treated and distributed to residents.
Amador Water Agency Urban Water Management Plan
The Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP) is utilized by the AWA for the management of the
Agency’s water supplies and water demands covering a range of normal and drought conditions. The
UWMP provides information and protections regarding water supply availability and future water
demands for AWA’s service areas.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                August 2009
                                                 8–4

  PUBLIC FACILITIES
Amador County Solid Waste Management Regional Agency
The Regional Agency is composed of representatives from each jurisdiction in Amador County and
manages the solid waste contracts. Solid waste services are contracted out to private service
providers.
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) is the only electrical and natural gas service provider in
the area and has the facilities to transmit and distribute electricity and natural gas.
AT&T
AT&T is the only local wired telephone service provider in the area and has the facilities to provide
telephone service.
Volcano Communication
Volcano Communications is the only cable television service provider in the area and has the
facilities to provide cable television service.
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
California Integrated Waste Management Act
The California Integrated Waste Management Act (CIWMA) requires each city and county to
prepare, adopt, and submit to the California Integrated Waste Management Board a source
reduction and recycling element (SRRE) that demonstrates how the jurisdiction will meet the
mandated diversion goals.
California Highway Patrol
The California Highway Patrol (CHP) provides law enforcement and patrol services throughout
Amador County on state highways, freeways, and unincorporated roadways. The CHP has primary
jurisdiction on roads used for hazardous materials transport. In addition, cell phone emergency (911)
calls are automatically routed to the CHP.
CAL FIRE
The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) is responsible for
responding to wildland fires in the area around the City of Ione. In addition, CAL FIRE provides
mutual aid assistance to the Ione Fire Department.
August 2009                                                                     City of Ione General Plan
                                                  8–5

                                                            PUBLIC FACILITIES
Mule Creek State Prison Fire Department
The Mule Creek State Prison Fire Department is responsible for protecting property belonging to
the California Department of Corrections, including the Preston School (California Youth
Authority). The Mule Creek State Prison Fire Department also provides response within the City’s
primary response area when specifically requested.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
This Element is closely related to the Land Use, Conservation, Noise and Safety and Circulation
Elements. Public utility infrastructure must support the varied land uses and often shares the same
rights-of-way with circulation routes. The Land Use Element specifies locations for major public
facilities such as schools, water treatment plants, and government buildings. The Noise and Safety
Element ensures public facilities are adequately protected from hazardous conditions. The
Conservation Element deals with water conservation, recycling and quality, which relate to overall
water provision issues addressed in this Element. The Conservation Element addresses public parks
and recreation opportunities which may share facilities with the agencies identified in this element.
In addition, the Conservation Element addresses historic and cultural resources..
SETTING, ISSUES, AND CONSIDERATIONS
The Issues and Considerations section briefly describes the issues determined to be of most
importance to the City Council and residents. These issue topics were gathered through extensive
community outreach and comments from both the public, elected leaders, and City staff. These
issues and considerations provide background information and further provide a framework to
create and interpret the General Plan policies.
For the reader’s reference, Figure 8-1 shows the location of the public facilities discussed in this
element.
WATER PROVISION
Residents desire a safe and reliable municipal water
supply for drinking and for fire protection. The Amador
Water Agency (AWA) provides wholesale, retail, raw, and
treated domestic water to most of Amador County’s
residences and businesses, including those within Ione.
The water system for Ione serves the residents of the City
plus other areas in the unincorporated western portion of
the County.
The limiting factor in AWA’s water provision to residents
in the County is the available water treatment capacity. As        Ione Water Treatment Plant (AWA)
the City grows, there will be a need for increased water
treatment capacity serving Ione.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                      August 2009
                                                8–6

 PUBLIC FACILITIES
                                        FIGURE 8-1: PUBLIC FACILITIES
     Note: Facility locations area approximate.
August 2009                                                           City of Ione General Plan
                                                    8–7

                                                               PUBLIC FACILITIES
In addition to potable water service, AWA provides non-potable raw water service to Howard Park,
Preston Youth Correctional Facility, and Unimin mines, of which only the Unimin property is
located outside of the City limits. AWA does not provide agricultural irrigation, as existing
agricultural uses in much of the Ione Valley rely on groundwater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT
The City of Ione provides wastewater treatment services to the City and limited wastewater
treatment services to the Amador Regional Sanitation Authority (ARSA). The City operates two
wastewater treatment and disposal facilities: the City of Ione Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP),
otherwise known as the secondary treatment plant, and the Castle Oaks Water Reclamation Plant
(COWRP), otherwise known as the tertiary treatment plant. The WWTP was designed to treat the
wastewater received from the City to a secondary level for disposal, while the COWRP treats
wastewater from ARSA to a tertiary level to be disposed of as irrigation for the Castle Oaks golf
course.
Due to long term demand expectations and desire for high quality service, the City is pursuing a
Wastewater Master Plan to increase its wastewater treatment capacity and level of treatment. The
ultimate goal for the City is to treat all wastewater to a tertiary level and use the reclaimed water for
irrigation, mining, and other appropriate uses in and around Ione.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE
Generally, the older sections of Ione have an inadequate
storm drainage system. Many older streets and
development lack storm drainage facilities or only have
limited storm drainage facilities, such as open air drainage.
In some areas of the City, no storm drainage facilities
exist, requiring City staff to place temporary storm
drainage structures to contain runoff. The City intends to
correct existing deficiencies in the stormwater drainage
system.
                                                                     Open drainage system with no paved sidewalk
SOLID WASTE
The City is a member of the Amador County Solid Waste Management Regional Agency and
receives a permit from them to handle solid waste services with private haulers.
PUBLIC SCHOOLS
Residents have expressed a great desire for high quality local education. Many residents have directly
expressed their desires for a high school to be located in Ione, as well as a community college.
The City of Ione is served by the Amador County Unified School District (ACUSD). ACUSD
operates two public schools, Ione Elementary and Ione Junior High, within the City limits. Ione’s
City of Ione General Plan                                                                            August 2009
                                                 8–8

  PUBLIC FACILITIES
students are bussed to Argonaut High School in Sutter Creek to attend high school. Future growth
of the City will increase the student population, and is likely to require the construction of new
schools, and possibly a high school. Any new schools would need to be coordinated between the
school district or community college district, the City, and other public service providers.
LIBRARY
Amador County operates the library system within the County. The County has a local library
branch within downtown Ione, the Ione Library, located at 25 East Main Street. A 2005 needs
assessment of the library system determined that a new library facility was needed elsewhere in the
County, and that existing libraries needed to upgrade their computer technology.
CITY HALL
City Hall serves as the administrative center for the City,
housing all of the City’s administrative functions and
offices, including the City Council Chambers. City Hall
also houses the Ione Police Department. The Ione Police
Department is looking to relocate to a new facility due to
space constraints at City Hall. Any future expansion and
growth of the City is likely to also require additional staff
and office space at City Hall. Potential administrative
office expansion could be provided if and when the
Police Department has a new facility and vacates their
space at City Hall.                                                     Police vehicle in front of City Hall
CEMETERY
The Ione Public Cemetery is the only public cemetery located in the City and is operated by the
Township Number Two Public Cemetery District. The District estimates that their cemeteries have
a combined capacity enough to provide burials through the period of this General Plan. Additional
private cemeteries are also located in the City, and provide options for residents of the community.
LAW ENFORCEMENT FACILITIES
The Ione Police Department operates out of limited
space within City Hall. As the City grows and more police
officers area added, the Police Department will require
additional office space. Future growth consideration will
need to include the Department’s future space
requirements.                                                    Near completion of Fire Station #2 in late 2008
August 2009                                                                        City of Ione General Plan
                                                  8–9

                                                             PUBLIC FACILITIES
FIRE PROTECTION AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL FACILITIES
The City of Ione relies on paid-call firefighters. In addition to serving the City, Ione’s firefighters
operate in a service area of approximately 38 square miles outside its boundaries.
The Ione Fire Department operates from two fire stations, one located on W. Jackson Street
(Station 1) in the downtown, and another located on Preston Avenue (Station 2) north of Sutter
Creek just south of Waterman Road. Operations and management of the Fire Department are based
out of Station 2. In the event of flooding or when the bridge over Sutter Creek is impassable,
emergency response to either side of the creek is limited.
Emergency medical aid service is provided by the Ione Fire Department as a first responder.
Ambulance services are provided by the American Legion Ambulance Service, a non-profit
organization.
STATE FACILITIES
Mule Creek State Prison
The Mule Creek State Prison (MCSP) is a prison housing adult male inmates. The prison is located
in the northern portion of the City and is controlled and operated by the State.
MCSP operates its own wastewater treatment facility but also treats wastewater from the Preston
Youth Correctional Facility and the CAL FIRE Academy training facility. The MCSP wastewater
facility is capacity constrained and unable to treat additional flows without expansion. Potential
recommendations include connecting CAL FIRE’s training facility to the City’s wastewater system,
allowing for expansion of the CAL FIRE facility.
Preston Youth Correctional Facility
The Preston Youth Correctional Facility is a juvenile correctional facility housing male wards. The
facility is located at 201 Waterman Road, just north of downtown. The facility is controlled and
operated by the State. Residents in Ione have made frequent suggestions for the City to consider
reuse of the facility as a potential community college site in the event the correctional facility is
closed.
CAL FIRE Academy
The CAL FIRE Academy, located at 4501 Preston Road,
provides training in fire protection, fire prevention, law
enforcement, administration, resource management, and
fire crew management. The facility is controlled and
operated by the State.
                                                                          CAL FIRE entrance
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                               8–10

 PUBLIC FACILITIES
ISSUES THIS ELEMENT ATTEMPTS TO SOLVE
This Element provides goals, policies, and actions that address the following issues, many of which
were raised at public meetings during creation of the General Plan:
    •   Designing and providing local services to meet the needs of local residents.
    •   Provision and maintenance of adequate public facilities to support anticipated growth in
        resident and workforce populations.
    •   Managing new development areas to ensure that roads, water lines, electrical facilities, storm
        drainage facilities, and sewer systems are constructed in advance of residential development.
    •   Coordinating with water, sewer, and utility service providers to reduce incidences of service
        interruption, improve the quality and sustainability of services, and reduce per-unit costs.
    •   Ensuring a clean water supply and adequate water and sewer capacity.
    •   Developing and maintaining storm drainage facilities to prevent drainage issues when
        possible.
    •   Creating public schools that are at the forefront of educational efforts, seen as a viable
        option by all parents, and are safe for children.
    •   Ensuring that public facilities provide healthy and safe conditions and promote well-being
        for all residents, workers, and visitors of Ione.
    •   Minimizing visual impacts and physical impediments of utilities.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
GOAL PF-1:           Ensure the development of public infrastructure that meets the
                     long-term needs of the community and ensure infrastructure is
                     available at the time such facilities are needed.
Policy PF-1.1:       Require sufficient capacity in all public facilities to maintain desired service levels
                     and avoid capacity shortages or other negative effects on safety and quality of life.
                     (Cross reference: ED 3.1.4)
                     Action PF-1.1.1: The City shall adopt a phasing plan for the development of
                     public facilities in a logical manner that encourages the orderly development of
                     roadways, drainage, sewer, and other public facilities. (Cross reference: LU 1.3)
August 2009                                                                      City of Ione General Plan
                                                  8–11

                                                                 PUBLIC FACILITIES
Policy PF-1.2:     Ensure adequate funding for public facilities maintenance, capital improvement
                   projects, and redevelopment efforts. (Cross reference: LU 1.3)
                   Action PF-1.2.1: Ensure new development pays for long-term maintenance
                   costs associated with infrastructure needed to support such development, such as
                   through development impact fees and establishment of a financing district or
                   mechanism. If financing districts are to be established, they shall be done
                   concurrently with Final Map recordation.
Policy PF-1.3:     The City shall require new development to provide adequate facilities and services
                   or pay its fair share of the cost for facilities needed to provide services to
                   accommodate growth, except for special circumstances when the City grants an
                   impact fee reduction or waiver, such as to promote low-income housing programs
                   or infill development projects. (Cross reference: H 4.5.1, H 5.5.1, H 5.6.1, NS 7.2, NS
                   7.3)
                   Action PF-1.3.1: During the development review process, the City shall not
                   approve new development unless the following conditions are met:
                   •    The applicant can demonstrate that all necessary infrastructure will be
                        installed or adequately financed;
                   •    Proposed infrastructure improvements are consistent with City infrastructure
                        plans; and
                   •    Proposed infrastructure improvements incorporate all feasible measures to
                        maintain or increase public safety and/or reduce environmental impacts
                        associated with the construction, operation, or maintenance of any required
                        improvement.
                   Action PF-1.3.2: The City’s Development Impact Fee Schedule shall either be
                   updated at least every five years or tied to the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to
                   account for increasing costs for facilities and services.
Policy PF-1.4:     The City shall not allow construction in phased projects, within all areas of the
                   City, including newly annexed areas, until backbone infrastructure is completed
                   that will provide for all phases of the development. Backbone infrastructure is
                   defined as public services and facilities, such as collector and arterial roadways,
                   including lighting, signage, landscaping, bikeways, and other public services and
                   facilities for such roads. (Cross reference: LU 1.4.1, CIR 1.1)
Policy PF-1.5:     Street lighting on City roadways shall be limited to the minimum amount needed
                   for public safety and shall be designed to focus light where it is needed (e.g.,
                   intersections). Streetlights shall consist of fixtures that are designed to block
City of Ione General Plan                                                                     August 2009
                                                8–12

 PUBLIC FACILITIES
               illumination of adjoining properties and prohibit light rays emitted from the fixture
               at angles above the horizontal plane.
               Action PF-1.5.1: As part of the development review process, the City shall
               require that all nighttime lighting associated with new development be designed to
               limit upward and sideways spillover of light.
               Action PF-1.5.2: As part of the development review process, the City shall
               restrict the use of reflective building materials that could cause glare.
GOAL PF-2:     Promote efficiency, agency collaboration, and community
               design in the provision, location, and operation of public
               facilities and services.
Policy PF-2.1: The City shall collaborate with local and regional service providers to ensure
               adequate and efficient provision of public facilities and services.
Policy PF-2.2: Encourage coordination with public service providers, including schools, regional
               parks and recreation, utility, transit, and other service districts in developing service
               planning strategies. (Cross reference: CO 8.1.2)
Policy PF-2.3: Public facilities and services shall be equitably distributed throughout the
               community to enhance quality of life.
Policy PF-2.4: The City shall work with ACTC and other partners to address vulnerability of the
               city’s infrastructure and appropriate adaptation strategies to protect those
               resources that are likely to be impacted by adverse effects associated with global
               climate change.
GOAL PF-3:     Promote the efficient use of limited water resources.
Policy PF-3.1: Increase efficiencies in water use, wastewater generation and the handling of storm
               water runoff through best practices in sustainable water management.
               Action PF-3.1.1: The City shall implement a water conservation program to
               reduce future water demand by establishing requirements for new construction
               that encourage conservation.
               Action PF-3.1.2: The City shall allow the use of reclaimed water for landscape
               irrigation at existing parks and the Castle Oaks golf course, when permitted by
               state regulations. If available, the City shall use reclaimed water for landscape
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                             8–13

                                                               PUBLIC FACILITIES
                   irrigation at all new: parks, non-residential landscaped areas, multifamily
                   landscaped areas, and subdivisions for single-family homes. The City shall consider
                   use of reclaimed water for landscape irrigation for non-residential landscaped
                   areas. (Cross reference: CO 4.2)
                   Action PF-3.1.3: The City shall work with property owners, farmers, mining
                   companies, and other public agencies to assess the feasibility of providing
                   reclaimed water to lands around the City, when permitted by state regulations. This
                   shall include agricultural operations, existing mining sites, former mine sites, and to
                   other public water agencies. Expansions of the wastewater treatment facilities and
                   infrastructure shall be consistent with RWQCB requirements.
                   Action PF-3.1.4: Ensure that drainage facilities in new development incorporate
                   stormwater runoff and sediment control, using sustainable water management and
                   Best Management Practices, as published by the Regional Water Quality Control
                   Board (RWQCB), where appropriate. (Cross reference: CO 2.2, CO 4.4, NS 3.4.1)
                   Action PF-3.1.5: Where possible, require drainage facilities to use natural
                   channels that simulate natural drainage ways while protecting property. (Cross
                   reference: CO 2.2, CO 4.4.3, NS 3.4.1)
Policy PF-3.2:     The City shall encourage the use of reclaimed water in toilets and for residential
                   and municipal uses as technologies and legal mechanisms allow.
GOAL PF-4:         Ensure adequate, efficient, and reliable water service to meet
                   the needs of existing and future development.
Policy PF-4.1:     The City shall work collaboratively with Amador Water Agency to ensure efficient
                   delivery of potable water and address water capacity issues in Ione.
                   Action PF-4.1.1: The City shall consult with AWA by providing growth forecast
                   information to ensure adequate supply needed to accommodate anticipated
                   growth. (Cross reference H 2.2.4)
                   Action PF-4.1.2: The City shall work with AWA to facilitate the construction,
                   expansion, and/or rehabilitation of water treatment facilities in Ione.
                   Action PF-4.1.3: The City shall consult with state agencies and AWA to
                   integrate surrounding land uses into the water service network as appropriate. The
                   City shall work with AWA to consider expanding potable water service to areas
                   outside of the city boundary for those lands concurrently being considered for
                   annexation into the city. This action shall not be interpreted to limit AWA and the
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                  8–14

 PUBLIC FACILITIES
               City’s desires to provide and expand non-potable, including recycled water service
               to properties near Ione.
               Action PF-4.1.4: The City shall work with AWA to protect the quality and
               quantity of groundwater resources and establish groundwater management
               planning. (Cross reference: CO 4.1.2)
Policy PF-4.2: The City shall proactively work with AWA to ensure sufficient water supply for
               affordable housing projects, consistent with State law requirements.
Policy PF-4.3: The City shall require that water flow and pressure be provided at sufficient levels
               to meet domestic, commercial, industrial, and firefighting needs. At a minimum,
               the water distribution system shall meet all pressure requirements outlined in the
               California Department of Public Health/Waterworks Standards.
GOAL PF-5:     Provide adequate wastewater treatment capacity to
               accommodate the needs of existing and future development.
Policy PF-5.1: The City will maintain sufficient sewer
               capacity to accommodate future
               development that has been entitled or
               could be entitled under the land use
               patterns adopted in this General Plan.
               Action PF-5.1.1: The City will seek
               out public/private partnerships and                  Secondary WWTP evaporation ponds
               design build options to upgrade,
               combine, and/or expand sewer treatment facilities as needed to provide sufficient
               sewer capacity.
               Action PF-5.1.2: As part of the Wastewater Master Plan, the City will establish a
               phasing plan to address planning, timing, and construction of new treatment
               facilities and expansion of existing facilities as new development occurs so no one
               development or home triggers the need for expanded services and adequate
               “buffer” capacity is available.
Policy PF-5.2: The City requires all improved properties to be served by municipal sewer service.
               Independent community sewer systems may not be established for new
               development unless such systems meet all City standards. (Cross reference H 2.2.3)
Policy PF-5.3: The City shall continue to take actions necessary to meet water quality discharge
               standards in the operation of its wastewater treatment facilities.
August 2009                                                                   City of Ione General Plan
                                             8–15

                                                             PUBLIC FACILITIES
Policy PF-5.4:     The City shall ensure sufficient wastewater treatment capacity for affordable
                   housing projects, consistent with State law requirements, by reserving a portion of
                   future wastewater treatment commitments sufficient for the next seven years of
                   affordable housing required.
Policy PF-5.5:     The City shall consider the use of best available control technology appropriate to
                   dispose of treated effluent based upon factors of reliability, economic feasibility,
                   and the ability to meet discharge permit requirements.
GOAL PF-6:         Ensure adequate stormwater drainage facilities to meet the
                   needs of existing and future development.
Policy PF-6.1:     New development within the City shall not increase peak off-site storm drainage
                   flow.
                   Action PF-6.1.1: City shall update the Storm Water Master Plan to assess the
                   need for stormwater drainage system improvements and set up a system for
                   monitoring storm drain requirements. (Cross reference: NS 3.2.1)
                   Action PF-6.1.2: The City shall require appropriate runoff control measures as
                   part of future development proposals to slow runoff, maximize on-site infiltration,
                   and minimize discharge or urban pollutants into area drainages.
                   Action PF-6.1.3: The City shall encourage project designs that minimize
                   drainage concentrations and impervious coverage.
                   Action PF-6.1.4: Where feasible, the City shall consider multiple public uses for
                   stormwater facilities as part of future development proposals, including the
                   potential for passive recreation, landscaped area, and open space.
                   Action PF-6.1.5: The City will establish Low Impact Development (LID)
                   standards through either the Stormwater Master Plan or the Municipal Code.
GOAL PF-7:         Ensure that the City’s solid waste disposal needs are met while
                   maximizing opportunities for waste reduction and recycling.
Policy PF-7.1:     The City shall work with Amador County, the Regional Agency, and the solid
                   waste contractors to promote solid waste reduction, recycling, and composting of
                   wastes to minimize residential, commercial, and industrial waste disposal. (Cross
                   reference: CO 7.1)
City of Ione General Plan                                                                 August 2009
                                                8–16

 PUBLIC FACILITIES
               Action PF-7.1.1:       The City shall encourage the recycling of construction debris.
               Action PF-7.1.2: The City shall encourage businesses to take a more active role
               in recycling and composting, focusing on businesses that generate a large amount
               of compostable or recyclable waste.
Policy PF-7.2: The City shall work with the Amador County Solid Waste Regional Agency to
               enter into franchise agreements for solid waste collection and disposal, consistent
               with state law.
               Action PF-7.2.1: The City shall establish regulations in Franchise Agreements
               for solid waste collection and disposal, as well in municipal operations and
               programs, to meet the waste diversion requirements of the Integrated Waste
               Management Act of 1989 (SB 939).
GOAL PF-8:     Ensure the highest possible level of education to students in
               Ione including re-establishing a high school in the community.
Policy PF-8.1: Work closely with the Amador County Unified School District to identify needs
               for public education programs, including developing and expanding extra-
               curricular recreation and educational
               programs for primary and secondary
               education where feasible.
Policy PF-8.2: Assist the school district in identifying
               and acquiring school site(s) as a part of
               new development.
Policy PF-8.3: The City shall include the following
               criteria in assisting the ACUSD in
               school site selection and provision of                   Ione Elementary School
               utilities: (Cross reference: CIR 2.3, CIR
               2.8.1, CO 8.1.2)
               •    Traffic impacts on nearby roadways and effect on City standards for Level of
                    Service.
               •    Interrelatedness of school sites with churches, parks, greenways, and off-
                    street paths.
               •    Walking distance to the greatest number of students.
               •    Safe walking routes to and from school.
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                              8–17

                                                                PUBLIC FACILITIES
                   •    Joint use potential of new school sites with existing and planned community
                        recreation and parks programs and facilities.
                   •    Linkages with trails, bikeways, and pedestrian paths.
Policy PF-8.4:     Work with the Amador County Unified School District to facilitate the
                   construction of a high school within Ione.
GOAL PF-9:         Provide opportunities for higher education in the City of Ione
                   that support professional development and workforce training.
Policy PF-9.1:     Work with the regional community college districts, vocational, and technical
                   colleges, to facilitate the location of a community college within Ione.
                   Action PF-9.1.1: Evaluate the potential reuse of the Preston Youth facility site
                   and identify other locations as a potential community college, in the event that the
                   State of California decides to close the facility.
GOAL PF-10: Ensure that adequate library services and facilities are provided
                   to the City's residents.
Policy PF-10.1:    Encourage the expansion of adequate library facilities and programs to meet the
                   needs of Ione residents as the community grows.
                   Action PF-10.1.1: Consult with Amador County to plan for a new or expanded
                   library facilities in Ione, as needed based on future growth.
                   Action PF-10.1.2: Consult with Amador County to continue to provide funding
                   for library programs and activities such as children’s story time, the Ione Book
                   Club, and providing state-of-the-art information and communication services.
GOAL PF-11: Ensure that adequate electricity and gas services are provided
                   to the City's residents and businesses.
Policy PF-11.1:    The City shall consult with Pacific Gas and Electric Company for the planning and
                   extension of gas and electrical facilities. (Cross reference: LU 2.4.4)
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                   8–18

 PUBLIC FACILITIES
Policy PF-11.2: The City shall require undergrounding of utility lines in new commercial
                development and in new residential development consisting of three or more
                structures, except where infeasible due to the electrical transmission load or other
                operational issues, as confirmed by the utility provider.
Policy PF-11.3: The City shall encourage, support, and evaluate the provision of proven, cost-
                effective, and feasible alternate forms of energy, including solar and wind power in
                Ione. (Cross reference: CO 6.3)
GOAL PF-12: Ensure that adequate access to telecommunication services is
                available to all residents and businesses in Ione.
Policy PF-12.1: The City shall work with telecommunication providers to ensure all residents and
                businesses have access to telecommunications services, including new
                technologies. To maximize access to inexpensive telecommunications services, the
                City shall encourage marketplace competition from multiple major service
                providers.
Policy PF-12.2: Where allowable under State law, the City shall encourage the siting of
                telecommunications infrastructure using the following guidance:
                •   Create an efficient service network through co-location of cellular facilities;
                •   Locate in areas that minimize visibility from public rights of way and
                    residential areas;
                •   Locate facilities on existing buildings, poles, or other support structures; and,
                •   Facilities should be painted, camouflaged, textured, or otherwise designed to
                    better integrate into existing conditions adjacent to the installation site and to
                    minimize visual impacts.
Policy PF-12.3: All new major commercial, office, and business developments and redevelopment
                projects shall ensure that adequate high speed telecommunication is available in the
                building.
August 2009                                                                City of Ione General Plan
                                              8–19

                                                                PUBLIC FACILITIES
GOAL PF-13: Maintain sufficient levels of fire protection and police services
                   to protect public safety and property.
Policy PF-13.1:    The City shall strive to maintain a firefighting capability sufficient to maintain a
                   proper fire response time as a general guideline for service provision and locating
                   new fire stations. (Cross reference: NS 7.1)
                   Action PF-13.1.1: Assess the City’s needs by updating the Fire Department
                   Master Plan at least every five years.
                   Action PF-13.1.2: Establish a minimum fire staffing ratio per 1,000 residents.
                   Action PF-13.1.3: Establish a threshold based on population growth for when a
                   transition from “paid call” to full-time fire protection service is necessary. The
                   threshold may include a mix of “paid call” and full-time firefighters.
Policy PF-13.2:    The City shall require all new developments to provide adequate emergency access
                   features, including secondary access points, as determined by the Ione Fire
                   Department. (Cross reference: NS 7.1.1)
Policy PF-13.3:    Ensure that the Police Department has sufficient space and facilities to support
                   law enforcement needs.
                   Action PF-13.3.1: Establish and maintain funding mechanisms for planned
                   additional space needs of the Police Department.
                   Action PF-13.3.2: Require              new
                   development to provide adequate fair-
                   share funding for the design,
                   construction, and operation of a new
                   Police facility and for officers through
                   a funding mechanism such as an
                   assessment       district,      community
                   facilities district, or other similar
                   program. If financing districts are to be
                   established, they shall be done
                   concurrently      with      Final      Map
                                                                             Police Services
                   recordation.
Policy PF-13.4:    The City shall promote the use of volunteer and educational programs to assist
                   police personnel.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                    August 2009
                                                  8–20

 PUBLIC FACILITIES
Policy PF-13.5: The City shall strive to maintain a law enforcement capability sufficient to maintain
                a safe community and proper response time as a general guideline for service
                provision.
                Action PF-13.5.1: Establish a minimum police response time as a standard.
                Action PF-13.5.2: By 2015, compile a Police Department Master Plan to formally
                assess the needs of the Police Department and to estimate and plan for future
                service demands.
August 2009                                                              City of Ione General Plan
                                            8–21

  HOUSING
INTRODUCTION
The Housing Element addresses housing development, rehabilitation and conservation. It sets forth
actions that the City will undertake to assist residents to maintain their homes and to help ensure
that there is an adequate supply of safe, affordable housing for
existing and future residents. The Element also addresses the Please turn to Page 9-2 for a
special housing needs of individuals requiring assistance, such as complete listing of contents
elderly residents, single mothers with children, low-income and covered in this Element, with
large families, military personnel, the homeless, and mobility- page number references.
impaired residents.
August 2009                                                                 City of Ione General Plan
                                                9-1
                                                                                    HOUSING
                                          IN THIS SECTION
      •   Introduction (Page 9-1)
      •   Vision (Page 9-2)
      •   Purpose (Page 9-2)
      •   Related Agencies, Plans and Programs (Page 9-3)
      •   Relationship to Other General Plan Elements (Page 9-3)
      •   Setting, Issues, and Considerations (Page 9-4)
      •   Issues this Element Attempts to Solve (Page 9-8)
      •   Goals, Policies, and Actions (Page 9-8)
VISION
The City of Ione is committed to making a meaningful effort to address housing needs. The
Housing Element reflects the City’s desire to build a balanced and diverse community, both
economically and socially. The policies contained in this Element are an expression of the statewide
housing goal of “attaining decent housing and a suitable living environment for every California
family.” More importantly, this element reflects the City’s desire to address our unique housing
needs in a manner that creates a more balanced community.
PURPOSE
The State of California has declared that “the availability of housing is of vital statewide importance
and the early attainment of decent housing and a suitable living environment for every California
family is a priority of the highest order.” In addition, government and the private sector should
make an effort to provide a diversity of housing opportunity and accommodate regional housing
needs through a cooperative effort, while maintaining a responsibility toward economic,
environmental and fiscal factors and community goals within the general plan.
Further, State Housing Element law requires “[a]n assessment of housing needs and an inventory of
resources and constraints relevant to the meeting of these needs.” The law requires the element to
include the following:
    •    An analysis of population and employment trends,
    •    An analysis and documentation of households characteristics,
    •    An inventory of land suitable for residential development,
    •    The identification of a zone or zones where emergency shelters are allowed as a permitted
         use without a conditional use or other discretionary permit,
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                   9–2

  HOUSING
    •   An analysis of potential or actual governmental and non-governmental constraints on the
        improvement, maintenance and development of housing,
    •   An analysis of any special housing needs,
    •   An analysis opportunities for energy conservation with respect to residential development,
    •   An analysis of publicly-assisted housing developments that may convert to non-assisted
        housing developments with in the next 10 years, and
    •   An analysis of the City’s fair share of the regional housing needs.
The purpose of these requirements is to develop an understanding of the existing and projected
housing needs within the community and to set forth policies and schedules promoting the
preservation, improvement, and development of diverse housing types available at a range of costs
in Ione.
RELATED AGENCIES, PLANS AND PROGRAMS
Relevant data used in preparing the Housing Element and Housing Needs Assessment was taken
from the sources listed below,
    •   U.S. Census
    •   California Department of Finance
    •   2008 Claritas Report (a data collection firm that uses 2000 Census data as a baseline for these
        projections)
    •   Employment Development Department
    •   Department of Housing and Community Development
    •   Central Sierra Planning Council (CSPC)
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
State law requires that “…the general plan elements and parts thereof comprise an integrated,
internally consistent, and compatible statement of policies….” The purpose of requiring internal
consistency is to avoid policy conflict and provide a clear policy guide for the future maintenance,
improvement and development of housing within the City.
All elements of the City of Ione 2009 General Plan, including the goals, policies and implementation
measures for environmental management, community development, public safety, circulation, and
August 2009                                                                 City of Ione General Plan
                                                  9-3

                                                                                  HOUSING
land use, have been reviewed for their internal consistency with this Housing Element. In addition,
the City of Ione Zoning Code has been reviewed for compatibility with this Housing Element’s
goals, policies and implementation measures. This Housing Element was designed to integrate and
be compatible with the new 2009 General Plan.
The Housing Element closely relates to the Land Use, Public Facilities and Circulation Elements.
The Land Use Element takes into consideration balanced housing needs and housing choices
identified in the Housing Element. The Public Facilities Element ensures adequate services for the
development of housing within the City. In addition, the Circulation Element directly relates when
projecting transportation noise sources and addressing safety at interfaces between different modes
of travel.
SETTING, ISSUES, AND CONSIDERATIONS
The findings listed below resulted from the information collected as part of the Housing Needs
Assessment located in Appendix B. These findings provide a direct relationship between
community conditions in Ione and the recommended Goals, Policies and Actions in this document.
DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE
According to the Department of Finance, the population of Ione was 7,416 persons in 2008, which
represents approximately 20 percent of the total population of Amador County (37,943 persons).
Within the County, Ione’s population is unique, with 52 percent (3,890 persons) of the population
comprising incarcerated persons. Deducting the incarcerated population provides a more accurate
indication of the City’s population. The actual population in 2008 was 3,256.
According to the 2000 Census, from 2000 to 2008, the median age in the City of Ione decreased
slightly from 34.3 to 33.1, with the largest shift in population occurring in persons aged 25–30. The
City is still a predominantly white community, with 57.7 percent in the white race category. The
largest percentage increase in the City was in the Asian race category, with an increase of
approximately 50 percent since 2000 (61 persons).
HOUSEHOLD PROFILE
Of the 1,440 households in the City, 1,035 (71.9 percent) were family households and 405 (28.2
percent) were non-family households. Of the total households, approximately 50 percent (730) of
households reportedly earned 0–80 percent ($0–$53,360) of the area median income (AMI) for
Amador County, which was $66,700 in 2008. Those earning 80 percent of the AMI or below are
considered to be low-income. To determine a person’s poverty status, one compares the person’s
total family income in the last 12 months with the poverty threshold appropriate for that person’s
family size and composition. If the total income of that person's family is less than the threshold
appropriate for that family, then the person is considered “below the poverty level,” together with
every member of his or her family. For example, the 2000 U.S. poverty threshold for a family of
four was $17,463. According to the 2000 Census,325 persons were considered to earn less than the
U.S. poverty level, approximately 11.2 percent of the Ione population.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                 August 2009
                                                 9–4

  HOUSING
EMPLOYMENT TRENDS
The California Economic Development Department (EDD) projects that Amador County’s largest
growing employment industries are to be in office and administration (7,730 jobs), sales (5,320 jobs),
food preparation and serving (5,270 jobs), management (3,640 jobs), and construction and exaction
(3,600 jobs) from 2004 to 2014. These industries will provide wages that predominately fall into the
extremely low- or very low-income categories.
SPECIAL NEEDS
In 2000, there were 589 persons (21.9 percent of the total population ages 5 and over) with a
disability living in the City. The majority of the disabled between the ages of 5 and 64 reported a
physical and/or employment disability.
Of the 152 households headed by a single parent, 27 households (17.7 percent) are headed by males
and 125 households (82.2 percent) are headed by females. A high proportion of single-parent
households have incomes below the poverty line according to 2000 Census statistics, approximately
37.8 percent or 57 households. Approximately 48.1 percent (13 households) of the male-headed and
35.2 percent (44 households) of the female-headed single-parent households are living below the
poverty line in the City.
Agricultural workers make up a small percentage of the households in the City. According to the
California Employment Development Department, there were an estimated 330 persons employed
as farmworkers in the Mother Lode Consortium (Amador, Calaveras, Mariposa and Tuolumne
counties) in 2008.
Currently, there are two known transients/homeless persons in the Ione area, neither of whom are
local Ione residents. There are currently no programs or shelters offered in the City of Ione to
provide support for the homeless. The closest shelter is located in Jackson and provides shelter for
abused women and homeless persons with the inclusion of meals and emergency shelter during
winter months.
HOUSING STOCK CHARACTERISTICS
In 2008, 62.2 percent of the housing units in the City were owner occupied and 37 percent were
renter occupied. Of these housing units, 84.1 percent are single-family units. The residential real
estate market in Ione reflected a steady number of homes sold between 2005 and 2008. Although
the number of homes has remained steady, the median selling price has decreased since 2005, from
$360,000 in 2005 to $281,340 in 2008. Similar to the rest of California and the nation, home prices in
Ione decreased between 2006 and 2008. The median sales price in 2008 was $269,990, a decrease of
over $50,000 from 2005 and 2006. Although there was not a significant change in the low selling
price between 2005 and 2008, the high selling price dropped by nearly $100,000 from 2005 to 2008.
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                                 9-5

                                                                                                          HOUSING
REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION (RHNA)
The first step in addressing State-wide housing needs is the Regional Housing Needs Allocation
(RHNA), which is mandated by the State of California (Government Code Section 65584) and
requires regions to address housing issues and needs based on future growth projections for the
area. The California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) allocates
regional housing needs numbers to regional councils of governments throughout the state. The
Regional Housing Allocation Plan (RHNP) for Ione is developed by the Central Sierra Planning
Council and allocates to cities and the unincorporated counties their “fair share” of the region’s
projected housing needs, also known as the Regional Housing Needs Allocation. The RHNP
allocates the RHNA based on household income groupings over the 5-year planning period for each
specific jurisdiction’s Housing Element.
Ione’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation for the 2007–2014 planning period is a total 228 units for
all income categories. The City is required to develop the necessary policies and programs to ensure
the RHNA is met. Table 9-1 provides the RHNA target for the planning period 2007 to 2014 for
each of the four household income groups for the City of Ione. See Table 9-41 in the Housing
Needs Assessment for specific sites available to fulfill the Regional Housing Needs Allocation for
very low, low-, moderate-, and above moderate-income households in the City of Ione.
                                                            TABLE 9-1:
        AFFORDABLE HOUSING NEED AND PRODUCTION, JANUARY 2007–JUNE 2014
                                                                         Units Built since
       Income Level                             RHNA                                                    Remaining RHNA
                                                                           January 2007
  Extremely Low                                    25                               0                            25
  Very Low                                         25                               0                            25
  Low                                              36                               0                            36
  Moderate                                         43                               0                            43
  Above Moderate                                   99                             331                            66
  Total                                           228                              33                           195
Source: Central Sierra Planning Council, 2008
Notes:
1
     A total of 33 building permits were issued since 2007 (26 in 2007, 2 in 2008 and 5 in January-March 2009).
Based on the State allocation needs, the City of Ione will need to accommodate 50 housing units
affordable to extremely low- and very low-income households, 36 housing units affordable to low-
income households and 43 housing units affordable to moderate-income households during the
current RHNA period. In addition, the City will need to accommodate 99 housing units available to
above moderate-income households.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                                         August 2009
                                                                 9–6

  HOUSING
Between January 2007 and March 2009, the City produced 33 housing units affordable to above
moderate-income housing units. As a result of building to date for the RHNA period, the City will
need an additional 66 above moderate-income units and an additional 129 extremely low-, very low-,
low-, and moderate-income housing units by 2014 to meet their RHNA.
In order to determine which current land is available to meet the RHNA for the City, HCD
considers existing land “zoned” for residential single- and multifamily development.
The City will be completing General Plan and Zoning Code updates in August 2009. After these
updates are adopted, the City of Ione will have the ability to better facilitate the development of high
and medium density residential sites which will accommodate the City's low and very low income
RHNA allocation. The City will develop a High Density Multiple-family dwelling (R-4) zoning
district which will allow up to 25 units per acre. Also, there will be Multiple-family dwelling (R-3)
and Limited Multiple-family dwelling (R-2) zoning districts that will allow for up to 15 units per
acre. Table 40 in the Housing Needs Assessment lists vacant sites suitable to meet the City’s
RHNA. The acreage and unit capacities described in the Housing Needs Assessment demonstrate
that the City is able to meet its 2007–2014 RHNA.
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES SUMMARY
Based on the policies and actions outlined below in Table 9-2, the following objectives represent a
reasonable expectation of the maximum number of new housing units that will be developed,
rehabilitated, or conserved and the number of households that will be assisted over the next five
years. The City should be able to facilitate the construction of 195 new units, and assist with the
rehabilitation of 15 units between 2009 and 2014.
                                                            TABLE 9-2:
                             QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES SUMMARY (2009-2014)
                                                                              Income Level
                 Task                        Extremely            Very                                     Above
                                                                              Low      Moderate                       Total
                                                  Low             Low                                    Moderate
  Fair Share Allocation                            25              25          36            43              99        228
  Residential Permits
                                                    0               0           0             0              331        33
  Issued 1/07 - 2/09
  New Construction
                                                   25              25          36            43              66        195
  Objectives
  Rehabilitation                                    0               0          15             0               0         15
  Preservation2                                     0               0           0             0               0          0
  Total                                            25              25          51            43              66        210
Source: Central Sierra Planning Council, 2008; City of Ione, 2009
Notes:
1
     A total of 33 building permits were issued since 2007 (26 in 2007, 2 in 2008 and 5 in January -March 2009).
2
     The City does not have any at-risk units.
August 2009                                                                                          City of Ione General Plan
                                                                 9-7

                                                                                               HOUSING
ISSUES THIS ELEMENT ATTEMPTS TO SOLVE
The primary issues the Housing Element attempts to solve are listed below and address the housing
needs identified in the Housing Needs Assessment (see Appendix B).
    •    Preserve Ione’s overall identity and character by supporting a mix of housing types which
         preserve and complement the City’s existing housing supply.
    •    Encourage decent, safe, adequate, and affordable housing in sufficient quantities for all
         economic segments of the community.
    •    Ensure availability of adequate housing for special needs groups including elderly, disabled,
         large families, female heads of households and the homeless.
    •    Promote affordability of housing of all types to meet the needs of households of all income
         levels.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
GOAL H-1:             Promote decent, safe, adequate, and affordable housing in
                      sufficient quantities for all economic segments of the
                      community.
Policy H-1.1:         Annually review the City’s building codes for compliance with the Housing
                      Element.
                      Action H-1.1.1:      Building Code Review. The City will continue to annually
                      review the City’s building codes for current compliance and adopt the necessary
                      revisions so as to further local development objectives.
                      Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, Building Inspector, City Planner, and City
                      Council
                      Funding Source: General Fund
                      Schedule: Annual evaluation of the adequacy of the City’s building codes
Policy H-1.2:         Provide consistency between the Zoning Code and General Plan, and incorporate
                      all amendments identified in the Housing Element Housing Program.
                      Action H-1.2.1:      Zoning Code Revision and Update. A complete review of
                      the Zoning Code is necessary to ensure its compliance with new State zoning
                      regulations. The Zoning Code shall be updated to meet new State regulations.
City of Ione General Plan                                                                         August 2009
                                                      9–8

 HOUSING
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner, City Engineer, Planning
              Commission, City Council
              Funding Source: General Fund
              Schedule: A complete update by August 2009
Policy H-1.3: The City shall continue ongoing efforts to fast-track all applications in order to
              promote the construction of housing.
              Action H-1.3.1:       Development Processing System Review Program.
              Complex processing procedures in permit issuance can be a major obstacle in
              housing development, especially for affordable housing projects that are under
              tight timelines imposed by state and federal funding programs. Minimize
              processing time for development permits, especially those for affordable residential
              projects and those which conform to City development requirements.
              The City will continue to monitor the development processing/review
              procedures to minimize the time required for review. This reduction in time will
              reduce the cost to developers and may increase the housing production in the
              City. The City will, on an annual basis, review and update as necessary its
              Framework for Planning, Entitlement Review, and Development. This
              document is a tool for staff, developers, and decision makers in understanding
              how to effectively navigate through the City’s development process.
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner
              Funding Source: General Fund
              Schedule: Annually
GOAL H-2      Maintain adequate land within the various land use categories
              to allow development of housing to meet projected demand for
              residential units.
Policy H-2.1: The City shall continue to offer a density bonus to qualifying residential
              development to encourage the construction of housing affordable to very low- and
              low-income households.
              Action H-2.1.1:       Density Bonus Program. Review the City’s density bonus
              program to ensure its consistency with State density bonus law. If any
              discrepancies are found, the City’s density bonus ordinance will be amended and
              updated to State minimum standards.
August 2009                                                                City of Ione General Plan
                                             9-9

                                                                                           HOUSING
                   Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager City Planner, Planning Commission, City
                   Council
                   Funding Source: General Fund
                   Schedule: Ongoing
Policy H-2.2:      The City shall maintain an adequate and reasonable supply of land in all residential
                   zone designations.
                   Action H-2.2.1:       Residential Site Development Program. The supply of
                   developable land with adequate infrastructure that is zoned for residential use can
                   assist the development of housing in the City. The City will annually ensure that
                   there is enough vacant and underutilized residential land in the City to meet its
                   RHNA allocation.
                   Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner
                   Funding Source: General Fund
                   Implementation Schedule: Annually
                   Action H-2.2.2:       Multifamily
                   Zoning Expansion Program. As part
                   of the General Plan update, to be
                   completed in August 2009, the City
                   identified land appropriate to rezone to
                   high density zoning districts. The City
                   has identified seven acres in the One-
                   family dwelling residential (R-1a)
                   district to be rezoned to the High
                   Density      Multiple-family       dwelling
                   residential district. The City has also
                   identified 1.4 acres of land in the Light                      Multifamily Housing
                   Commercial (C-1) district to be
                   rezoned to the Limited Multiple-family dwelling residential (R-2) district. Specific
                   parcels have been identified and are shown in Table HE-41 of the Housing
                   Needs Assessment (Appendix A).
                   Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner, City Council and Planning
                   Commission.
                   Funding Source: General Fund
                   Schedule: August 2009, consecutively with the adoption of the Housing Element
City of Ione General Plan                                                                             August 2009
                                                 9–10

 HOUSING
              Action H-2.2.3:        Wastewater Capacity. The City is committed to ensuring that
              there is enough wastewater treatment capacity to support its fair share of the
              region's housing needs. The City is working towards updating its
              Wastewater Master Plan and anticipates adoption of the updated plan by the end
              of 2009. The Master Plan will call for phased improvements to the City's sewer
              service. Contingent upon Regional Water Quality Control Board approval, the
              City anticipates initiating construction of sewer treatment improvements within 18
              months of General Plan adoption. To comply with Government Code Section
              65589.7 The City shall grant a priority for the provision of these services to
              proposed developments that include housing units affordable to lower income
              households (Cross Reference: Goal PF-5 and related policies and actions)
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Council, City Manager, Wastewater Operator, City
              Engineer, City Planner
              Funding Source: Wastewater Fund
              Schedule: Dependent upon RWQCB approval, construction stating by February 2011
              Action H-2.2.4:        Potable Water Capacity. The City is committed to ensuring
              that there is enough potable water to support its fair share of the region's housing
              needs. The City will continue to work collaboratively with the region's potable
              water provider, Amador Water Agency, to identify both short and long-term viable
              and cost effective solutions to maintaining potable water availability in the City.
              (Cross Reference: Goal PF-4 and related policies and actions)
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Council, City Manager, City Engineer, City Planner
              Funding Source: General Fund
              Schedule: On-going, target completion of upgrades by 2014
GOAL H-3:     Maintain and preserve the City’s existing housing stock.
Policy H-3.1: Continue to provide a housing rehabilitation program for lower-income owners
              and renters.
              Action H-3.1.1:        Housing Rehabilitation Program. The City will continue to
              pursue grant opportunities to create a Rental Rehabilitation Program. The City
              will apply for HOME funding for this program and consider applying for CDBG
              funding for this program. Once the Redevelopment Area has been established, the
              City will consider allocating a portion of the Low and Moderate Housing Fund for
              housing rehabilitation.
August 2009                                                                  City of Ione General Plan
                                             9-11

                                                                                            HOUSING
                   Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Council
                   Funding Source: CDBG, HOME, Redevelopment Agency Low and Moderate Income Housing
                   (RDA Low-Mod funds) Fund
                   Schedule: 2012, Annually apply for CDBG, PTA grants, HOME applications, and use
                   RDA Low-Mod funds if a Redevelopment Agency is established.
Policy H-3.2:      The City shall continue to enhance code enforcement efforts.
                   Action H-3.2.1:       Ione Beautification (Code Enforcement) Program. The
                   City currently handles violations of its Municipal Code on a demand-driven basis.
                   Staff responds to housing code complaints initiated by Ione tenants. The City
                   plans to sponsor debris hauling and clean-up programs and plans to limit the
                   number of garage sales permitted during the year.
                   Responsible Agencies/Department: City Manager, City Building Inspector, Police Chief, City
                   Planner
                   Funding Source: General Fund
                   Schedule: Ongoing as complaints are received; debris hauling and cleanup program biannually.
GOAL H-4:          Promote affordability of housing of all types to meet the present
                   and projected needs of households of all income levels.
Policy H-4.1:      The City shall continue to work with nonprofit entities and any other groups
                   identified for the purpose of building affordable housing and providing housing
                   services to qualified residents of Ione.
                   Action H-4.1.1:       Affordable Housing Development Program. City staff shall
                   continue to coordinate with the appropriate entities, such as Mercy Housing of
                   California, once during the planning
                   period or as projects come onboard
                   that could provide housing and
                   services for lower-income households
                   and take the appropriate steps to
                   recommend that the City Council
                   formally execute an agreement or letter
                   of understanding with these entities.
                   Responsible    Agencies/Departments: City
                   Manager
                                                                                    Affordable Housing
City of Ione General Plan                                                                              August 2009
                                                 9–12

 HOUSING
              Funding Source: General Fund
              Schedule: Once during the planning period or as projects come onboard
Policy H-4.2: Assure that new housing developments provide a fair share of housing for persons
              of extremely low-, very low,- low- and moderate-incomes.
              Action H-4.2.1:         State and Federal Housing Programs. The City will apply
              for funding as NOFAs are released for the development of affordable housing
              units.. (Cross reference: ED 4.2.1)
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager
              Funding Source: All available federal, state and local sources
              Schedule: Ongoing
Policy H-4.3: Assist in the development of housing affordable to extremely low-, very low- and
              low-income households through financial and/or technical assistance.
              Action H-4.3.1:         First-Time Homebuyers Down Payment Assistance
              Program. Continue to use CDBG funding for the First-time Homebuyer Program
              in the City.
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, Mercy Housing California
              Funding Source: CDBG
              Schedule: Ongoing
Policy H-4.4: The City shall establish a Redevelopment project area. (Cross reference: ED 3.3)
              Action H-4.4.1:         Redevelopment Project Area Creation. The City has
              initiated the creation of a Redevelopment Agency and will work to establish a
              redevelopment project area.
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Attorney, City Council
              Funding Source: General Fund
              Schedule: August 2011-2012
Policy H-4.5: Promote residential infill development. (Cross reference: ED 3.4)
              Action H-4.5.1:         Infill Development Program. Infill development is one
              technique in meeting the housing needs required by expanding populations. The
              City will encourage the use of vacant small individual lots in the central City by
August 2009                                                                     City of Ione General Plan
                                              9-13
                                                                                     HOUSING
                   reviewing, and amending as appropriate, development standards to accommodate
                   housing development.
                   The City will encourage the use of infill for the development of housing by
                   addressing density requirements, which may constrain the development of
                   housing on infill lots, and if necessary remove those constraints. The City will
                   consider reduced impact fees for infill development. (Cross reference: PF 1.3)
                   Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Planner, City Manager, Planning Commission, City
                   Council
                   Funding Source: City General Fund
                   Schedule: December 2010
Policy H-4.6:      Promote the production of affordable housing by offering development incentives
                   in conjunction with an affordable housing requirement.
                   Action H-4.6.1:       Affordable Housing Program. To encourage the
                   development and availability of housing affordable to a broad range of households
                   with varying income levels throughout Ione, the City requires that residential
                   projects of ten or more units include five percent of the units in the project as
                   affordable to very low-, low-, and moderate-income households. Developers of
                   less than ten housing units are exempt from this requirement.
                   Developers of ten or more housing units shall provide the following:
                   •    In a rental housing project of ten or more units two percent of the units shall be
                        affordable to very low -income households, two percent shall be affordable to
                        low-income households and one percent shall be affordable to moderate-
                        income households.
                   •    In a for-sale project of ten or more units two percent shall be affordable to low-
                        income households and three percent shall be affordable to moderate-income
                        households.
                   •    Affordable units shall be built on site and must be comparable in infrastructure
                        (including wastewater, water and other utilities), construction quality, and
                        exterior design to the market-rate residential units. Affordable units may be
                        smaller in aggregate size and have different interior finishes and features than
                        market-rate units, so long as the interior features are durable, of good quality,
                        and consistent with contemporary standards for new housing. The number of
                        bedrooms should be the same as those in the market-rate units, except that if
                        the market-rate units provide more than three bedrooms, the affordable units
                        need not provide more than three bedrooms
City of Ione General Plan                                                                    August 2009
                                                  9–14

 HOUSING
            •   All affordable units must be constructed and occupied concurrently with or
                prior to the construction and occupancy of market-rate units. In phased
                developments, the affordable units must be evenly distributed throughout the
                development and will be constructed and occupied in proportion to the
                number of units in each phase of the residential development
            •   Deed restrictions shall be provided to assure that rental units developed for
                very low-, low- and moderate-income persons will remain affordable for 55
                years and ownership units developed for low- and moderate-income units will
                remain affordable for 45 years.
            •   If an owner sells an affordable unit before the end of the 45 year resale
                restriction term, the owner shall repay the City/ subsidy balance. The balance is
                any remaining principal and accrued interest after the subsidy has been reduced
                as defined in the Buyer’s Resale Agreement (to be determined at the time of
                purchase).
            •   Per the deed restriction of the affordable units, all affordable units resold shall
                be required to be sold to an income-eligible household.
            •   The City will develop and maintain a waiting list of eligible persons wishing to
                purchase or occupy an affordable housing unit.
            Alternatives
            •   Payment of an in-lieu fee for ownership or rental units may be acceptable and
                the amount of in-lieu fees shall be established by a nexus study to be completed
                by June of 2010. The money will then be placed into an affordable housing
                trust fund. The City will develop a set of priorities for the use of Housing Trust
                Fund monies once the Housing Trust Fund is established (Action H-4.7.1).
            •   If the developer is permitted to dedicate land for the development of affordable
                units in satisfaction of part or all of its affordable housing requirement, the
                agreement shall identify the site of the dedicated land and shall provide for the
                implementation of such dedication in a manner deemed appropriate and timely
                by the City.
            Incentives
            Possible incentives that may be included but are not limited to the following:
            •   Assistance with accessing and apply for funding (based on availability of federal,
                state, local foundations, and private funds);
            •   Mortgage-subsidy or down payment assistance programs to assist first time
                homebuyers and other qualifying households, when such funds are available;
August 2009                                                              City of Ione General Plan
                                          9-15

                                                                                              HOUSING
                   •   Expedited/streamlined application processing and development review;
                   •   Modification of development requirements, such as reduced set backs and
                       parking standards on a case-by-case basis; and
                   •   Density Bonuses.
                   Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, and
                   City Council.
                   Funding Source: General Fund
                   Schedule: Implement as residential projects are processed through the Planning Department.
Policy H-4.7:      The City shall establish an Affordable Housing Trust Fund
                   Action H-4.7.1:        Affordable Housing Trust Fund. The City will develop an
                   Affordable Housing Trust Fund with fund that will be acquired through in-lieu
                   fees as a part of the Affordable Housing Program (Action H-4.6.1). Once funds
                   start being collected, the City will develop a priority list for the use of these funds.
                   Additionally, the City will apply for matching funds from the Local Housing Trust
                   Fund Matching Grant Program though the State Housing and Community
                   Development Department (HCD).
                   Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, and
                   City Council.
                   Funding Source: In-lieu fees collected from Action H-4.6.1
                   Schedule: Develop a Trust Fund by June 2010.
GOAL H-5:          Ensure availability of adequate housing for special needs
                   groups including elderly, disabled, large families, female heads
                   of households, and the homeless.
Policy H-5.1:      The City shall continue to enforce all State and federal handicap accessibility
                   requirements.
                   Action H-5.1.1:        Persons with Disabilities Access. In May 2009 the City
                   established a reasonable accommodation procedure (section 17.10.060 of the City’s
                   Zoning Code) to ensure a fair and efficient process for persons with disabilities to
                   make necessary accessibility adjustments to their homes. The City shall ensure that
                   reasonable accommodations to persons with disabilities are provided as required
City of Ione General Plan                                                                              August 2009
                                                     9–16

 HOUSING
              under Senate Bill 520 (Chapter 671 of the Government Code). The City shall
              annually review its Reasonable Accommodations permit process for consistency
              with State law. To further comply with SB 520, the City will update its definition of
              family to state “One or more persons living together in a dwelling unit, with
              common access to, and common use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within
              the dwelling unit.”
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Planner, City Manager
              Funding Source: General Fund
              Schedule: Ongoing, provide an updated definition of family by August 2010.
Policy H-5.2: Seek and support programs that will address special needs housing including
              housing for large families (families with five or more members).
              Action H-5.2.1:       Large Family Housing Program. Renter households with
              seven or more persons do not have an adequate number of dwelling possibilities in
              the City. The number of large rental housing units is very limited in the City and
              as such large renter households cannot obtain adequate housing.
              The City will continue to provide incentives, such as modifications to
              development standards, and regulatory incentives for the development of rental
              housing units with four or more bedrooms.
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission and
              City Council
              Funding Source: General Fund
              Schedule: Ongoing
Policy H-5.3: Permit emergency shelters and transitional housing in accordance with state law.
              Action H-5.3.1:       Identification of Sites for Emergency Shelters and Transitional
              and Supportive Housing.
              Emergency Shelters
              California Health and Safety Code (Section 50801) defines an emergency shelter
              as “housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is
              limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual
              or households may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.”
              The City allows emergency shelters in the Limited Manufacturing (M-1) Zoning
              District as a use permitted by right without a conditional use permit or other
August 2009                                                                     City of Ione General Plan
                                             9-17

                                                                                    HOUSING
                   discretionary review. The M-1 district is within close proximity to schools, parks
                   and the downtown area which includes the City Market. After the General Plan
                   and Zoning Code Updates, the City will have approximately 70 acres available in
                   the Limited Manufacturing Zoning District.
                    In addition, the City will evaluate adopting development and managerial
                   standards that will be consistent with Government Code Section 65583(a)(4).
                   These standards may include such items
                   as:
                   •   Lighting
                   •   On-site management
                   •   Maximum number of beds or persons
                       to be served nightly by the facility
                   •   Off-street      parking     based     on
                       demonstrated need
                   •   Security during hours that the
                       emergency shelter is in operation
                   Transitional and Supportive Housing
                   Transitional and supportive housing provides temporary housing often with
                   supportive services to formerly homeless persons for a period that is typically
                   between six months and two years. The supportive services, such as job training,
                   rehabilitation, and counseling, help individuals gain life skills necessary for
                   independent living. Both transitional and supportive housing types are allowed as
                   permitted uses subject to only the same restrictions on residential uses contained
                   in the same type of structure.
                   Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, and
                   City Council
                   Funding Source: General Fund
                   Schedule: Ongoing
Policy H-5.4:      The City shall recognize the housing needs of extremely low-income persons (30
                   percent of AMI) and encourage development of housing to meet these needs.
                   Action H-5.4.1:      Extremely Low-Income Households. AB 2634 requires the
                   City to identify zoning to encourage and facilitate housing suitable for extremely
                   low-income households, which includes supportive housing and single-room
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                9–18

 HOUSING
              occupancy units. The City will continue to allow single-room occupancy units
              (SROs) to be permitted in the Multiple-family dwelling (R-3) and High Density
              Multiple-family dwelling (R-4) zoning districts with a conditional use permit.
              In addition, to encourage and facilitate the development of housing affordable to
              extremely low-income households, the City will prioritize funding and offer
              financial incentives and regulatory concessions.
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, City
              Council
              Funding Source: General Fund
              Schedule: Ongoing, as projects are processed through the Planning Department.
Policy H-5.5: The City shall encourage the provision of housing that accommodates the special
              accessibility needs of the elderly.
              Action H-5.5.1:        Senior Housing Program. To encourage the development of
              affordable senior projects, the City will offer density bonuses, help interested
              developers apply for government financing and/or other government subsidies,
              assist interested developers in acquiring surplus government land suitable for
              multifamily development, expedite permit processing, consider reducing parking
              standards and lot sizes, and consider waiving impact fees for low-income dwelling
              units. (Cross reference: ED 1.5, PF 1.3)
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, City
              Council
              Funding Source: General Fund
              Schedule: Ongoing
Policy H-5.6: Assist in the development of housing for female heads of households.
              Action H-5.6.1:        Female Head of Household Housing Program. Female-
              headed households, with children under 18 years of age, are one of the fastest
              growing special housing needs group in the City. Many times these households do
              not have sufficient income to acquire adequate housing.
              The City will identify nonprofits, transitional shelter providers, battered spouse
              assistance providers, and any other assistance-type providers which may offer
              services for female heads of households. The City will contact these service
              providers in an attempt to ascertain the specific services and housing needed for
              this special needs group. The City will assist in the development of housing for
              this group by considering offering incentives such as fee reduction or waivers,
August 2009                                                                      City of Ione General Plan
                                              9-19
                                                                                     HOUSING
                   funding assistance, if possible, fast-tracking development plans, and/or any other
                   assistance deemed feasible by the City. (Cross reference: PF 1.3)
                   Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, City
                   Council
                   Funding Source: General Fund, CDBG, HOME
                   Schedule: Annually
                   Action H-5.6.2:       Child Care Program. In cooperation with private developers,
                   the City will evaluate on a case by case basis the feasibility of pairing a child care
                   center in conjunction with affordable, multifamily housing developments or nearby
                   to major residential subdivisions.
                   Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner, Planning Commission, City
                   Council
                   Funding Source: General Fund
                   Schedule: Ongoing
GOAL H-6:          Ensure that discrimination is not a factor in the ability of
                   households to obtain housing.
Policy H-6.1:      Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, religion, sex,
                   marital status, ancestry, national origin, or color.
                   Action H-6.1.1:       Housing       Discrimination        and     Housing       Equal
                   Opportunity. Continue to coordinate and refer interested persons to the
                   Amador/Tuolumne Community Action Agency. The City will act as an
                   independent third party to discrimination complaints and shall maintain a file for
                   the purpose of recording information about any alleged violations of State or
                   federal fair housing requirements. The City will support housing equal opportunity
                   programs by providing informational fair housing brochures available to the public
                   at City Hall, public library, and other public places as appropriate.
                   Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager
                   Funding Source: General Fund
                   Schedule: Ongoing
City of Ione General Plan                                                                   August 2009
                                                  9–20

 HOUSING
              Action H-6.1.2:      Continue Ione’s Fair Housing Practices in All Housing
              Development. The City shall continue to require and enforce of all residential
              development, whether it be new or rehabilitated, public or private, fair housing
              practices as required by State and federal fair housing laws. Any and all
              occurrences of housing discrimination will be recorded and steps will be taken to
              correct the situation.
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Administrator, City Council
              Funding Source: General Fund
              Schedule: Ongoing
GOAL H-7:     Promote the conservation of natural resources and energy in
              housing design requirements.
Policy H-7.1: Encourage the reduction of energy use and the conservation of natural resources
              in the development of housing through implementation of the State Energy
              Conservation Standards. (Cross reference: CO 6.2)
              Action H-7.1.1:      Implement State Energy Conservation Standards. The
              Building Inspector will continue to be responsible for implementing the State’s
              energy conservation standards (e.g., Title 24 Energy Standards). This includes
              checking of building plans and other written documentation showing compliance
              and the inspection of construction to ensure that the dwelling units are constructed
              according to those plans. Applicants for building permits must show compliance
              with the state’s energy conservation requirements at the time building plans are
              submitted.
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: Building Inspector
              Funding Source: General Fund
              Schedule: Ongoing
              Action H-7.1.2:      Ensure Consistency with Green Building Standards. The
              City will annually ensure that local building codes are consistent with state
              mandated or recommended green building standards. (Cross reference: CO 6.3)
              Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner
              Funding Source: General Fund
              Schedule: Annually
August 2009                                                                 City of Ione General Plan
                                           9-21

                                                                                HOUSING
                   Action H-7.1.3:        Promote Energy Conservation. The City will continue to
                   partner with PG&E to promote energy saving programs such as, the California
                   Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE), the Relief for Energy Assistance through
                   Community Help (REACH) and the Family Electric Rate Assistance (FERA).
                   (Cross reference: CO 6.4)
                   Responsible Agencies/Departments: City Manager, City Planner
                   Funding Source: General Fund
                   Schedule: Ongoing
City of Ione General Plan                                                            August 2009
                                                9–22

