                  CAMARILLO URBAN RESTRICTION BOUNDARY
                                        CAMARILLO
The electorate of the City of Camarillo
has adopted an urban growth boundary
line designated the Camarillo Urban
Restriction Boundary (CURB), which has
been extended until December 31, 2050.
                                          CAMARILLO URBAN RESTRICTION BOUNDARY l 2016
City of Camarillo Measure J – Ordinance No. 1134,
was passed by the voters of the City of Camarillo at
the November 8, 2016, General Municipal Election.
                 See Attachment A.
                               CAMARILLO URBAN RESTRICTION BOUNDARY l 2016

                                          Attachment A
                 CITY OF CAMARILLO MEASURE J – ORDINANCE NO. 1134
                 AN INITIATIVE ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER 3.0 OF
                 THE CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN TO ADD DEVELOPMENT
                 RESTRICTIONS WITHIN AN AREA DESIGNATED THE
                 CONEJO CREEK VOTER PARTICIPATION AREA AND TO
                 AMEND AND EXTEND THE LIFE OF DEVELOPMENT
                 RESTRICTIONS OUTSIDE THE CAMARILLO URBAN
                 RESTRICTION BOUNDARY (CURB)
        The people of the City of Camarillo do ordain as follows:
        Section 1. Title
        This ordinance measure to amend the Camarillo General Plan shall be known as the
Camarillo 2050 SAVE OPEN-SPACE and AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES (SOAR) Land
Use Voter Participation General Plan Amendment.
        Section 2. Preamble
        On November 3, 1998, the voters of Camarillo approved an initiative measure
establishing a Camarillo Urban Restriction Boundary, entitled the Save Open-Space and
Agricultural Resources measure (SOAR) limiting development outside of the CURB. The
measure sunsets – expires – in 2020. This initiative is intended to restate and re-adopt the
SOAR measure, and to re-establish the CURB line, in order that their lives may be extended
until December 31, 2050. Accordingly, the following is the measure as adopted by the voters
in 1998, and inserted into the City’s General Plan at Chapter 3.0. Certain changes are set
forth herein, deletions being indicated by strike-outs and additions being indicated by italics.
        In addition to restating and readopting the SOAR measure and its concomitant CURB,
with the indicated changes, this measure identifies a particularly sensitive area on the south
easterly edge of the City of Camarillo and calls for voter participation in most development
decisions to be made in that area denominated the Conejo Creek Voter Participation Area.
        The original 1998 measure, with indicated changes, follows:
        Section 3. Introduction
        The electorate of the City of Camarillo has through the ordinance process adopted an
urban growth boundary line designated the Camarillo Urban Restriction Boundary (CURB).
Its purposes, principles, implementation procedures, and methodologies for amendment are
set forth in this Chapter III 3.0 of the Camarillo General Plan. This initiative measure restates
and readopts the CURB and otherwise enhances the voters’ participation in major land use
decisions of the City of Camarillo, by the establishment of the Conejo Creek Voter
Participation Area [Implementation, ¶ G].
        Section 4. Purpose
        The City of Camarillo and surrounding area with its unique combination of soils,
microclimate and hydrology, has become one of the finest growing regions in the world.
Vegetable and fruit production from the County of Ventura and in particular production from
                                                                                      CURB | 3-1

the soils and silt from the Conejo Creek, Calleguas Creek, Revlon/Beardsley Wash and
alluvial plains adjacent to the City have achieved international acclaim, enhancing the City’s
economy and reputation.
        The purpose of this Urban Restriction Boundary and the new Conejo Creek Voter
Participation Area is to ensure that the purposes and principles set forth in the Camarillo
General Plan relating to Land Use (Chapter IV) and Open Space and Conservation (Chapter
IX) are inviolable against transitory short-term political decisions and that agricultural,
watershed and open space lands are not prematurely or unnecessarily converted to other
non-agricultural or non-open space uses without public debate and a vote of the people.
        Section 5. Principles and Findings
        Continued urban encroachment into agricultural and watershed areas, in particular but
without limitation into those lands denominated herein as the Conejo Creek Voter
Participation Area, will impair agriculture and threaten the public health, safety, and welfare
by causing increased traffic congestion, associated air pollution, and potentially serious water
problems, such as pollution, depletion, and sedimentation of available water resources. Such
urban encroachment would eventually result in both the unnecessary expensive extension of
public services and facilities and inevitable conflicts between urban and open space/
agricultural uses. The unique character of the City of Camarillo and quality of life of City
residents depend on the protection of a substantial amount of open space, natural resource
and agricultural lands. Given the effectiveness of the SOAR measure over the last almost 20
years, the continued protection of such lands not only ensures the continued viability of
agriculture, but also contributes to flood control and the protection of wildlife, environmentally
sensitive areas, and irreplaceable natural resources. As importantly, extending the sunset
date of the adopted adopting an Urban Restriction Boundary around the City of Camarillo
promotes the formation and continuation of a cohesive community by defining the boundaries
and by helping to prevent urban sprawl. Such an Urban Restriction Boundary promotes
efficient municipal services and facilities by confining urban development to defined
development areas.
        Moreover, the area at the southeastern edge of the City of Camarillo, providing the
easternmost gateway for many travelers and visitors to the City makes for a particularly
important and sensitive area not completely protected by the voter participation elements of
SOAR. A recent development proposal for that area threatened to disrupt not only the
important agricultural and open space components of the City, but in addition the watershed
and wildlife corridor associated with Conejo Creek lending significant benefits to the City. The
development application generated much lively public debate regarding many aspects of the
proposal. Accordingly, the citizens hereby find that a direct democracy involvement in that
area would be beneficial to the community as a whole, and so by this measure create the
“Conejo Creek Voter Participation Area.” Enhanced public notice of changes to the
Agriculture designation within that area is necessary to ensure the continued public
involvement in decisions affecting that important area.
        Section 6. Implementation
        A.      The City of Camarillo has established hereby establishes an the Camarillo
Urban Restriction Boundary (CURB). The CURB is established coterminous with and in the
same location as the Sphere of Influence line established by the Local Agency Formation
Ordinance No. 1134
Page 2 of 13
                                                                                        CURB | 3-2

Commission as it exists existed as of January 1, 1998 or modified pursuant to the Amendment
Procedures as altered as set forth below, excepting that the CURB line additionally
encompasses: i) that certain parcel of approximately 140 acres immediately outside the
western edge of the influence line south of the 101 Freeway easterly of and at the intersection
of Central Avenue, and easterly of the Greenbelt line in that general location, currently
designated commercial/office on the Camarillo General Plan Map, and for which a request
for annexation was pending prior to January 1, 1998; and ii) that certain parcel of
approximately 300 acres immediately outside of the City’s sphere of influence line that is
located south of Pleasant Valley Road, east of Calleguas Creek, north of the westerly
extension of Howard Road and west of Pancho Road.
        B.     Until December 31, 2020 2050, the City of Camarillo shall restrict urban
services (except temporary mutual assistance with other jurisdictions) and urbanized uses of
land to within the Camarillo Urban Restriction Boundary, except as provided herein and
except for the purpose of completing roadways designated in the circulation element of the
Camarillo General Plan as of January 1, 1998 April 23, 2014, and as it may be amended
hereafter, construction of public potable water or sewer facilities, additions to public schools
already in existence or new public schools as deemed necessary and appropriate by the state
agency with responsibility for such decisions, public parks or other government facilities and
projects deemed necessary by the City Council for public safety or the delivery of essential
public services. construction of public potable water facilities, or public schools, public parks
or other government facilities. Other than the exceptions provided in this Chapter 3.0, the
City and its departments, boards, commissions, officers and employees shall not grant, or by
inaction allow to be approved by operation of law, any general plan amendment, rezoning,
specific plan, subdivision map, conditional use permit, building permit or any other ministerial
or discretionary entitlement, which is inconsistent with the purposes of this Chapter 3.0,
unless in accordance with the Amendment Procedures of Section V of this Chapter 3.0.
        “Urbanized uses of land” shall mean any development which would require the
establishment of new community sewer systems or the significant expansion of existing
community sewer systems; or, would result in the creation of residential lots less than 10
acres in area; or, would result in the establishment of commercial or industrial uses which are
neither agriculturally-related nor related to the production of mineral resources.
        C.     The Camarillo General Plan Map is has been amended to reflect the existence
of the Camarillo Urban Restriction Boundary. A copy of said Map, readopted by this
ordinance, formatted to more clearly illustrate said CURB is attached hereto as Exhibit “A.”
        D.     The City of Camarillo is hereby authorized to amend the City of Camarillo
Zoning Ordinance, and related zoning maps and other ordinances and policies affected by
this ordinance as soon as possible and in the manner and time required by any applicable
state law, to ensure consistency between the policies adopted in this ordinance, the City of
Camarillo Zoning Ordinance, and related zoning maps and other ordinances and policies.
        E.     The date that the notice of intention to circulate this ordinance measure was
submitted to the elections official of the City of Camarillo is deemed the “submittal date.” The
City General Plan in effect on the submittal date and the General Plan as amended by this
ordinance comprise an integrated, internally consistent and compatible statement of policies
for the City of Camarillo. In order to ensure that nothing in this ordinance measure would
prevent the City of Camarillo General Plan from being an integrated, internally consistent and
Ordinance No. 1134
Page 3 of 13
                                                                                      CURB | 3-3

compatible statement of the policies of the City, as required by state law, and to ensure that
the actions of the voters in enacting this ordinance are given effect, any amendment to the
General Plan that is adopted between the submittal date and the date that the General Plan
is amended by this ordinance measure shall, to the extent that such interim-enacted provision
is inconsistent with the General Plan provisions adopted by this ordinance measure, be
amended as soon as possible and in the manner and time required by state law to ensure
consistency between the provisions adopted by this ordinance and other elements of the
Camarillo City General Plan.
        DF.    Neither the Camarillo Urban Restriction Boundary, as defined and readopted
herein and as reflected Illustrated on the amended General Plan Boundaries Map (attached
as Exhibit “A” and incorporated herein by reference), nor the land use designation of the
General Plan within the Conejo Creek Voter Participation Area, nor this Chapter 3.0 of the
General Plan may be amended, altered, revoked or otherwise changed prior to December
31, 2020 2050, except by the vote of the people or by the City Council pursuant to the
procedures set forth in Section V of this Chapter.
        G.     Notwithstanding the existence of the CURB line, as indicated in paragraphs A
and C, above, that area south and east of Pleasant Valley Road on the City’s southeasterly
edge, being the gateway to the City, is considered by the proponents of this ordinance to be
particularly sensitive, the proposed development of which has generated substantial public
involvement and debate. Accordingly, said area, as depicted on Exhibit “B,” shall be deemed
the “Conejo Creek Voter Participation Area.” The Conejo Creek Voter Participation Area has
a land use designation of Agriculture, as set forth in the City’s General Plan Land Use Map
(Exhibit “C”). Said “Agriculture” land use designations shall remain so designated unless
amended by the procedures set forth herein, or unless amended by approval by a majority
vote at an election. Attached hereto as Exhibit “D,” set forth for illustrative purposes only, and
not intended to be embodied within the Camarillo General Plan, are Sections 19.10.020 and
19.10.030 from the Camarillo Municipal Code indicating the types of uses permitted in the
Agriculture land use Designation under the City’s Zoning Code. It is not intended that said
uses are exclusive or cannot be modified in the future. They do, however, indicate the nature
and intensity of uses that may be respectively allowed in and deemed consistent with the
Agriculture designations.
        H.     Within the Conejo Creek Voter Participation Area, any and all applications for
a zone change or project that require a public hearing, whether before an officer, board,
commission or council of the City, for uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted shall
have notice provided by the City Clerk, prior to every hearing necessitated by the application,
as follows:
               i) according to the City’s standard notice requirements to neighboring
        properties, typically those within 300 feet of the edges of the proposed zoning area or
        project boundaries; and,
               ii) not less than 30 days prior to the hearing, to all individuals or organizations
        who or which have indicated a desire for such Notice by placing his/her/its name and
        contact information on a Conejo Creek Voter Participation Registry to be maintained
        by the City Clerk.
Ordinance No. 1134
Page 4 of 13
                                                                                       CURB | 3-4

        Section 7. Amendment Procedures
        Until December 31, 2020 2050, the foregoing purposes, principles and implementation
provisions of this Chapter III 3.0 may be amended only by a vote of the people commenced
pursuant to state statute, the ordinance process by the public, or pursuant to the procedures
set forth in subsections A, B, C or D below. Unless amended pursuant to these procedures
all land use decisions by the City Council regarding properties outside the CURB or decisions
relating to lands within the Conejo Creek Voter Participation Area shall be implemented to
further the purposes of this initiative. Should amendments be undertaken pursuant to the
provisions of this initiative other than by the voters at an election, said amendments shall be
designed and construed as narrowly as possible to approximate the Purpose, Principles and
Findings of this initiative, while still allowing the Amendments as permitted.
        A.      Following at least one public hearing for presentations by an applicant and the
public, and after compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act, the City Council
may, without a vote of the people, amend either the Urban Restriction Boundary (Exhibit A)
described herein and designated on the amended General Plan Boundaries Map and the or
permit change the land use designation within the Conejo Creek Voter Participation Area in
order to comply with state law regarding the provision of housing for all economic segments
of the community. For that purpose, the City Council may amend the General Plan, and/or
the Urban Restriction Boundary (Exhibit “A”) as described herein and as designated on the
General Plan Boundaries map, or change the land use designation in the Conejo Creek Voter
Participation Area (Exhibit “B”) in order to accommodate lands to be designated for residential
uses, provided that no more than 40 acres of land be so redesignated brought within the
Urban Restriction Boundary for this purpose in any calendar year. Such amendment may be
adopted only if the City Council makes each of the following findings:
        1)      The land is immediately adjacent to existing compatibly developed areas and
the applicant for the amendment to the General Plan inclusion of land within the Urban
Restriction Boundary has provided to the city evidence that required municipal services,
applicable water and sewer districts, as well as the school district with jurisdiction over such
land have adequate capacity to accommodate and will serve the proposed development and
provide it with adequate public services; and
        2)      That the proposed development will address the creation of housing most
necessary to achieve a balance in its Regional Housing Needs Assessment, e.g., create new
low- and very low income housing; and
        3)      That there is no existing residentially designated land available within the
Urban Restriction Boundary to accommodate the proposed development; and
        4)      That it is not reasonably feasible to accommodate the proposed development
by re-designating lands located within the Urban Restriction Boundary.
        B.      Following at least one public hearing for presentations by an applicant and the
public, and after compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act, the City Council
may amend the General Plan’s Camarillo Urban Restriction Boundary described herein
(Exhibit “A”) or the land use designation within the Conejo Creek Voter Protection Area
(Exhibit “B”) and designated on in the amended General Plan described herein and
designated on the General Plan Boundaries Map, based on substantial evidence in the
Ordinance No. 1134
Page 5 of 13
                                                                                     CURB | 3-5

record, if the City Council makes each of the following findings:
        1)      The land proposed for General Plan amendment receiving urban services,
urbanized land uses, or inclusion with in the Urban Restriction Boundary, is immediately
adjacent to areas developed in a manner compatible to the proposed use;
        2)      Adequate public services and facilities are available and have the capacity and
capability to accommodate the proposed use;
        3)      The proposed use will not have direct, indirect, or cumulative adverse
significant impacts to the area’s agricultural viability, habitat, scenic resources, or watershed
value.
        4)      The proposed use will not adversely affect the stability of land use patterns in
the area (i.e., the parcel affected will not introduce or facilitate a use that is incompatible with
adjoining or nearby uses);
        5)      The land proposed for reception of public services, urbanization or inclusion
within the Urban Restriction Boundary has not been used for agricultural purposes in the
immediately preceding two four years and is unusable for agriculture due to its topography,
drainage, flooding, adverse soil conditions, inaccessibility to appropriate water or other
physical reasons;
        6)      The land outside the Camarillo Urban Restriction Boundary (CURB) proposed
for reception of public services or urbanization, or, the land within the Conejo Creek Voter
Participation Area proposed for General Plan Land Use redesignation, or inclusion within the
Urban Restriction Boundary does not cumulatively exceed 40 acres for any one landowner in
any calendar year, and one landowner’s property may not similarly be removed from the
protections of this Chapter III 3.0 more often than once a year. Landowners with any unity of
interest are considered one landowner for purposes of this limitation;
        7)      Not more than a cumulative 160 80 acres, including the acreage that may be
added to meet state housing requirements as set forth in subdivision A, above, are to be
added to the area within the Camarillo Urban Restriction Boundary or development allowed
(other than as permitted by the extant Agriculture Land Use Designation) within the Conejo
Creek Voter Participation Area, in any calendar year.
        8)      Notice of such Proposed Modification is given according to the City’s standard
notice requirements to neighboring properties; and as well, not less than 30 days prior to the
proposed modification appearing on the City Council agenda, to LAFCo, and to all individuals
or organizations who or which have indicated a desire for such Notice by requesting the same
by placing his/her/its name and contact information with the City Clerk.
        C.      Following at least one public hearing for presentations by an applicant and the
public, and after compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act, the City Council
may amend the Urban Restriction Boundary described herein and designated on the
amended General Plan Boundaries Map, or, may change the General Plan land use
designation within the Conejo Creek Voter Participation Area, based on substantial evidence
in the record, if the City Council makes each of the following findings:
                1)     Application of the provisions of subsections A or B of these amendment
Ordinance No. 1134
Page 6 of 13
                                                                                        CURB | 3-6

procedures are unworkable and failure to amend the Urban Restriction Boundary would
constitute an unconstitutional taking of a landowner’s property for which compensation would
be required; and,
                2)     The amendment and associated land use designations will allow
additional land uses only to the minimum extent necessary to avoid said unconstitutional
taking of the landowner’s property.
        D.      Following at least one public hearing for presentations by an applicant and the
public, and after compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act, the City Council
may place any amendment to this ordinance the Urban Restriction Boundary or the Camarillo
SOAR Ordinance on the ballot pursuant to the mechanisms provided by state law.
        E.      The General Plan may be reorganized and individual provisions, including the
provisions of Chapter 3.0, may be renumbered or reordered in the course of ongoing updates
of the General Plan in accordance with the requirements of state law.
        Section 8. Exemptions for Certain Projects
        A.      This ordinance shall not apply to any development project or ongoing activity
that has obtained, as of the effective date of this initiative, a vested right pursuant to state or
local law.
        B.      This initiative shall not be interpreted to apply to any land or use that, under
state or federal law, is beyond the power of the local voters to affect by the initiative power
reserved to the people via the California Constitution. Nothing in this ordinance shall be
applied to preclude the City’s compliance with state laws governing second units or the use
of density bonuses where authorized by state law.
        C.      The provisions of the this Chapter 3.0 Camarillo SOAR Ordinance, relating to
lands outside the CURB or within the Conejo Creek Voter Participation Area, do not apply to
any roadways designated in the circulation element of the Camarillo General Plan as of
January 1, 1998 April 23, 2014, and as it may be amended hereafter, construction of public
potable water or sewer facilities, additions to public schools already in existence or new public
schools as deemed necessary and appropriate by the state agency with responsibility for
such decisions, public parks or other government facilities or projects deemed necessary by
the City Council for the public safety or for the delivery of essential public services. nor to
any development project that has obtained as of the effective date of this ordinance a vested
right pursuant to state or local law.
        Section 9. Severability [Replacing the original in whole]
        This measure shall be interpreted so as to be consistent with all federal and state laws,
rules, and regulations. If any section, sub-section, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion
of this measure is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a final judgment of a court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this measure. The voters hereby declare that this measure, and each section, sub-section,
sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion thereof would have been adopted or passed even
if one or more sections, sub-sections, sentences, clauses, phrases, parts, or portions are
declared invalid or unconstitutional. If any provision of this initiative is declared invalid as
applied to any person or circumstance, such invalidity shall not affect any application of this
Ordinance No. 1134
Page 7 of 13
                                                                                      CURB | 3-7

measure that can be given effect without the invalid application. This initiative shall be broadly
construed in order to achieve the purposes stated in this initiative. It is the intent of the voters
that the provisions of this measure shall be interpreted by the City and others in a manner
that facilitates the confinement of urban uses within a City Urban Restriction Boundary
thereby protecting agricultural, open space and rural lands, and preventing urban sprawl.
        Section 10. Amendment or Repeal [Replacing the original in whole]
        Except as provided herein, this initiative may be amended or repealed only by the
voters at an election.
        Section 11. Insertion Date
        Upon the effective date of the passage of this amendment to the Camarillo SOAR
Ordinance, the General Plan amendment shall be deemed inserted at Chapter III 3 of the City
of Camarillo’s General Plan, except that if the four amendments of the mandatory elements
of the General Plan permitted by state law for any given calendar year have already been
utilized in 1998 2016 prior to the effective of the Camarillo SOAR Ordinance, this General
Plan amendment shall be deemed inserted in the City’s General Plan on January 1, 1999
2017.
        Section 6. Adoption of County SOAR Initiative Required
                At the same election that the voters of the City or Camarillo will be considering
the Camarillo SOAR Ordinance, the voters of Ventura County will be considering a County-
wide initiative measure commonly known as the County Save Open Space and Agricultural
Resources Initiative (“County SOAR Initiative”). Notwithstanding any language in the
Camarillo SOAR Ordinance to the contrary, if the County SOAR Initiative is not approved by
the majority of County voters, then the Camarillo SOAR Ordinance shall be of no force or
effect and Chapter III shall not be added to the Camarillo General Plan pursuant to the
provisions of the Camarillo SOAR Ordinance.
                 Measure J was passed by the voters of the City of
                     Camarillo at the November 8, 2016, General
                 Municipal Election. See Resolution No. 2016-133
                               for official election results.
Ordinance No. 1134
Page 8 of 13
                                                                                        CURB | 3-8

Ordinance No. 1134
Page 9 of 13
                   CURB | 3-9
Ordinance No. 1134
Page 10 of 13
                   CURB | 3-10
Ordinance No. 1134
Page 11 of 13
                   CURB | 3-11
                                                 Exhibit D
19.10.020 - Uses permitted.
     The permitted uses are farming in all of its branches and including the cultivation and tillage of soil,
production, growing and harvesting of any agricultural or horticultural commodity; and any practice,
performance by a farmer or on a farm as an incident to or in conjunction with such farming operation;
including preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, or to carrier for transportation to market.
No building, structure or land may be used and no building or structure may hereinafter be used except
in accordance with the following provisions, set forth in this chapter. The following uses are illustrative of
the types of permitted uses and are not exclusive:
     A.   Trees for fruit, nuts or fiber;
     B.   Bushes or vines for berries or grapes;
     C.   Field vegetable or truck or row crops;
     D.   Orchards, vineyards and bushes for fruits or nuts;
     E.   Forest land and timber;
     F.   Drying of crops: hay, straw and seed;
     G. Storage and wholesaling of crops;
     H.   Animal breeding, pasturing and ranching;
     I.   The growing and harvesting of flowers, ornamentals and turf;
     J.   Apiary; for the purpose of this title, apiary includes one or more hives or boxes occupied by
          bees (hives or boxes include colonies) and may not be interpreted to include honey houses,
          extraction houses;
     K.   Poultry raising of up to five hundred birds;
     L.   Any operation, performance in a permanently fixed structure or establishment on the farm or
          on a moving packing plant on the farm for the purpose of preparing agricultural, horticultural,
          egg, poultry, meat, or rabbit or dairy products for market which such operations are done on
          the premises owned or operated by the same person who produced the products referred to
          herein and includes all operations incidental thereto;
     M. Park, playground or community center (owned or operated by a governmental agency or a
          nonprofit farm community organization, or a farm owner for the use of the owner's
          employees);
     N.   Private nonvehicular daytime recreational activities for hiking, riding, fishing and hunting,
          which do not require structures or improvements such as, but not limited to, fireplaces, paving
          or swimming pools;
     O. A mobile home used as a temporary dwelling during construction or alteration of the existing
          residence on the property where inhabitants would be permitted; in which case, such
          temporary construction may not exceed a time period of six months with the director's
          approval;
     P.   Residence of the owner or owners, or lessees or lessor, of the land upon which the use is
          conducted;
     Q. Day care, small and large family. Large family day cares must also comply with Section
          19.44.050(8) and the following:
          1.   There must be a minimum separation of three hundred feet between properties upon
               which a large day care use is located; provided, that this regulation only applies to a
               large family day care use that is commenced on or after March 22, 1993;
                                                                                                CURB | 3-12
         2.   Vehicles picking up and dropping off children may not block existing drives nor block
              circulation in the public street;
         3.   Outdoor activities must be controlled to maintain the noise level for a residential zone
              and must be primarily limited to an area in the rear yard or rear and side yards;
         4.   Parking must be provided in accordance with Section 19.44.050(8).
    R.   Farmworker housing;
    S.   Cottage food operations as set forth in Chapter 19.74.
19.10.030 - Uses permitted by conditional use permit.
    The following additional uses may be permitted subject to the approval of a conditional use permit
as provided for in Section 8163.3 of the zoning ordinance:
    1.   Nurseries, plants, retail;
    2.   Feed lots;
    3.   Dairies;
    4.   Production of eggs, and hatcheries involving more than five hundred laying birds;
    5.   Fur farms;
    6.   Electrical distribution substations;
    7.   Natural resources, development of, including necessary structures and appurtenances.
         Development of water resources shall be limited to the following.
         a.   The drilling and operation of water wells on lots which are principally used for agriculture
              and are forty acres or larger. The water produced shall be used only for the lot on which
              the well is located,
         b.   The drilling and operation of water wells and distribution of water therefrom by any
              mutual water company to the persons and properties which it serves;
    8.   Soil amendment activities to incorporate certain oil field waste into the soil;
    9.   Residence in excess of those permitted in Section 19.10.010;
    10. [Reserved.]
    11. Private nonvehicular daytime recreational activities for hiking, riding, fishing, and hunting
         which such uses require structures or improvements such as, but not limited to, fireplaces,
         paving or swimming pools;
    12. Automated radio, television transmitter relay signal distribution facilities and associated
         equipment;
    13. Temporary agricultural stands in accordance with Chapter 19.62;
    14. Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas greater than one meter and roof-mounted satellite dish
         antennas which project above the ridgeline of the roof and ground-mounted satellite dish
         antennas greater than one meter in size located in the required side yard or at heights greater
         than fifteen feet.
                                                                                           CURB | 3-13
                                        COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT 2012
                                          CAMARILLO
      This element establishes goals,
    policies and guidelines which will
    assist the City of Camarillo in the
preserva on and enhancement of its
unique physical and visual character.
                                           CITY OF CAMARILLO COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT 2012
CONTENTS
10.1       Introduction                                                     3
10.2       Camarillo Community Character                                    9
10.3       Residential Areas                                               23
10.4       Commercial Areas                                                37
10.5       Industrial Areas                                                51
10.6       Public and Quasi-Public Facilities                              61
10.7       Open Space Areas                                                71
10.8       Gateways, Streets and Corridors                                 73
10.9       Scenic Corridors                                                95
10.10 Sustainable Design                                                  100
10.11      Existing Regulations and Documents                             109
10.12      Implementing Actions                                           121
Adopted
June 27, 2012
Previously Adopted
Sept 12, 1984
Prepared By
RRM Design Group
Top Cover Photo used with permission: Joe Virnig, VenturaCountyVistas.com
City of Camarillo
Community Design Element
10.1 INTRODUCTION
The Community Design Element is an element of the General
Plan and is forma ed as a stand-alone document. This element
establishes a design framework for community development,
includes design guidelines for new projects and addresses the
maintenance of exis ng projects while protec ng the city’s posi ve
characteris cs. The Community Design Element guides public
and private improvements to create a func onal and a rac ve
community with a dis nct sense of place.
When developing a community design element, it is of paramount
importance to iden fy the city’s character. More specifically,
what makes Camarillo unique compared to other communi es?                 Old Town Monument
Camarillo’s character is ed to its history through its agriculture,
mild climate, proximity to California State University Channel Islands
(CSUCI) and Highway 101, and geological features.
10.1.1 Purpose
The City of Camarillo has always encouraged quality development
and protec on of the environment. The purpose of the Community
Design Element (CDE) is to establish goals, objec ves, policies
and design guidelines which will assist the City of Camarillo in
the preserva on and enhancement of its unique physical and
visual character. The CDE addresses site features, architectural
elements and environmental factors that aﬀect the community
image. The Community Design Element will assist landowners,
architects, engineers, City oﬃcials and other persons in the design
                                                                       Camarillo Business Center
and maintenance of development and enhancements in Camarillo.
                                                                        INTRODUCTION           3

                               City of Camarillo General Plan
   Table 10-1 provides a summary on how to apply the contents of the CDE and the steps one would take to
   propose a development project in Camarillo.
   Table 10-1 - How to Use the Community Design Element (CDE)
               Step              CDE       Reference                   Required AcƟon by
                                 Page      Document                           Applicant
     1 - Iden fy General Plan     NA   City Land Use     Land use maps are available online at the
        Land Use Designa on            Map               City’s website and from the Community
                                                         Development Department at City Hall.
     2 - Iden fy Zone             NA   City Zoning       Zoning maps are available online at the
                                       Map               City’s website and from the Community
                                                         Development Department at City Hall.
     3 - Iden fy Specific        110                     If your project falls within a Specific Plan
        Plan Area                                        Area you must use the design guidelines
                                                         and development standards found in that
                                                         document as well as the guidelines found
                                                         herein. All other projects shall use the CDE.
     4 - Heritage Zone            16                     Determine if your project falls within
                                                         the Heritage Zone. If so, incorporate the
                                                         requirements described on page 16 as well
                                                         as the design guidelines found herein. If not,
                                                         u lize the design guidelines found herein.
     5 - Community Design       15-103                   Use the design guidelines appropriate for your
        Element Design                                   land use.
        Guidelines
     6 - Addi onal                     City Zoning and Apply zoning standards such as parking and
        Requirements                   General Plan      signage from the City’s Municipal Code (Title
                                                         19). Check for project consistency with the
                                                         General Plan.
     7 - Architectural            NA   CDE and other Projects are subject to staﬀ review for
        Review                         applicable        consistency with the City’s General Plan,
                                       design            Zoning Ordinance, applicable Specific Plan and
                                       guidelines        other design guidelines. For projects requiring
                                                         approval by the Planning Commission, plans
                                                         are to be reviewed by the Architectural
                                                         Review Commi ee.
4 COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                    Community Design Element
10.1.2 Element Organiza on
The essence of the CDE lies in its goals, objec ves and policies. These
are declara ve statements that set forth the City’s approach to various
issues. The defini ons below and in Figure 10.1, on the following page, are
intended to serve as a “reader’s guide” to the goals, objec ves, policies,
design guidelines and implemen ng ac ons of this Element.
Goal
A general statement of desired community outcome
Objec ve
A subset of a goal, an objec ve is more specific and provides measurable
strategies
Policy
Policies are ac ons that a community will undertake to meet the goals and
objec ves
Design Guideline
Guidelines act as a tool to assist in both design and review; suggests or
encourages specific ac on, but is not mandatory
Implemen ng Ac on
A list of physical improvements and recommended ac ons necessary to
achieve element goals, objec ves and policies; implemen ng ac ons are
discussed in Sec on 10.12.
                                                                            INTRODUCTION 5

                                        City of Camarillo General Plan
 Goal Diagram
  Goal Numbering
 Each goal number starts with the
 element acronym and is followed by
 the number of the goal (e.g., RA-1 =
 Residen al Areas, first goal).
  Goal
 Each goal follows the goal acronym and                     Element Acronym
 number and generally has one or more
 objec ves associated with the goal.
 Objec ve Numbering
Each objec ve number starts with the           Goal RA-1
element acronym and is followed by the         Preserve and enhance neighborhood iden ty and character for
number of the goal and objec ve (e.g.,         Camarillo’s residen al neighborhoods.
RA-1.1 = Residen al Areas, first goal, first
objec ve).                                     Objec ves
                                              RA-1.1      Establish mul -family residen al developments that
  Objec ve                                                are integrated and compa ble with surrounding land
 Each objec ve follows the objec ve                       uses and neighborhoods – both exis ng and future.
 number and generally has a policy
 associated with the objec ve.
  Policy Numbering
 Each policy number starts with the
 element acronym and is followed by the
                                                          Policy RA-1.1.1
 number of the goal, objec ve and policy
 (e.g., RA-1.1.1 = Residen al Areas, first                Require diversity of housing types in each neighborhood
 goal, first objec ve, first policy).                     and a mix of uses in the neighborhood centers.
                                                          a. New structures should be compa ble with
  Policy Statement                                            the area’s environment and with adjacent
 Each policy statement is associated with                     development.
 a specific goal and objec ve.
  Design Guidelines
 Guidelines act as a tool to assist in both
 design and review. A guideline suggests
 or encourages specific ac on, but it is
 not mandatory.
Figure 10.1 - General Plan Goal Diagram
6       COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                   Community Design Element
10.1.3 Rela onship to Other General Plan Elements
The Community Design Element supports the other General Plan elements
and focuses on the aesthe c aspects of design. The elements of the
General Plan which have the greatest rela onship to the Community
Design Element include the Land Use, Circula on and Recrea on
Elements.
Land Use Element
The Community Design Element presents design guidelines to guide future
development as designated in the Land Use Element. It also considers
the rela onship of uses through the use of landscaping and other means
to transi on between types of land uses. The Land Use Element also          City of Camarillo General Plan
designates land for agriculture and open space purposes. The Community
Design Element supports the reten on of open space lands to preserve
the scenic quali es of hillsides, agriculture areas and waterways.
Circula on Element
The Circula on Element discusses road design and non-motorized
mobility. The Community Design Element considers the views to and from
the roadway, building features and the overall appearance that would be
presented as viewed from street corridors. It also considers the pedestrian
areas, pedestrian connec ons and the landscaping of parking areas.
Recrea on Element
The rela onship between the Community Design Element and the
Recrea on Element is that while the Recrea on Element addresses
                                                                              City of Camarillo Recrea on
the func onal aspect of the parks and the benefit of recrea onal                                  Element
opportuni es, the Community Design Element addresses the linkages
between park lands and residen al areas. It also addresses the benefits of
recrea onal lands within the urban environment and developed areas.
Other Elements
While the Community Design Element has a less direct rela onship to
the Noise Element, Housing Element, Open Space and Conserva on
Element, Safety Element and the Camarillo Urban Restric on Boundary
(CURB) Element, each element is singularly important and, collec vely, the
elements form the framework of Camarillo’s future.
Sec on 10.11, Exis ng Regula ons and Documents, provides a summary of
the exis ng codes, regula ons, Specific Plans, guidelines and due process
that support the implementa on of the Community Design Element.               Community Design Element
                                                                                     INTRODUCTION          7

                           This Page Le Blank Inten onally
8 COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
                                   Community Design Element
                                                                            Bougainvillea is commonly found in Camarillo
10.2 CAMARILLO COMMUNITY CHARACTER
10.2.1 Introduc on
Camarillo draws its iden ty from a history rich in agriculture, its loca on
on Highway 101, the Southern Pacific Railroad line, regional shopping
opportuni es and the beauty of its natural environment, including mountain
backdrops, agricultural fields and creeks. A key element of Camarillo’s
character is the contrast between the intensity of the urban area and the
openness and scenic beauty of the surrounding environment. As Camarillo
matures, new development, which is meless in design, complements the
community’s historic architecture and respects the natural backdrop of open
space, is consistent with the unique iden ty the community has embraced.
Camarillo’s first structures were influenced by the rancheros who first                          Adolfo Camarillo House
se led there and built churches and homes in the Spanish style. These
structures were built substan ally of stone, brick and smooth stucco. A
significant factor in the loca on of the city was the Southern Pacific Railroad
Company’s decision to lay the tracks of the main coastal railroad through
the vicinity in 1898. A depot was constructed in 1910, and the town site
of Camarillo was laid out that same year by William Fulton. Camarillo was
established on 40 acres adjacent to and west of the Rancho Calleguas, at the
Southern Pacific Railroad tracks and Ventura Boulevard. In the mid 1950s,
the comple on of Highway 101 facilitated easy access to Los Angeles and
points south allowing for rapid growth. Housing tracts were built where
orchards once stood and large industries began moving into the area.
However, despite Camarillo’s development, the town maintains an aura of
Old California.
                                                                        CAMARILLO COMMUNITY CHARACTER                  9

                                       City of Camarillo General Plan
                                       10.2.2 Overall Community Character
                                       The following features combine to create Camarillo’s unique character:
                                            •   Camarillo’s history in agriculture
                                            •   Camarillo’s small town/hometown atmosphere with big-city
                                                ameni es
                                            •   Camarillo’s Heritage Zone which helps create community iden ty
                                                and a sense of place
                                            •   The Spanish-style architecture prevalent from the Highway 101
 Agriculture helps define Camarillo’s           viewshed
 history
                                            •   The high quality and meless design appeal of key buildings and
                                                landscape within Camarillo
                                            •   Camarillo’s se ng, surrounded by open space that is protected by
                                                SOAR, CURB ini a ves and CURB Element
                                            •   The Camarillo Hills, Calleguas Mountains, and Conejo Mountain
                                                which provide a drama c backdrop for the city
                                            •   City streets that are visually pleasing with mature trees,
                                                landscaped medians and well-maintained parkways
                                            •   Bougainvillea plants characteris c of Camarillo’s landscape pale e
 Calleguas Mountains provide drama c
 backdrop for the city
                                       The City’s primary land uses are described as follows:
                                       Single-Family Residen al
                                       Camarillo’s residen al neighborhoods are primarily made up of single-
                                       family homes with elementary schools and parks. These neighborhoods
                                       are generally built on a modified grid pa ern with tree lined streets served
                                       by large arterial roads. The homes are a variety of styles that include
                                       mostly one- and two-story structures on ±5,000 sf to ±7,000 sf lots.
                                       Hillside Residen al
                                       Residen al neighborhoods including Spanish Hills and Las Posas Estates
                                       are considered to be hillside residen al. These homes are typically
                                       constructed on larger lots and are not uniform in lot size. A variety of
 Single-family residen al in Camarillo
                                       architectural styles are found within the hillside residen al areas.
10     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                  Community Design Element
Mul -Family Residen al
Mul -family residen al units are dispersed throughout the community.
This residen al type is typically made up of apartments, townhomes and
condominiums, and contains on-site ameni es such as pools, common
green spaces, walking paths, tennis courts and recrea on rooms. Many
units are within walking distance to parks, schools, public transporta on
and commercial centers.
Regional Commercial
The regional commercial shopping centers located south of Highway
101 provide retail outlets that serve all of Ventura County and beyond.
These centers are anchored by several large na onal tenants, have
                                                                                          Mul -Family Residen al
wide sidewalks, plazas, areas for outdoor dining and well-maintained
landscaping.
Commercial and Oﬃce
Commercial and oﬃce areas located outside of Old Town and the Highway
101 regional shopping centers are suburban scale shopping centers,
typically with supermarkets as anchors, and some strip commercial
development along primary arterial roadways. These areas are generally
automobile-oriented and are physically separated from nearby residen al
areas. There are also some campus-style oﬃce parks such as the Camarillo
Business Center that have strong pedestrian connec ons linking buildings,
parking areas and plazas.
Industrial
The industrial areas located east of Lewis Road and north and south of                  Camarillo Corporate Plaza
Highway 101 provide a strong and diversified economic base for Camarillo.
These areas have rela vely low-intensity warehouse, research and
development, distribu on and manufacturing facili es located on large
parcels with some flex-oﬃce/flex-tech space.
Old Town
Old Town can be accessed by Ventura Boulevard which serves as the
community’s “Main Street.” Old Town is considered to be the historical
heart of the city. There are numerous buildings of importance that
enhance the city’s iden ty as well as walkable streets with wide sidewalks,
a rac ve landscaping, public art and a small town, urban fabric.
                                                                                The Lewis and Sons building in Old
                                                                              Town has undergone several re-uses
                                                                    CAMARILLO COMMUNITY CHARACTER                11

                             City of Camarillo General Plan
                             Parks
                             Camarillo parks are operated and maintained by the Pleasant Valley Recrea on
                             and Park District, with the excep on of Cons tu on Park and Dizdar Park which
                             are owned by the City. The District maintains over 300 acres of parkland, open
                             space and recrea on areas that provide a wide array of opportuni es for area
                             residents. These include passive picnic areas, walking paths, equestrian arenas,
                             athle c fields, a community pool, water slide and a splash pad.
                             Combined, these elements contribute to what Camarillo residents call a
                             “small town/hometown feel.” This is a general term used to define the quiet
                             residen al neighborhoods where children can play in the streets and people
                             know their neighbors, a circula on system that provides easy access to goods,
 Pleasant Valley Park
                             services and jobs in ci es near and far, an Old Town that has a quaint, historic
                             character, and an abundance of parks and schools that serve as focal points of
                             community life.
                             10.2.3 Overall Community Character
                                         Goal, Objec ves, and Policies
                             GOAL CD-1
                             PROMOTE A HOMETOWN COMMUNITY WITH A STRONG SENSE OF
                             IDENTITY.
                             Objec ve CD-1.1
                             Provide a pleasant experience for residents and visitors, emphasizing
                             vistas, view corridors and natural features.
 Pi s Ranch Park
                             Objec ve CD-1.2
                             Preserve and enhance community iden ty and character in concert with
                             the historic agricultural and Spanish architectural roots.
                                          Policy CD-1.2.1
                                         Through community engagement and design review, ensure that
                                          new development and redevelopment is of high-quality design,
                                          is aesthe cally pleasing and contributes to a posi ve image for
                                          Camarillo.
                                         Policy CD-1.2.2
                                         Take into account Camarillo’s coastal climate in site layout,
                                          building design, and trees and landscaping.
 Springville Park
12     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                   Community Design Element
           Policy CD-1.2.3
           Require that the architecture and site design of new developments
           are compa ble with the surrounding context.
Objec ve CD-1.3
Create pedestrian access and connec vity opportuni es as well as human-
scaled gathering places.
           Policy CD-1.3.1
           Require new developments to create pleasing transi ons to
           surrounding development.
                                                                               Sidewalk dining helps to ac vate the
Objec ve CD-1.4                                                               streetscape and create visual interest
Define dis nc ve architectural styles, streetscapes and public space design
themes.
           Policy CD-1.4.1
           All new development and redevelopment shall adhere to the
           basic principles of quality and meless architecture, urban design
           and landscape architecture, including but not limited to human-
           scaled design and pedestrian orienta on where appropriate,
           interconnec vity of street layout and si ng buildings to hold
           corners.
           Policy CD-1.4.2
           Enhance design for all new development and redevelopment
           through applica on of materials and design elements including:      Dis nc ve architectural themes help
                                                                                      iden fy streetscape character
           a. Richness and authen city of material surface and texture
           b. Muted earth tone colors (such as oﬀ-whites, ochres,
               siennas, umbers, beiges, tans, browns or other similar
               subdued colors) for primary building surfaces, with more
               intense colors limited to accents
           c. Significant wall ar cula on (insets, canopies, wing walls,
               trellis features, arcades, colonnades)
           d. Full-sloped roofs, mul -planed roofs (combina on of
               pitched and flat roofs)
           e. Roof overhangs, ar culated eaves and parapets
                                                                                  Gardens help support community
                                                                                                           wellness
           f.  Window configura ons compa ble with the design of the
               building
                                                                     CAMARILLO COMMUNITY CHARACTER                13

                                     City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                 g. Ar culated building mass and form
                                                 h. Landscape elements, which include plan ngs and
                                                     hardscape that complement the style of architecture,
                                                     enhance building and site design and are integrated into
                                                     the surrounding context
                                                 i.  Timeless designs, colors and materials
                                                 j.  U liza on of 360-degree architecture (ar cula on of all
                                                     facade eleva ons) when visible from a public street or other
                                                     property
 Significant wall ar cula on and                 k. Allow for architectural and landscape varia on between
 prominent features enhance design                   neighborhoods, but maintain common citywide street
                                                     furnishings and street signage
                                     Objec ve CD-1.5
                                     Beau fy streets and corridors with unifying landscaping and materials.
                                     Objec ve CD-1.6
                                     Protect hillside viewsheds and open space/agricultural lands that surround
                                     Camarillo.
                                     Objec ve CD-1.7
                                     Support community wellness through arts and cultural experiences,
                                     recrea on, parks, trails, community gardens and other resources for
                                     healthy living.
 Landscape entry and signage enhance Objec ve CD-1.8
 overall character and experience
                                     Preserve, protect and enhance historic buildings, landmarks, sites,
                                     landscapes and areas of historical, cultural and urban design significance.
                                     Objec ve CD-1.9
                                     Landscaping shall be maintained in a manner that provides for a natural
                                     appearance, requires less maintenance and considers plant health.
                                     GOAL CD-2
                                     PROTECT GREENBELTS CONSISTENT WITH THE CURB ELEMENT AND THE
                                     OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT.
 Ar culated building mass and form
14      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
                                 Community Design Element
10.2.4 Citywide Character Design Guidelines
The following guidelines should be considered in reviewing development and
redevelopment with regard to citywide character:
           a. Integrate prominent design features exis ng in the
               immediate area (e.g., trees, landforms, historic landmarks)
           b. Complement exis ng and planned development, buildings
               and structures
           c. Respect the natural environment (e.g., hillsides, washes,
               na ve vegeta on, community landscaping)
           d. New structures should be compa ble with the area’s                   Desirable historic character in
               environment and with adjacent development                                                Camarillo
           e. Setbacks from streets and adjacent proper es should be in
               propor on to the structure and func on of the street
           f.  Mul -story structures should be made less imposing by
               physically stepping por ons of the upper stories back from
               street level
           g. New development and redevelopment should provide
               connec vity and linkages for pedestrians, bicycles and
               vehicles to nearby land uses and public ameni es
           h. Site plans should balance the need to provide adequate
               vehicular access with the need to eliminate unnecessary
               driveway entrances by providing reciprocal access points
               that are coordinated with adjacent proper es
                                                                                    New development should be
                                                                             compa ble with the desired character
                                                                                                     of Camarillo
                                                                              Changes in setbacks and stories help
                                                                                    make buildings less imposing
                                                                    CAMARILLO COMMUNITY CHARACTER                15

                                               City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                                                                                                         R.
                                                                                                                                  ND D
                                                                                                                          UPL A
                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                           RD
                                                                        ARNEILL RD.
                                                         .
                                                     S RD                                                                                               SA
                                               OSA                                                                                 D.                  O
  CE                                  L   AS P                                                      RT
                                                                                                       E.                      BLV                   AR
    NT                                                                                                    34             AKS                       NT
      R   AL
                                                                                                FLYN         )         NO                     SA
                                                                                                     N              SIO
                                                                                                                 MIS
               AV                                                                            D. (      RD
                  E.                                                                     IS               .
                                                        PONDEROSA DR.                       R
                                                                                      LE
                                                                                         W
                            VENTURA FW
                                      Y - US HWY
                                                       101
                                                                                                                  AD
                                                                                                                    OLF
                                                                                                                       OR
                                                                                                                         D.
                                             PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                                                                                                                                    Map Features
                                                                                                                                                            500’ Heritage Zone
                                                                                                                                                            1000’ Radius @ Hwy
                                                                                                                                                            Interchange
Figure 10.2 - Heritage Zone Map
                                                10.2.5 Heritage Zone
                                                Developments within proximity to the freeway have been classified as
                                                being in the Heritage Zone area of the city. The Heritage Zone requires
                                                developments within 500 feet of the freeway and 1,000 feet of freeway
                                                interchanges to have a par cular design theme. The Heritage Zone is
                                                measured from the outer boundary of the Caltrans right-of-way. Architectural
                                                styles that would be appropriate within the Heritage Zone could include
                                                the following: Mission, Monterey, Early California, Spanish, Mediterranean
                                                or modern interpreta ons of these styles. The most important aspect of
                                                the Heritage Zone is the type of materials, their colors and textures and
                                                the scale of the architectural elements within the building design. Building
                                                materials may include the use of stucco, wood, glass, le, textured blocks and
                                                other similar materials. The building materials should be appropriate to the
                                                architectural style of the building. Specific Plans are allowed to broaden the
 Example of a building with Spanish-            Heritage Zone architectural pallet to u lize other styles that reflect historic
 style architecture located within the          buildings in Camarillo such as the Boy Scout Headquarters.
 Heritage Zone
                                                The configura on of the building should provide for a variety of features
                                                and a well-balanced combina on of the parts of the building rather than a
                                                simple block of a building mass. The building should be broken up wherever
                                                possible. Building clustering will allow parking to be segmented into
                                                numerous smaller lots. The Camarillo Business Center is a strong example
                                                of the Heritage Zone architectural style. The Heritage Zone provides the
                                                traveler with an ini al view of the city and sets forth the character of the
                                                community. It also provides for design con nuity along the most heavily
                                                traveled corridor in the city, the Ventura Freeway, Highway 101.
16             COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                   Community Design Element
                                                                                     The Camarillo Business Center
                                                                                    is representa ve of the desired
10.2.6 Architectural Character                                                 architectural character in Camarillo
Architectural design not only addresses the func ons of buildings, it
also addresses the building style through its materials, detailing, colors,
textures and configura on of the building. While no single architectural
style is dictated in Camarillo, the Spanish style of the Heritage Zone is
prominent throughout Camarillo.
Though the consistency of the Mission style helps unify the image of
Camarillo, Cra sman, Ranch and Victorian styles can be integrated in
development outside of the Heritage Zone. Mission, Mediterranean,
Cra sman, Ranch and Victorian architecture all have historic roots
in Camarillo. Civic buildings, however, may be designed to have an
architectural character unique to the Camarillo architectural pale e. This
can be an eﬀec ve and appropriate way to dis nguish important civic
                                                                              Spanish, Mission and Mediterranean
buildings.                                                                     style is desired in the Heritage Zone
                                                                     CAMARILLO COMMUNITY CHARACTER                 17

                                City of Camarillo General Plan
                                10.2.7 Historical Buildings and Features
                                There are several buildings which reflect the early character of Camarillo
                                and provide texture to the present image of the community. The following
                                buildings provide an iden fiable asset to the community design of Camarillo:
                                St. Mary Magdalen Church on Ventura Boulevard
                                The church reflects California’s Mission heritage with a white stucco exterior,
                                red le roofing, outdoor pa o surrounded by lush gardens and a series of
                                arches, colorful stained glass windows
                                Evangelical Free Church on Ventura Boulevard
                                The church building was constructed in 1891. At that me, it was Pleasant
 St. Mary Magdalen Church       Valley Bap st Church.
                                Adolfo Camarillo House on Mission Oaks Boulevard
                                The Camarillo House was built in 1892 by Adolfo Camarillo and others using
                                the services of architects Franklin Ward and Herman Anlauf. This 3-story,
                                14-room home was built in the Victorian, Queen Anne style.
                                St. John’s Seminary
                                Juan Camarillo, Jr. donated 100 acres from his Rancho Calleguas on March 3,
                                1927 with the specific desire to have the land used for a seminary named for
                                St. John the Evangelist. On January 14, 1938, John J. Cantwell announced the
                                planned construc on of the seminary.
                                Griﬃn residence on Daily Drive
                                The Griﬃn residence was built in 1931 by Wendell Phillips Daily. The property
                                was sold to the Griﬃn Family in 1951 and is now operated as a mortuary.
 Adolfo Camarillo House
                                Charles Daily House (Boy Scout Headquarters)
                                The Charles Daily House is a cra sman-style house built in 1911 and is
                                accompanied by a barn. The structures are the former residence of county
                                pioneer Charles J. Daily.
                                Every a empt should be made to preserve the buildings men oned above.
                                Adjacent developments should complement these buildings through scale
                                and massing. Addi ons to buildings having a historical benefit should reflect
                                the architectural elements and materials of the main structure. Freestanding
                                buildings on the same site may be simpler in detail so as not to compete with
                                the main building.
                                These historic buildings are the architectural founda on for the Spanish style
                                of the Heritage Zone. New projects looking to incorporate Spanish-style
                                architecture should take visual queues from the historic buildings listed above.
 Charles Daily House (Boy Scout
 Headquarters)                  Historic restora on and preserva on shall be in conformance with Chapter
                                16.42 of the City’s Municipal Code.
18     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                                         Community Design Element
                                     Lewis Road Corridor
                                     Camarillo Commons
                                                                                                                                            ND   DR.
                                                                                                                                       UPLA
                                                                                                                                                                        D.
                                                                                                                                                                   AR
                                                                                ARNEILL RD.
                                                               RD.
                   Commercial                       PO   SAS                                                                                .                    OS
 CE                                            L AS                                                         RT                           LVD                   AR
   NT                                                                                                          E. 34               AK  SB                   N T
     R   AL
                   Recreational Cntr.                                                                   FLYN         )           NO                    SA
                                                                                                             N              SIO
            AV                                                                                      RD
                                                                                                      .(       RD
                                                                                                                  .      MIS
              E.                                                PONDEROSA DR.                      IS
                                                                                               W
                                                                                              LE                                                                70-Acre
                                     VENTURA FW                                                                                                                 Opportunity Site
                                               Y - US   HWY 101
                                                                                                                          AD
                                                                                                                               OLF
                                                                                                                                  OR
                                                                                                                                      D.
                   Hotel and
                   Conference Center                                                                                                                            Metrolink Station
                                                   PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                   Old Town and
                   Ventura Blvd.
                   Dawson Drive
                                                                                                                                     Map Features
                   Industrial Area
                                                                                                                                                  Key Redevelopment Areas
Figure 10.3 - Key Redevelopment Areas
     10.2.8 Key Redevelopment Areas
     The following opportunity sites are noted for their poten al to further
     enhance Camarillo.
     Dawson Drive Industrial Area
     The approximately 180-acre Dawson Drive Industrial Area is located east
     of Old Town. It houses many of the city’s industrial businesses, large
     vacant parcels and underu lized lands. The Dawson Drive Industrial Area
     Concepts and Design Guidelines establishes a set of design standards and
     improvements that will guide its redevelopment into a vibrant district.
     Of special importance is to enhance signage, circula on and access that
     integrates this area into Old Town and central Camarillo. As implemented                                                        The Southern Gateway to Camarillo:
     over me, the concepts and design guidelines will encourage property                                                                   Dawson Drive Industrial Area
                                                                                                                                         Concepts and Design Guidelines
     owners, residents and businesses to improve exis ng proper es and
     create new infill development that will help unify the area and connect it
     to central Camarillo.
                                                                                                                   CAMARILLO COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                    19

                                       City of Camarillo General Plan
                                       Metrolink Sta on
                                       The Metrolink sta on is located within the North Dawson Drive subsec on
                                       of the Dawson Drive Industrial Area Specific Plan. With its proximity
                                       to Old Town, Dawson Drive Industrial Area, Village at the Park and the
                                       Amtrak sta on, and its rela onship to California State University Channel
                                       Islands, this historic railroad area caters to both nearby residents and
                                       commuters. Consistent with the Heritage Zone, this area is envisioned
                                       to be developed/redeveloped with a design theme reminiscent of
                                       turn-of-the-century railroading. The Specific Plan calls for uses such as
                                       restaurants, fresh produce/local food markets, nurseries, flower shops,
                                       galleries, service oﬃces and other small scale retailers within the Dawson
                                       Drive area. This plan will also improve connec vity across the Southern
 Public art at the Camarillo Metrolink Pacific Railroad tracks. The sta on itself has benefited from the addi on of
 Sta on                                public artwork, including horse relief murals. Addi onal artwork may be
                                       considered at this loca on.
                                       70-Acre Opportunity Site
                                       The 70-Acre Opportunity Site is located on the north side of Mission Oaks
                                       Boulevard, east of Lewis Road and west of Flynn Road. The site presents
                                       a possible opportunity for rehabilita on of the exis ng industrial uses or
                                       reuse of the site to a variety of other uses including a Transit Oriented
                                       Development (mixed-use areas designed to maximize access to public
                                       transporta on).
                                       Camarillo Commons
                                       The Camarillo Commons Plan Area is within walking distance of the
 Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan      historic Camarillo Old Town. The Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan
 concept plan
                                       recommends an appropriate mix of land uses, urban design concepts and
                                       architectural design guidelines, and establishes a framework to guide
                                       implementa on of the plan’s vision which ul mately intends to replace the
                                       1960s-style development. This area is ideal for redevelopment due to its
                                       central loca on, many underu lized and single-story structures, and large
                                       parking areas.
                                       Old Town and Ventura Boulevard
                                       Ventura Boulevard, as it proceeds through Old Town, is considered by
                                       many to be the “heart” of Camarillo. Historically, Ventura Boulevard
                                       served as the primary commercial boulevard for the community, and
                                       as a main transporta on highway for the region. Development along
                                       the Boulevard represented a mix of tradi onal community-serving and
                                       highway-oriented businesses, constructed over several decades and
 Old Town Camarillo Ventura
 Boulevard Design Guidelines
20     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                  Community Design Element
in varying architectural styles. A majority of the exis ng development
occurred while the Boulevard served this dual purpose. In the 1950s, the
highway was expanded and realigned to bypass Old Town, becoming what
is now known today as the Ventura Freeway.
Of special note is the development of the Evangelical Free Church of
Camarillo (1869, formerly Pleasant Valley Bap st Church) and the St. Mary
Magdalen Chapel (1913). These churches serve as visual icons for Ventura
Boulevard and are representa ve of the Spanish-style architecture desired
by the community.
A handful of vacant and underu lized parcels remain in Old Town which,
when developed, could further transform Old Town into a vibrant                Evangelical Free Church of Camarillo
community des na on. The adjacency to Highway 101 oﬀers the
opportunity to a ract visitors with signage and enhanced landscaping and
architecture along Highway 101.
The Old Town Camarillo Ventura Boulevard Design Guidelines were
adopted in 1997. This document provides two primary areas of
improvement and investment recommenda ons including streetscapes
(primarily public realm) and building facades (primarily private realm).
The City implemented the recommenda ons by preparing the Ventura
Boulevard Streetscape Program and the Facade Improvement Rebate
Program.
The goals of the streetscape program promote a pedestrian-friendly                Old Town building that benefited
environment conducive to retaining and a rac ng businesses, retailers        from the Facade Improvement Rebate
and patrons. The establishment of this Program improved infrastructure,                                    Program
streets, sidewalks, streetscape, landscaping, street ligh ng and accent
plan ng along Ventura Boulevard between Arneill Road and Lewis Road.
The Carmen Drive improvements entail roadway, sidewalk, landscaping,
street ligh ng and accent plan ng improvements along Ventura Boulevard
east of Carmen Drive. These improvements were designed to collec vely
create an entry feature for Old Town Camarillo.
In the past, many buildings were improved as a result of the Facade
Improvement Rebate Program ini ated by the Camarillo Community
Development Commission. This Program encouraged property owners to
rehabilitate their buildings and building facades in accordance with the Old
Town Camarillo Design Guidelines in an eﬀort to increase the economic
viability of Old Town Camarillo.
                                                                                                 Old Town building
                                                                    CAMARILLO COMMUNITY CHARACTER                 21

                                    City of Camarillo General Plan
                                    Lewis Road Corridor
                                    The Lewis Road corridor is one of the most important roads in the city
                                    as it connects the city’s largest industrial areas to Highway 101 and State
                                    Route 118. It is also the primary route to CSUCI to the southwest and
                                    many residen al subdivisions to the east. Lewis Road is also known as
                                    State Route 34 and is owned and maintained by Caltrans. Improvements
                                    to this corridor must be compliant with Caltrans’ requirements. Due to
                                    the high volume of vehicle traﬃc on this corridor, the City should work
                                    with Caltrans to beau fy and enhance the street edges. This corridor
                                    could benefit from improved sidewalks, bike lanes, gateway signage, u lity
                                    undergrounding, full paveout, landscaping and street furnishings.
 Lewis Road corridor
                                    Hotel and Conference Center
                                    The City is pursuing opportuni es to provide a hotel/conference center
                                    facility that can accommodate a large number of people located south
                                    of the 101 Freeway, east of Las Posas Road, on the north side of Ventura
                                    Boulevard.
                                    Commercial Recrea onal Center
                                    An approximate 12-acre property, located on West Ventura Boulevard,
                                    north of the Camarillo Airport and just east of Springville Drive, provides
                                    an opportunity to develop a commercial recrea onal center, which may
                                    include a bowling alley and a two-sheet ice hockey rink.
 Lewis Road corridor with excessive
 right-of-way
22      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                             Community Design Element
                                                                                                                                        R.
                                                                                                                                 ND D
                                                                                                                         UPL A
                                                                                                                                                              D.
                                                                                                                                                         AR
                                                                   ARNEILL RD.
                                                  RD.
                                        PO  SAS                                                                               .                        OS
 CE                                L AS                                                       RT                           LVD                       AR
   NT                                                                                            E. 34               AK  SB                       N T
     R   AL
                                                                                          FLYN         )           NO                        SA
                                                                                               N              SIO
            AV                                                                          RD
                                                                                          .(     RD
                                                                                                    .      MIS
              E.                                   PONDEROSA DR.                    IS
                                                                                 LE
                                                                                    W
                         VENTURA FW
                                   Y - US   HWY 101
                                                                                                            AD
                                                                                                               O LFO
                                                                                                                       RD.
                                       PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                                                                                                                    Map Features
                                                                                                                                                      Residential Areas
                                                                                                                                                      Non-Residential Areas
                                                                                                                                                      Non-Residendial  Areas
Figure 10.4 - Residen al Areas
     10.3 RESIDENTIAL AREAS
     10.3.1 Introduc on
     Camarillo’s residen al areas are defined by neighborhoods that make
     up the larger community. Neighborhoods are comprised of 150 to 500
     residen al units, emphasize a rela onship to public spaces and balance
     vehicular circula on with pedestrian mobility.
     Residen al projects, whether single-family or mul -family, should include
     visual interest and variety. The size, scale, propor on, color, placement
     and detailing of architectural features should be carefully considered.
     The overall massing and scale of the single-family or mul -family projects                                    Residen al development should be
     should include landscaping and architecture that is complementary and                                       at a scale and quality consistent with
     creates neighborhood iden ty. Historically, the character of Camarillo                                                      Camarillo’s character
     included Spanish-style architecture with the first buildings constructed
     substan ally of smooth stucco, stone and brick. The first residen al units
     built in Camarillo were primarily small, one-story houses.
                                                                                                                             RESIDENTIAL AREAS                                 23

                                       City of Camarillo General Plan
                                       10.3.2 Residen al Areas Goals, Objec ves and
                                                  Policies
                                       GOAL RA-1
                                       PRESERVE AND ENHANCE NEIGHBORHOOD IDENTITY AND CHARACTER
                                       FOR CAMARILLO’S RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS.
                                       Objec ve RA-1.1
                                       Maintain a high quality of cra smanship in development through the use
                                       of building details, design elements and materials.
                                       Objec ve RA-1.2
                                       Respect surrounding context and scale of adjacent buildings.
 Quality building elements and details
 enhance neighborhood character        Objec ve RA-1.3
                                       Mul -family residen al developments should be integrated and
                                       compa ble with surrounding land uses and neighborhoods – both exis ng
                                       and future.
                                       Objec ve RA-1.4
                                       Respect and enhance the site’s natural form, viewsheds and environmental
                                       a ributes.
                                       Objec ve RA-1.5
                                       Provide for safe and secure neighborhoods.
                                                  Policy RA-1.5.1
                                                  Encourage walkable neighborhoods with sidewalks, street trees
                                                   and linkages to common areas.
 Context and scale should be           Objec ve RA-1.6
 appropriate to each neighborhood      Further energy conserva on and sustainability.
                                       Objec ve RA-1.7
                                       Enhance and maintain the city’s aesthe c beauty and visual character.
                                                  Policy RA-1.7.1
                                                  Protect and enhance the unique iden          es of residen al
                                                   neighborhoods.
                                                  Policy RA-1.7.2
                                                  Promote cleanliness and regular          maintenance   of  all
                                                   neighborhoods and public places.
                                                  Policy RA-1.7.3
                                                  Create common open space areas and enhanced landscaped
 Encourage walkability and linkages                focal points.
24     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                  Community Design Element
           Policy RA-1.7.4
           Provide high-quality architecture with emphasis on facades that
           are visible from public streets.
Objec ve RA-1.8
Provide bicycle facili es within residen al neighborhoods.
GOAL RA-2
PROMOTE DESIGN EXCELLENCE FOR INFILL AND REDEVELOPMENT SITES.
Objec ve RA-2.1
For new infill development, match the typical lot size and building form of
any adjacent development, with par cular emphasis given to maintaining
consistency with other developments that front onto a public street to be    Enhanced landscaped focal point
shared with the proposed new project.
           Policy RA-2.1.1
           Integrate new infill development into the exis ng neighborhood
           pa ern and, where applicable, extend or complete the exis ng
           street network.
           Policy RA-2.1.2
           Workforce and aﬀordable housing shall be well designed and
           a rac ve and is to be compa ble with surrounding proper es.
GOAL RA-3
INTEGRATE TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (TOD) WITH PUBLIC
TRANSPORTATION.
Objec ve RA-3.1                                                                 Enhance neighborhoods with
                                                                                pedestrian-oriented elements
Examine opportuni es for transit-oriented development (mixed-use areas          to create unique iden ty and
designed to maximize access to public transporta on).                                            connec vity
Policy RA-3.1.1
           Ensure transit is suppor ve of land uses.
           Policy RA-3.1.2
           Increase density around transit sta ons.
           Policy RA-3.1.3
           Create pedestrian- and bicycle-oriented design.
           Policy RA-3.1.4
           Make each sta on a hub for ac vity.
                                                                                 Provide for opportuni es for
                                                                            workforce and aﬀordable housing
                                                                               RESIDENTIAL AREAS            25

                                                                    City of Camarillo General Plan
                                   BELLA
                                   VISTA
                                                                                                CAMARILLO
                                                                                                 HEIGHTS
                                                     LAS POSAS
                        STERLING                      ESTATES
                          HILLS                                                                                                                       ST. JOHN’S
                                                                                                                                                      SEMINARY                         UPLAND ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                 DD   R.
                                                                                                                                                                       U   PL AN
                                                                          FOOTHILLS
                                                                                                                                              PITTS                                                           D.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AR
                                                                                                    ARNEILL RD.
                                                                          RD.                                                                RANCH                                  MISSION OAKS
                    SPANISH
                                                               PO   SAS                                                                                                        D.                      OS
  CE                                                       LAS                                                                                                             BLV                       AR
                     HILLS                                                                                                      RT
                                                                                   CENTRAL                                         E.
    NT                                                                                                                                34                              KS                          N T
      R                                                                         NEIGHBORHOOD                                FL           )                         OA                        SA
          AL                                                                                                                  YN
                                                                                                                                 N                        SI ON
             AV                                                                                                         RD
                                                                                                                          .(       RD
                                                                                                                                      .               MIS
               E.                                                          PONDEROSA DR.
 DEL NORTE                                                                                                             IS
                                       Springville                                                                 W
                                                                                                                  LE                                                       LEISURE VILLAGE
                                           VENTURA FW                                                                                     RANCHO
                                                     Y - US       HWY 101                                                                CALLEGUAS
                                                                                                                                                        AD
                                                                                                                                                           O   LFO
                                                                                        CAMARILLO
                                                                                        OLD TOWN
                                                                                                                                                                     RD.
                                                                                                                                         WOOD-
                                                                                                                            VILLAGE       SIDE
                                                                                                                             AT THE      GREENS
                                                                                                                              PARK
                                                                 PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                                                                                                                                                           CAMARILLO
                                                                                                                                                                            SPRINGS
Figure 10.5 - Residen al Neighborhoods
                                                                    10.3.3 Residen al Neighborhoods
                                                                     Approximately 30 established residen al neighborhoods can be found
                                                                     in Camarillo. These neighborhoods are dis nct in iden ty, characterized
                                                                     by design elements such as their street pa erns, architecture typologies,
                                                                     landscaping, public realm elements and other a ributes that support
                                                                     Camarillo’s sense of place. Figures 10.4 and 10.5 highlight the city’s
                                                                     residen al neighborhoods.
                                                                     Camarillo’s residen al neighborhoods also vary with respect to community
                                                                     design. Street pa erns are an important component of the urban
                                                                     form which impact not only circula on and community access but also
                                                                     community layout and character. Neighborhood streets such as those in
                                                                     the Las Posas Estates and on Upland Drive exhibit an organic, semi-rural
 Street pa erns and landscaping                                      street pa ern, while the Foothills and Village at the Park neighborhoods
 enhance the pedestrian experience                                   are loosely based on a grid pa ern. Development within residen al
                                                                     neighborhoods such as Village at the Park, Springville and Camarillo
                                                                     Commons are guided by the standards and guidelines provided in their
                                                                     respec ve Specific Plans.
                                                                     Architectural typologies are common among many of the neighborhoods,
                                                                     as well as other design elements and features. Many of Camarillo’s
                                                                     neighborhood sidewalks meander along the street edge and are shaded
                                                                     by mature trees. Fencing materials, including slump block and wood, are
                                                                     found along the edges of most residen al subdivisions. Landscaping in the
                                                                     city’s residen al neighborhoods is colorful, textured and well maintained
                                                                     which helps to enhance the pedestrian experience.
26          COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                  Community Design Element
10.3.4 Residen al Design Guidelines
The following guidelines should be considered in reviewing development
and redevelopment of residen al areas:
Site Design
            a. Minimize the visual dominance of the garage through use of
               alleys. Recessed or detached garages located at the rear of
               the lot are encouraged.
            b. Open street pa erns that create a network of circula on
               connec ons with mul ple points of access are encouraged.
            c. When cul-de-sacs are provided, they shall be open-ended to       Various forms of circula on pa erns
               create pedestrian connec ons to adjacent neighborhoods,              and connec ons are encouraged
               commercial areas, trails and open space.
            d. Varying building setbacks and lot widths are encouraged.
            e. Sidewalks should be provided within the street right-of-way
               to enhance the walkability of each neighborhood.
            f. Parkways with street trees should be provided between the
               curb and sidewalk.
            g. Orient streets and residen al units to maximize solar
               orienta on.
            h. Create opportuni es for small gathering spaces, common
               areas and pocket parks.
            i. Encourage use of complete street strategies in the design of      Varying massing and form enhance
                                                                                                       visual interest
               new residen al streets. Complete streets enable safe access
               for all pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists and transit riders of
               all ages and abili es.
            j. Incorporate recrea onal ameni es, such as walking trails/
               paths, into the design of new residen al projects.
Building Form
            a. Dwellings should include front porches, trellises, landscaping
               and other features to create a tradi onal neighborhood
               street scene not dominated by garage doors.
            b. Architectural features such as porches, balconies, chimneys,
               door placement, window propor ons, dormers, detailing and
               color scheme shall be used to complement the overall building
               design, site and neighborhood context.                             Front porches enhance tradi onal
                                                                                          neighborhood street scene
                                                RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES        z
                                                                                       RESIDENTIAL AREAS            27
                                        City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                  c. Include a variety of architectural details, eleva ons and
                                                     setbacks to create visual interest on streets. One design
                                                     should not be repeated so frequently that the homes appear
                                                     “cookie cu er.”
                                                  d. A variety of architectural styles found within the city of
                                                     Camarillo should be integrated to reflect the overall character
                                                     of the community.
                                                  e. Vary building orienta ons to avoid monotony and long garage
                                                     door corridors.
                                                  f. Simple, clean projec ons of stairways should be used to
                                                     complement the architectural massing and form of mul -
 Incorporate indoor and outdoor
 spaces and linkages                                 family structures. Stairways should be constructed of smooth
                                                     stucco, plaster or wood with accent trim of complementary
                                                     colors. Thin-looking, open metal, prefabricated stairs are
                                                     discouraged.
                                                  g. Design homes to incorporate a rela onship between indoor
                                                     and outdoor spaces.
                                                  h. Emphasize the front entry through the use of contextually
                                                     relevant elements such as porches, stoops, courtyards,
                                                     enhanced ligh ng and landscaping.
                                                  i. Mul -family units shall be compa ble in scale and design with
                                                     neighboring single-family detached and/or a ached homes.
                                                  j. To the extent possible, each a ached unit should be individually
 A ached units should provide a                      recognizable. Methods to break up massing could include:
 variety of setbacks, staggered planes,
 and varying compa ble architectural                    1)    Varying front setbacks within same structure;
 styles
                                                        2)    Staggering unit wall planes; and
                                                        3)    Varying details to appear as separate units, while s ll
                                                              remaining part of the whole building and maintaining
                                                              overall architectural style.
                                                  k. Raised mul -family or hillside homes with parking underneath
                                                     should u lize stucco, brick or masonry veneers on founda on
                                                     wall surfaces below the main floor of the house.
                                                  l. A combina on of quality materials such as stone, stucco and
                                                     wood should be used in the construc on of residen al unit
                                                     exteriors.
 Mul -family should be in scale and
 design with neighboring single-family
28      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT           z
                                             RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES

                                   Community Design Element
Massing
Mass is defined as a three-dimensional form, such as a cube, box,
cylinder, pyramid or cone. Appropriate building massing can change
the appearance of the street and the building and make them more
interes ng and less imposing.
             a. Large projects should be broken up into groups of structures
                of various heights.
             b. Several smaller, compact building footprints, rather than one
                large building, should be used to provide an in mate scale
                and a more eﬃcient envelope for op mizing dayligh ng
                and passive solar hea ng and cooling func ons.                 Varia on in wall plane, wall height
                                                                                 and roof heights are encouraged
             c. Building designs should include a combina on of the
                following techniques:
                   1)   Varia on in the wall plane (projec ng and
                        recessed elements)
                   2)   Varia on in wall height
                   3)   Varia on of roof heights
             d. Where appropriate, the upper stories of new mul -family
                buildings should be stepped back to reduce the scale of
                facades that face the street, courtyards or open space
                areas.
                                                                              Addi onal setback to second stories
             e. Structures with greater height should include addi onal       helps transi on height and massing
                setbacks and steps within the massing to create a transi on
                in height from adjacent proper es and to avoid domina ng
                the character of the neighborhood.
             f. Mul -family units shall be designed and detailed to
                complement the neighboring single-family detached
                and/or a ached homes and commercial centers. The
                architecture should incorporate the best features of the
                neighboring units.
             g. Ver cal elements such as towers may be used to accent
                horizontal massing and provide visual interest.
                                                                               Encourage use of ver cal elements
                                               RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES      z
                                                                                    RESIDENTIAL AREAS            29

                                     City of Camarillo General Plan
                                     Roofs
                                                a. Roofs should reflect a residen al appearance through roof
                                                   pitch and material selec on.
                                                b. Varied roof pitches, porches and overhangs provide visual
                                                   interest and increase the architectural character of the
                                                   dwelling unit, while reducing the bulk and size of the
                                                   structure.
                                                c. Roofs covering the en re building such as hips and gables
                                                   are preferred over mansard roofs. Segmented pitched roofs
                                                   should be applied at the building edge.
 Varying roof planes and porches                d. Roofing colors shall be so earth tones to minimize reflec ve
 helps create visually interes ng
 architectural a ributes                           glare and visual impacts.
                                                e. A variety of roof les and colors consistent with the
                                                   architectural style of the home helps enhance the diversity
                                                   and character of the community.
                                     Privacy
                                                a. Dwellings built on lots without direct frontage on the public
                                                   street should be situated to respect the privacy of adjacent
                                                   homes and to create usable yard space for the dwelling(s).
                                                b. Windows on walls adjacent to a neighbor’s home should be
                                                   oﬀset to prevent direct views into neighbor’s windows.
                                                c. Balconies and decks should avoid direct sight lines to
 Balconies, decks and clerestory                   neighbor’s windows or livable outdoor areas.
 windows should avoid direct sight-
 lines to neighbors’ livable spaces.
                                                d. Use clerestory windows or translucent glass to interrupt
                                                   direct sight lines to neighbor’s windows and livable outdoor
                                                   spaces.
                                                e. Use landscaping or garden features, where appropriate, to
                                                   provide a buﬀer or screening between proper es.
                                                f. The use of large blank walls as a result of trying to address
                                                   privacy concerns is not acceptable.
 Walkways and landscaping provides a
 buﬀer between buildings
30      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT         z
                                           RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES

                                   Community Design Element
Signage
Sign type, size and loca on shall comply with applicable sign provisions in
the Zoning Code.
             a. Signage contributes to the development’s iden ty as a
                unique environment. Professionally designed, crea ve
                signage is strongly encouraged, especially for gateways,
                internal direc ons and building iden fica on.
             b. Clear legible entry signage should be provided to iden fy the
                development. Internal circula on signage and visitor parking
                areas should also be clearly indicated.
                                                                                Entry signage and monuments provide
             c. Building numbers and individual unit numbers shall be                     strong iden ty and character
                readily visible, in a consistent loca on, well lit at night and
                compa ble with the overall design of the development.
U litarian Aspects
All u litarian equipment and features should be integrated into the site
plan and should either be aesthe cally screened from view or designed
to complement the architectural style of the project. U lity service areas
should be part of the early site design process, rather than an a erthought
at the construc on document phase.
             a. Landscaping, screens or aesthe c walls should minimize
                impact of trash cans and mechanical enclosures.
             b. Any equipment, whether on the side of a structure or ground,
                should be screened. The method of screening should be            U lity areas should be integrated into
                                                                                                        building design
                architecturally compa ble in material, color, shape and size.
                The screening design should blend with the building design,
                which may include a con nuous screen.
             c. Any outdoor equipment, whether on a roof, side of a structure
                or on the ground, should be appropriately screened from
                view and should not be placed adjacent to public ways and
                trails. The method of screening should be architecturally
                integrated with the adjacent structure in terms of material,
                color, shape and size.
             d. The trash and recycling enclosure should be consistent with
                the design of the project and building architecture. The same
                or similar materials should be used on the enclosure as the
                                                                                             Mailbox enclosures should
                buildings. Architecturally designed roof structures should be      complement the building character
                used to create a finished-looking structure.
                                                RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES          z
                                                                                         RESIDENTIAL AREAS            31

                                    City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                e. For single-family residen al lots, air condi oning units are
                                                   not permi ed within the required side yard setback. Air
                                                   condi oning and hea ng equipment must be located in the
                                                   rear yard of a lot and must be visually screened from view of
                                                   the public street. Screening should extend from the exis ng
                                                   grade to the top of the equipment and should be located
                                                   behind a wall.
                                                f. Common mailbox enclosures should be similarly designed in
                                                   form, material and color to the surrounding buildings.
                                    Residen al Landscaping
                                    Plants should be used to define building entrances, parking lots and the
   Landscaped parkways help         edges between use areas. Plants should also be used to buﬀer and screen
   provide a separa on between      neighboring proper es. Considera on of safety, environmental impacts
   pedestrian and vehicular
   circula on                       and accent elements is important when selec ng and loca ng landscaping
                                    features.
                                                a. Within the right-of-way of local streets, a landscaped parkway
                                                   and street trees shall provide a separa on between vehicle
                                                   and pedestrian circula on pa erns.
                                                b. Street trees shall be provided along the street edge and
                                                   along driveways to reduce heat and provide shade for
                                                   pedestrian thoroughfare. Refer to City-approved Tree List for
                                                   appropriate species.
                                                c. Public spaces which require visibility shall use transparent or
                                                   permeable screens and plan ng.
   Water-eﬃcient landscaping and                d. Within all required landscaped areas, an automa c water-
   irriga on systems are encouraged
                                                   eﬃcient irriga on system shall be installed upon ini al
                                                   construc on of any building or substan al altera on to any
                                                   building or site.
                                                e. Low-water use plan ngs shall be u lized to the extent
                                                   possible.
                                                f. The use of synthe c turf shall be minimized on single-family
                                                   lots and shall be in conformance with the requirements found
                                                   in the City of Camarillo Landscape and Irriga on Guidelines.
                                                g. Meandering sidewalks are encouraged along arterial roads.
                                                h. A variety of plant materials should be used for color, texture
                                                   and contrast.
   Landscape elements provide
   shade and define sea ng areas
32    COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT          z
                                          RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES

                                  Community Design Element
Hillside Development
Hillside areas must have special considera on in planning for
development. Good hillside design will coordinate the housing with
the topography, using the slope of the land as the basis for design of
the structure whenever possible. Excessive grading for lots into pads is
discouraged. In addi on to Chapter 18.100 (Hillside Development) of the
Camarillo Municipal Code, the following guidelines should be adhered to
in the development of hillside areas:
             a. In subdivisions with standard lots, split-level designs            Split-level home eliminates the need
                eliminate the unsightliness of s lt houses and eliminate the                       for extensive grading
                need for flat building pads involving extensive grading.
             b. Where site pads are created, they should be so ened by finish-
                grade sculpturing a er the mass grading is completed.
             c. Harmony of streets with mountain topography can be
                a ained by alignments that follow ridges and valleys.
             d. Rear property lines should be at the top of a slope to provide
                for proper slope maintenance responsibility.
             e. Streets should run diagonally across contours rather than
                perpendicular to slopes in order to reduce grading.
             f. Cluster housing, where dwellings are concentrated in
                rela vely compact groups, should be encouraged to preserve           Structures should be placed below
                a maximum amount of usable open space and wildlife               ridgelines to preserve views and blend
                corridors.                                                                      with exis ng topography
             g. All structures should be closely related to their sites, trea ng
                the site as an architectural element.
             h. Housing designs should take advantage of the best orienta on
                for view, shade, sun, breeze and privacy.
             i. Limit grading and removal of important landscape features
                such as barrancas. Soil export and import should be
                minimized.
             j. Consider impact on views from public roads and scenic
                corridors.
             k. Structures should be designed to blend in with the exis ng
                topography.
             l. Preserve ridgelines by avoiding the placement of structures
                on top of ridgelines.
                                                RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES           z
                                                                                           RESIDENTIAL AREAS           33
                                    City of Camarillo General Plan
                                    10.3.5 Landform Grading
                                    The purpose of this sec on is to provide design guidelines for grading
                                    projects within Camarillo and is meant to supplement the standards set
                                    forth by the City Public Works Department. These guidelines are intended
                                    to create landforms that work together with the surrounding topography,
                                    exis ng vegeta on, circula on and land features, as well as other
                                    elements of the total project site.
                                                a. Development shall consider the constraints and opportuni es
                                                    of the site and adjacent property.
                                                b. The project grading should be sensi ve to the exis ng site
 Natural drainage courses should be                 topography.
 incorporated into the design
                                                c. The view of the graded landform from private proper es and
                                                    public areas should reflect the natural landform character
                                                    and minimize a manufactured appearance.
                                                d. Significant natural features shall be incorporated into
                                                    developments including, but not limited to, rock outcroppings,
                                                    natural drainage courses, trees and other visual assets of the
                                                    site to the extent possible.
                                                e. Excessive grading should be avoided and removal of
                                                    vegeta on shall be limited to the minimum necessary.
                                                f. Pads shall not be significantly “built up” above exis ng
                                                    topography, unless no feasible alterna ve exists given
                                                    engineering constraints.
                                                g. The overall architecture shall complement and reinforce the
                                                    exis ng topography.
                                                h. Rather than using extensive grading to create one large pad,
                                                    projects should create smaller pads, gradually terracing up
                                                    hillsides where feasible. This produces smaller slopes that
                                                    are more easily revegetated, visually less obtrusive and more
                                                    suitable for slope contouring and blending.
                                                i. Long, con nuous slopes that have hard edges, sharp,
                                                    angular forms and no transi on areas at the top or toe of the
                                                    slope shall be avoided. “Natural” landform contour grading
                                                    smoothed to blend with the surrounding natural terrain and
                                                    with rounding and blending at the top and toe of the slope
                                                    shall be used to create a more natural appearing slope.
                                                j. Homes should be located below the ridgeline.
                                                k. The use of retaining walls should be minimized. High retaining
                                                    walls are not permi ed.
34     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                  Community Design Element
10.3.6 Safety, Security, and Fencing
Incorpora on of Crime Preven on Through Environmental Design (CPTED)
measures may be provided as necessary to reduce fear and crime. CPTED
principles may be provided to promote safer environments. CPTED
provides the following recommenda ons:
             a. Design projects with defensible space that will serve as a
                 means to discourage and to deter crime through the loca on
                 of physical features, ac vi es and people to maximize
                 visibility.
             b. Define clear boundaries between public, semi-public/private,
                                                                             Provide safe linkages and visibility to
                 and private spaces.                                                   semi-public/private spaces
             c. Promote regula ons, programs and prac ces that result
                 in the proper maintenance of the measures employed for
                 CPTED surveillance, access control, and territoriality.
Fencing and Walls
Residen al fences and walls are very visible design elements and have a
strong impact on a community’s character. There are numerous loca ons
throughout Camarillo where homeowners have extended the height of
their rear or side walls backing onto public rights-of-way. Along major
corridors, these wall extensions have created a clu ered appearance with
a variety of fencing materials at a variety of heights. Uniform walls and
fences will significantly improve the aesthe c environment for motorists
traveling along Camarillo’s vehicular corridors. In addi on, the provision
of vines and landscaping adjacent to the fencing and walls will so en their
                                                                                 Clear boundaries between public
hard appearance. Refer to Sec on 10.8 Gateways, Streets and Corridors                        spaces is encouraged
for fencing and wall guidelines along public corridors.
                                                                                 Vines and landscaping should be
                                                                              placed adjacent to walls in order to
                                                                                            so en the appearance
                                                                                    RESIDENTIAL AREAS              35

                                       City of Camarillo General Plan
                                       The following guidelines have been established to help enhance the
                                       character of Camarillo’s residen al areas:
                                                   a. Walls and fences used to delineate property limits of
                                                      backyards shall be compa ble with the architectural styles
                                                      and character in a neighborhood and shall be consistently
                                                      applied throughout that development.
                                                   b. Hedges and other landscaping in place of walls and fencing
                                                      are encouraged.
                                                   c. Walls, fences and hedges shall be in conformance with
                                                      Sec on 19.38.020 of the City of Camarillo Municipal Code.
 Walls and fences should be compa ble
 with building materials
                                                   d. Fences that do not obstruct views should be used for
                                                      developments adjacent to open space.
                                                   e. Fences and walls taller than three feet should not be located
                                                      in front yard setback or within corner site visibility restricted
                                                      areas. The design, scale and installa on of walls and fences
                                                      should be coordinated throughout new developments.
 Fences and walls less than three feet
 are appropriate in front yards
 Fencing provides privacy and
 transparency for surveillance
36     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                              Community Design Element
                                                                                                                                        R.
                                                                                                                                 ND D
                                                                                                                         UPL A
                                                                                                                                                            R   D.
                                                                   ARNEILL RD.
                                                    .
                                                S RD                                                                                                     SA
                                             OSA                                                                               D.                      RO
CE                                  L   AS P                                                   RT
                                                                                                  E.                        BLV                      A
  NT                                                                                                 34              AKS                           NT
    R   AL
                                                                                           FLYN        )           NO                         SA
                                                                                                N             SIO
           AV                                                                          RD
                                                                                         .(       RD
                                                                                                     .     MIS
             E.                                    PONDEROSA DR.                      IS
                                                                                  W
                                                                                 LE
                          VENTURA FW
                                    Y - US HWY
                                                   101
                                                                                                            AD
                                                                                                                 OLF
                                                                                                                    OR
                                                                                                                       D.
                                           PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                                                                                                                             Map Features
                                                                                                                                                           Commercial Areas
Figure 10.6 - Commercial Areas
    10.4 COMMERCIAL AREAS
    10.4.1 Introduc on
        The environment of a commercial area can act as a magnet to draw
        people in, or, if nega ve, can repel poten al customers or development.
        Commercial areas not only provide for shopping and dining ac vi es, they
        also act as a focal point by providing walkways, sea ng, and gathering
        spaces for pedestrians.
        Within the city of Camarillo, there are a variety of commercial areas.
        These include individual businesses on separate parcels, small commercial
        centers, neighborhood shopping centers, commercial oﬃce complexes and
        specialty commercial areas. Most commercial uses are within commercial                                           Water features act as focal points
                                                                                                                                 within commercial plazas
        centers or individual pockets of commercial areas. Some commercial
        developments include a mix of commercial and oﬃce uses, as can be
        found in the Dos Caminos Plaza or Paseo Camarillo development. The
        newer commercial centers have provided for adequate areas of parking,
        landscaping and a rac vely designed buildings. Earlier commercial
        developments have lacked suﬃcient landscaping screening of parking
        and loading areas, adequate parking, a rac vely designed buildings and
        master sign programs. The present standards for commercial centers
        provide for an a rac ve, pedestrian-friendly retail se ngs with plazas,
        appropriate parking and other conveniences to serve the needs of the
        customer.
                                                                                                                              COMMERCIAL AREAS                                37

                                     City of Camarillo General Plan
                                     The Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan proposes conver ng surface
                                     parking lots and underu lized structures along Arneill Road and Ponderosa
                                     Drive into a mixed-use shopping, entertainment and residen al hub for
                                     the community. The Ventura Boulevard corridor in Old Town is an example
                                     of an area that has benefited from good planning and revitaliza on eﬀorts
                                     and con nues to oﬀer great redevelopment poten al for exis ng buildings
                                     and underu lized parcels. Other older commercial areas have similar
                                     opportuni es for improvement.
                                     Oﬃce development, such as that found in the Camarillo Business Center,
                                     exemplifies the design opportuni es that can be u lized. The Civic Center
                                     block, for example, includes extensive landscaping, common parking areas,
 The Promenade Camarillo Premium     fountains, walkways, well-designed buildings and other features. This area
 Outlets                             has become a focal point within the community and has a strong visual
                                     prominence from the Ventura Freeway.
                                     Historically, the commercial character of Camarillo included Spanish-style
                                     architecture with the first buildings constructed substan ally of smooth
                                     stucco, stone and brick.
                                     10.4.2 Commercial Area Goal, Objec ve and Policies
                                     GOAL CA-1
                                     CREATE AND MAINTAIN ATTRACTIVE AND VIBRANT COMMERCIAL
                                     DEVELOPMENTS.
                                     Objec ve CA-1.1
 The Promenade is an a rac ve and    Commercial centers should emphasize strong street defini on by crea ng
 vibrant development                 ac ve front facades with outdoor sea ng, parking that is located on the
                                     side and behind buildings, maximiza on of entrances and transparent
                                     building facades.
                                                 Policy CA-1.1.1
                                                 Building architecture along Highway 101, primary collectors and
                                                  secondary collectors shall be of the highest quality.
                                                 Policy CA-1.1.2
                                                 Encourage property owners to improve facades and landscaping
                                                  surrounding exis ng buildings.
                                     Objec ve CA-1.2
                                     Both horizontal and ver cal mixed-use development is encouraged where
 The Village Commons is a successful appropriate. Ver cal mixed-use consists of residen al or oﬃce uses located
 mix of uses
                                     above retail within the same building. Horizontal mixed-use integrates
                                     residen al and commercial uses in separate structures on the same site.
38     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                 Community Design Element
Objec ve CA-1.3
Encourage the redevelopment of outdated and underu lized commercial
proper es.
           Policy CA-1.3.1
           Develop incen ves that encourage commercial property owners
           to improve tenant spaces, facades, parking areas and common
           outdoor spaces.
10.4.3 Commercial Design Guidelines
The following guidelines should be considered in reviewing development
and redevelopment of commercial areas:
                                                                              Parking areas should be screened with
                                                                                            trees, shrubs and berms
Site Design (Parking, Loading Areas)
            a. Commercial areas should provide pedestrian and bicycle
               connec ons to adjacent neighborhoods, parks and public
               facili es.
            b. Commercial developments should be pedestrian-oriented
               with clearly marked sidewalks, street furniture, landscaping,
               display windows, plazas, parkway focal points, ligh ng and
               signage.
            c. Buildings along primary corridors should incorporate
               landscaped setbacks.
            d. Commercial areas should provide for adequate building
               setbacks, and landscaping when adjacent to residen al
               uses.
            e. The use of common parking areas, pedestrian accessways and                Pedestrian accessways and
               landscaping programs should be u lized to e commercial          landscaping help break up expansive
                                                                                                        parking lots
               areas together both aesthe cally and func onally.
            f. Parking should be adequate and appropriately located based
               on the type of commercial center or district.
            g. Parking lots on corner sites should not be placed adjacent to
               the street edge.
            h. Parking should not be provided in one large lot that can
               be characterized as “a sea of cars.” Parking lots should be
               broken up into a series of smaller connected lots for visual
               interested and to reduce “heat island” eﬀects.
            i. Reciprocal access between adjacent parking areas should be
               provided so that vehicles are not required to enter the street
               in order to move from one area to another on the same or
                                                                                Trees shade vehicles and pedestrian
               adjacent sites.                                                                           accessways
                                              COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES          z
                                                                                      COMMERCIAL AREAS            39

                                         City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                                                      Special emphasis should be given to
                                                                                      building entrances and corners
 The massing of this building has been broken up by giving the appearance of          Tower feature adds emphasis to the
 several buildings joined together                                                    building’s corner
                                                       j. A landscaping buﬀer, landscaped berm or low wall should be
                                                           provided between parking areas and public rights-of-way.
                                                       k. Parking areas should be planted with trees to provide shade
                                                           and reduce the “heat island” eﬀect.
                                                       l. Loading areas shall be screened from view of public streets.
                                                           Screening can be accomplished through loca on, building
                                                           features, landscaping, fencing or walls.
                                                       m. Buildings should be oriented to create pedestrian plazas,
 Curvilinear forms may be appropriate
 for angled parcels                                        pathways, courtyards and ea ng areas to enhance the
                                                           quality of the outdoor environment.
                                                       n. Due to the high visibility of corner proper es, extra care
                                                           should be given to building orienta on and ar cula on.
                                                           Significant buildings with prominent architectural features
                                                           should be located near corners and intersec ons whenever
                                                           possible.
                                                       o. Building site plans shall incorporate public spaces.
 Appropriate building materials
40      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT              z
                                                COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES

                                Community Design Element
Form and Massing
          a. Commercial projects located within the Heritage Zone
             should apply Spanish-style architecture and include the use
             of natural materials.
          b. The configura on of the buildings should avoid strictly linear
             planes. A variety of building heights, setbacks and diﬀerences
             in configura on should be encouraged to add interest and
             scale to the development.
          c. Commercial buildings that are not complementary and
             do not relate to the surrounding environment should be
             discouraged.
                                                                            Commercial uses oriented toward the
                                                                                street enhance pedestrian traﬃc
          d. Specialty types of retail ac vi es, such as service sta ons,
             garages or drive-through restaurants which have precise
             func onal requirements, should be properly designed to
             incorporate those features, while minimizing the dominance
             of drive isles and paving. Their func onal requirements
             include maneuvering area, stack-up space, parking and
             loading areas.
          e. Sites at the end of street vistas, par cularly those of
             primary arterial streets, are much more visible than other
             sites. Design of these sites and structures should create an
             architectural terminus with architectural elements such as
             towers, interes ng roof forms or ar culated entries.
          f. All sides of the building should receive appropriate
             enhancement through building forms, details, fenestra on       Appropriate building ar cula on and
             and architectural elements.                                      features enhance the architectural
                                                                                                       character
          g. New development should express its own uniqueness
             complementary of Camarillo’s Spanish-style architecture,
             and not as a copy of a generic building type or na onal
             tenant architecture.
          h. Building bulk and mass should be reduced as much as possible
             by various ver cal and horizontal eleva on changes.
          i. Varying heights and setbacks on buildings increases the
             visibility of anchor stores and individual tenants while
             contribu ng to the overall design of the buildings.
                                                                                     Building orienta on creates
                                                                                                 pedestrian plaza
                                            COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES        z
                                                                                  COMMERCIAL AREAS              41

                                       City of Camarillo General Plan
                                       Mixed-Use Structures
                                       Mixed-use structures should be designed to correspond to the circula on
                                       of surrounding neighborhoods, providing easy accessibility by both vehicle
                                       and pedestrian traﬃc. It is envisioned that the commercial uses will be
                                       oriented toward the street for a pedestrian-friendly design. Pedestrian-
                                       scaled buildings with parking areas located away from the street and out
                                       of view from the surrounding residen al is a preferred design approach.
                                                   a. Buildings and entrances should front the street or sidewalk
                                                      where a strong pedestrian circula on system is present.
                                                   b. Loading areas should be located at the rear of a site as
 Varying heights and delinea on                       opposed to the front where it would be diﬃcult to adequately
 increases visibility of anchor stores                screen them from view.
                                                   c. When residen al proper es are located directly adjacent or
                                                      above commercial proper es, loading and delivery facili es
                                                      should be located to avoid noise and circula on conflicts and
                                                      screened with mature vegeta on and/or berming.
                                                   d. Site design, building orienta on and placement shall carefully
                                                      integrate pedestrian connec ons to adjoining residen al
                                                      neighborhoods in ways that maximize ease of access and
                                                      ensure the safety and security of both commercial and
                                                      residen al uses.
                                                   e. Trash and recycling enclosures should be located away
                                                      from residen al uses to minimize nuisance to adjacent
                                                      proper es.
 Entries, windows and awnings
 should be compa ble with building                 f. Architectural form and massing should be designed at a
 architecture                                         pedestrian scale.
                                                   g. Horizontal mixed-use projects should provide recrea on/
                                                      open space ameni es for residen al units.
                                                   h. Drive-through uses are prohibited in mixed-use structures
                                                      that include residen al units.
                                       Materials, Colors, and Finishes
                                                   a. Changing materials and colors, roof planes and setbacks as
                                                      well as architectural elements can help reduce building mass
                                                      and bulk of buildings.
                                                   b. Entries, roof overhangs, display windows, awnings and
 Appropriate base materials enhance                   arcades should all be complementary to the building design
 building character                                   to create invi ng public spaces.
42     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT            z
                                             COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES

                                       Community Design Element
Appropriate architectural details help
accentuate roofs
Overhangs and eaves accentuate entrance        Ver cal elements such as towers accentuate the horizontal massing and provide
                                                                                                               visual interest
                 c. Use high-quality base materials and cornice or molding
                     elements to anchor the building to the ground plane.
                 d. Permanent shading devices such as awnings and canopies
                     on south-facing facades should enhance the building façade,
                     while assis ng in cooling the building during the summer
                     months.
                 e. All sides of the building should receive appropriate
                     enhancement through details, materials, colors, and
                                                                                        Roof form complements architectural
                     finishes.                                                                                     character
    Roofs
    Roof forms should be varied to break up building massing and define the
    architectural character of the building.
                 a. Mul -form roof, gable roof and shed roof combina ons
                     should be used to create an interes ng and varying roof that
                     will lessen the mass of the building and add visual appeal.
                 b. Roof materials and colors should be consistent with the
                     architectural style.                                                      Tower feature used at building
                                                                                            entrance enhances building form
                                                   COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES              z
                                                                                               COMMERCIAL AREAS             43

                                     City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                c. Long, unbroken, horizontal roof lines are discouraged.
                                                d. Deep roof overhangs are encouraged to create pedestrian
                                                   arcades, verandas and passive solar benefits.
                                                e. Use of exposed ra er tails should have appropriate massing
                                                   and width.
                                                f. All roof equipment shall be located below a parapet wall and
                                                   screened from public view.
                                                g. Roof-mounted equipment shall be fully screened from public
                                                   view and located below the parapet. In addi on, placement
                                                   and screening shall be considered when visible from higher
 Sidewalk cafes add vibrancy to                    eleva on roads such as the Conejo Grade.
 outdoor spaces
                                     Pedestrian Ameni es
                                                a. Adequate areas for pedestrian ac vi es should be provided
                                                   and should include a variety of sizes to encourage diﬀerent
                                                   types of usage of those spaces.
                                                b. Pedestrian links should be provided between buildings on the
                                                   same site, public open spaces and parking areas and should
                                                   be visually emphasized through the use of landscaping or
                                                   trellis features, ligh ng, walls and/or dis nc ve paving.
                                                   Pedestrian links should be consistent with Title 24 of the
                                                   California Code of Regula ons accessibility requirements.
                                                c. Pedestrian walkways to building entries shall be prominent,
                                                   clear and readily iden fiable.
 Landscape plazas provide an invi ng
 atmosphere                                     d. Clear and direct pedestrian linkage from parking areas to
                                                   building entries should be provided.
                                                e. Pedestrian walkways should be physically separated from
                                                   vehicular areas to ensure safety.
                                                f. Pathways and walkways should be used to link plazas and
                                                   gardens and access to all buildings.
                                                g. The use of a variety of enriched textures and paving for
                                                   walking surfaces is encouraged.
                                                h. A clear pedestrian link to exis ng or proposed bus stops
                                                   should be provided.
 Pathways provide a colorful and                i. Design of public spaces should incorporate space for public
 textured walking experience                       gatherings and smaller, in mate mee ng areas.
44     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT         z
                                          COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES

                               Community Design Element
          j. Stores and restaurants should provide a vibrant street scene
             and front public spaces.
          k. Display windows should be provided to encourage pedestrian
             interac on and visual interest.
Landscaping
          a. Landscaping areas should be u lized to screen parking areas,
             accent pedestrian areas and so en walls of buildings.
          b. Plan ng should be used to screen less desirable areas
             from public view (e.g., trash enclosures, parking areas,
             storage areas, loading areas, public u li es and mechanical
             equipment).                                                        Outdoor dining and landscaping
                                                                                   creates a pleasant experience
          c. Appropriate pedestrian furniture, such as sea ng, ligh ng,
             water features and/or public art should provide a safe,
             friendly and comfortable environment.
          d. Landscaping should include a mix of trees, shrubs, and
             ground cover. In commercial areas, larger box-sized trees
             should be installed.
          e. Sidewalks should incorporate tree wells or planters to
             provide shade and create an urban street scene.
          f. The use of landscaping and water features should be used to
             address street noise when public spaces abut busy streets.
Ligh ng
          a. Light fixtures should complement the character and style of   Sidewalk dining not located adjacent
             the development.                                                 to the building edge should allow
                                                                             ample room for pedestrians to pass
          b. Spotligh ng or glare from any site ligh ng should be shielded
             from adjacent proper es and directed at a specific object
             or target area. Exposed bulbs should not be used. Cut-oﬀ
             ligh ng is preferred.
          c. Ligh ng should be incorporated into the landscape and
             theme of the buildings.
                                                                              Trellis and trees provide shade for
                                                                                                      pedestrians
                                           COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES         z
                                                                                  COMMERCIAL AREAS              45

                                       City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                   d. Fixtures enhancing the crea ve style and theme of the
                                                       project are encouraged.
                                                   e. Fixtures must be of high-quality design, vandal resistant and
                                                       durable.
                                                   f. Innova ve use of night ligh ng should be used to add
                                                       to the character of the buildings, while minimizing light
                                                       and glare (e.g., ligh ng of footpaths, fountains and other
                                                       water elements, landscaping elements and the buildings
                                                       themselves).
                                                   g. Ligh ng shall be controlled by a mer. Within one hour a er
 Ligh ng style should complement the                   closing, ligh ng in the parking areas should be reduced to
 building architecture                                 a minimal level necessary for safety and security; and the
                                                       illumina on of signs and landscaping shall be curtailed.
                                                   h. Energy-eﬃcient ligh ng shall be used to the extent
                                                       possible.
                                       Commercial Signage
                                       Signs play an important role in the success of any business by providing
                                       necessary iden fica on and adver sing. Signs integrated into the building
                                       design provide a personal quality that contributes to the ambiance of the
                                       commercial complex or streetscape, especially the more unique signs.
                                       Conversely, signs can intrude upon pleasant surroundings when applied as
                                       an a erthought. These guidelines are intended to balance the legi mate
                                       adver sing needs of businesses with the need to prevent visual clu er.
 Ligh ng should be architecturally
 compa ble with the main structure                 a. Signs should be in scale with and in propor on to the
                                                       primary building façade so that the signs do not dominate
                                                       the facade.
                                                   b. Sign colors, materials and design should be compa ble with
                                                       that of the primary building façade.
                                                   c. Signs shall be constructed of durable materials that are
                                                       compa ble in appearance to the building iden fied by the
                                                       sign.
                                                   d. The method of a aching the sign to the building should be
                                                       integrated into the overall sign design.
                                                   e. Signs on canopies and awnings are prohibited.
 Spot ligh ng is an elegant alterna ve
 to back-lit, box-style ligh ng                    f. Signs should not cover up windows or important architectural
                                                       features.
46      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT           z
                                             COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES

                               Community Design Element
          g. A single development with mul ple users should provide a
             unifying sign theme through a sign program.
          h. Flush-mounted signs should be posi oned within
             architectural features such as the window panel above the
             storefront or flanking the doorway.
          i. Energy-eﬃcient ligh ng should be used to light commercial
             signs.
Mechanical Equipment
          a. Mechanical equipment, including roo op mounted units, is
             required to be located below the parapet wall and screened
             from public view. Screening shall be designed as an integral     Example of an appropriately
             element of the building.                                          integrated commercial sign
          b. Any outdoor equipment, whether on a roof, side of a
             structure or on the ground should be appropriately screened
             from view and should not be placed adjacent to public ways
             and trails. The method of screening should be architecturally
             integrated with the adjacent structure in terms of material,
             color, shape and size.
          c. Buildings with flat or low-pitched roofs should incorporate
             parapets, pitched facades or architectural elements
             designed to screen roof-mounted mechanical equipment.
             The screening should be architecturally compa ble in color,
             shape, size and material with the primary building and should
             be carefully integrated into the overall building design.
          d. Transformer units, backflow units and air compressors                          Hanging Sign
             mounted on the ground area should be adequately screened
             by walls or landscaping and should be located outside
             setbacks and away from prominent public areas.
          e. U lity service areas, such as electrical panels, should be
             placed within enclosures that are architecturally integrated
             into the building design. U lity companies should be able to
             access meters and u lity equipment even when screened.
          f. Roof access should be provided from the interior of the
             building. Exterior roof access ladders should be avoided if
             possible.
                                                                                                Wall Sign
                                            COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES   z
                                                                             COMMERCIAL AREAS           47

                                        City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                   g. Stealth-mounted applica ons for wireless communica on
                                                      facili es should be used whenever possible, whereby the
                                                      facility is aesthe cally integrated into the surrounding
                                                      environment so as not be readily seen or recognized as a
                                                      communica on facility.
                                        Trash Enclosures
                                                   a. Support features, such as loading spaces and trash enclosures,
                                                      should be provided and considered in the ini al design of
                                                      the project.
                                                   b. The trash and recycling enclosure should be consistent with
                                                      the design of the project and building architecture. The same
 Loading and delivery areas should be                 or similar materials should be used on the enclosure as the
 screened with landscaping and walls
                                                      buildings. Architecturally designed roof structures should be
                                                      used to create a finished-looking structure.
                                        Loading Areas
                                                   a. Loading facili es shall be designed as an integral part of the
                                                      building which they serve and shall be located in the most
                                                      inconspicuous loca on possible.
                                                   b. Loading facili es should be oriented and designed where
                                                      they will not be visible from any adjacent public street.
                                                   c. No loading facility, including incidental parking and
                                                      maneuvering areas, shall extend into any required minimum
                                                      yard setback.
 Loading and delivery areas should                 d. Loading, storage and service facili es shall be screened from
 be architecturally consistent with the               view by a combina on of walls and landscaping.
 main building
                                        Redevelopment and Infill of Exis ng Commercial Centers
                                                   a. Infill and redevelopment of exis ng commercial centers
                                                      should include structures located on the street edge,
                                                      avoidance of large parking areas, pedestrian connec vity
                                                      between buildings and architectural compa bility with
                                                      Camarillo’s Spanish style.
                                                   b. All buildings and their elements (including ligh ng and
                                                      signage) must be consistent with the architectural character
                                                      of the area and compa ble with neighboring buildings.
 Trash enclosures must be covered and
 should compliment the design of the
 adjacent architecture
48     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT            z
                                             COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES

                      Community Design Element
                                                               Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan Concept Plan
c. Infill buildings should fill the en re vacant space between
   neighboring buildings to create a con nuous block of facades.
   If the vacant space is large, the infill building’s façade should
   be divided into several facades of approximately the same
   length of neighboring buildings façades.
d. Scale should be pedestrian-oriented and appropriate to the
   orienta on of the street.
e. Infill buildings should contribute to the harmony of the
   street’s appearance by using complementary colors and                  Revitalized shopping center with new
                                                                                    buildings at the street edge
   materials.
f. Infill buildings should be designed to maintain a unified
   appearance with adjoining buildings. However, exact
   duplicates of neighboring buildings are discouraged.
                                                                                            Old Town Camarillo
                                                                          Ventura Boulevard Design Guidelines
                                   COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES                z
                                                                                 COMMERCIAL AREAS              49

                            This Page Le Blank Inten onally
50 COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
                                            Community Design Element
                                                                                                                                        R.
                                                                                                                                 ND D
                                                                                                                        UP L A
                                                                                                                                                            R   D.
                                                                 ARNEILL RD.
                                                  .
                                            SAS RD                                                                            .                          SA
 CE                                LA  S PO                                                 RT                             LVD                         RO
   NT                                                                                          E. 34                    KSB                        NT
                                                                                                                                                     A
     R                                                                                  FL           )               OA                       SA
         AL                                                                               YN
                                                                                             N               S ION
            AV                                                                        RD
                                                                                        .(     RD
                                                                                                  .      MIS
              E.                                 PONDEROSA DR.                    IS
                                                                               LE
                                                                                  W
                          VENTURA FW
                                    Y - US HWY
                                                 101
                                                                                                          AD
                                                                                                               OLF
                                                                                                                     OR
                                                                                                                       D.
                                         PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                                                                                                                             Map Features
                                                                                                                                                           Industrial Areas
Figure 10.7 - Industrial Areas
     10.5 INDUSTRIAL AREAS
     10.5.1 Introduc on
     Camarillo has some of the finest industrial developments in the county.
     These are generally located in the newer industrial parks and feature
     high quality design concepts including landscaping, parking and adequate
     building setbacks. The buildings are well designed and make use of a
     variety of building materials, colors and textures with good propor ons
     and massing.
     Historically, citrus, walnuts and lima beans were the predominant                                           Buildings should be well designed and
     agricultural crops near Camarillo; therefore, the main industries were                                       incorporate a variety of architectural
                                                                                                                            materials, colors and styles
     packing and shipping. The Southern Pacific Railroad allowed for the growth
     of Camarillo’s agricultural and industrial opera ons as it allowed produce
     to be shipped to faraway markets.
                                                                                                                                  INDUSTRIAL AREAS                            51

                                          City of Camarillo General Plan
 Architectural massing is broken into dis nct elements
                                           Most of the ac vi es within the newer industrial developments take place
                                           inside the building. The limited type of ac vi es which occur outside of
                                           a building are provided with proper screening and landscape treatment.
                                           The developments make use of common access drives, sign programs
                                           and landscape treatment and provide a well-designed environment for
                                           manufacturing, technology and oﬃce uses.
                                           Camarillo also has loca ons of older industrial developments which
                                           include developments that lack landscaping, proper building setbacks and
 Incorpora on of a variety of materials    on-site parking and that have numerous uses conducted outside of the
 and colors                                buildings, such as the storage of vehicles and equipment. These areas are
                                           considered to lack the environmental and design characteris cs consistent
                                           with the image of the community and newer industrial developments. The
                                           addi on of landscaping, adequate structural setbacks, oﬀ-street parking,
                                           good architectural design and appropriate sign graphics can transform
                                           these areas into assets to the community.
                                           Recently constructed industrial developments that are representa ve of
                                           high-quality architecture, massing and ar cula on can be found within the
                                           Airport North Specific Plan Area and Flynn Road Business Park. Further,
 Employee break areas should be            the Dawson Drive Industrial Specific Plan includes adopted concepts and
 integrated into the site design           design guidelines to improve this area.
52     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                   Community Design Element
10.5.2 Industrial Area Goal, Objec ves and Policies
GOAL IA-1
PROVIDE WELL-MAINTAINED, COMPATIBLE AND ATTRACTIVE INDUSTRIAL
AREAS THAT ARE ABLE TO MAINTAIN THEIR VALUE OVER TIME.
Objec ve IA-1.1
Enhance and update the visual quality of industrial areas within the city.
Objec ve IA-1.2
Guide future developments in a direc on that will improve the aesthe cs,
func onality and economy of the community.
                                                                              Second floor balconies help to break
Objec ve IA-1.3                                                                               up building massing
Design to respect the scale and development character of adjoining sites
and work to mi gate the nega ve visual and func onal impacts that arise
from the scale, bulk and mass inherent to larger industrial developments.
Objec ve IA-1.4
Strengthen the usability and connec vity of the pedestrian environment
by enhancing access to transit, adjoining development, the public realm of
the street and/or open space features.
Objec ve IA-1.5
Allow for flexibility to respond to the unique characteris cs and constraints
inherent to diﬀerent users, specific sites and associated contexts.
Objec ve IA-1.6
Promote building designs, systems and prac ces that are sustainable and         Planters and landscaping enhance
adaptable to mul ple uses in the interest of extending the building life                             public spaces
cycle.
            Policy IA-1.6.1
            The industrial performance standards contained in the Zoning
            Ordinance are to be complied with to insure that the use will not
            be detrimental to other adjoining land uses.
            Policy IA-1.6.2
            The City shall con nue to apply the standards contained in the
            L-M, M-1 and M-2 zoning regula ons.
                                                                                     INDUSTRIAL AREAS            53

                                         City of Camarillo General Plan
 Building orienta on should maximize northern and southern exposure
                                                    Policy IA-1.6.3
                                                    Orient openings to maximize northern and southern exposure.
                                                    Policy IA-1.6.4
                                                    Orient openings to maximize natural cross-flow ven la on.
                                                    Policy IA-1.6.5
                                                    Provide landscaping that will provide shade throughout the
                                                    summer and allow for the use of winter sun.
                                         Objec ve IA-1.7
 Loading areas should be oriented        Work to minimize, and mi gate where necessary, a development’s
 toward the back of the building         nega ve impacts on adjoining areas.
 Incorpora ng loading areas below the
 building helps reduce its visual impact
54     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                Community Design Element
10.5.3 Industrial Design Guidelines
The following guidelines should be considered in reviewing development
and redevelopment of industrial areas:
Site Design (Parking, Loading Areas, Employee Break Areas)
            a. Appropriate setbacks should be provided. A variety of
               setbacks should be encouraged along the street and buildings
               with greater heights should have greater setbacks.
            b. When manufacturing use abuts other types of land uses,
               appropriate transi onal features such as landscaping, walls
               and greater building setbacks should be provided.            Significant architectural materials and
                                                                                              massing denote entry
            c. Ensure compa bility between uses located within the same
               development through use of design criteria such as enhanced
               setbacks, transi ons and building/site design.
            d. Adequate parking should be provided to serve the needs of
               the development.
            e. Proper access for parking areas and loading areas should
               be provided. The use of common accessways should be
               encouraged and driveways along the developments should
               be limited.
            f. Adequate loading spaces should be provided with appropriate
               maneuvering space. The loading opera on should be
               screened from view from the street and major entrances to
               the building.                                                    A variety of ver cal and horizontal
                                                                                 elements helps reduce the overall
            g. Employee break areas should be incorporated into the project                               massing
               and include ameni es such as flowers, shrubs, shade trees,
               sea ng/dining areas with chairs, shade structure/umbrellas,
               ligh ng and/or sound a enua on fence or wall.
Form and Massing
            a. The design of the buildings shall complement the area and
               shall promote good architectural design through the use
               of building propor ons, massing, materials, textures and
               colors.
            b. Surface detailing should not serve as a subs tute for
               dis nc ve massing.
                                                                                   Corner treatment creates visual
                                                                                                           interest
                                               INDUSTRIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES         z
                                                                                      INDUSTRIAL AREAS            55
                                       City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                   c. Desirable massing includes:
                                                          1)    Varia on in the wall plane (projec ng and recessing
                                                                elements)
                                                          2)    Varia on in wall height
                                                          3)    Roofs located at diﬀerent levels
                                                   d. Exterior wall planes should be varied in depth and/or
                                                       direc on. Wall planes should not run in one con nuous
                                                       direc on for more than 50 feet without a significant oﬀset.
                                                   e. The height of the building should be varied so that it appears
 Varying roof planes helps to decrease
 massing and form                                      to be divided into dis nct massing elements.
                                                   f. Minimize the ver cal emphasis of architectural design
                                                       elements by incorpora ng features such as horizontal
                                                       bands, reveals, trims, awnings, eaves, overhangs or other
                                                       ornamenta on along diﬀerent levels of the wall surface.
                                                       Minimize blank walls by:
                                                          1)    Adding window openings, entrances and other
                                                                relief
                                                          2)    Changing color and texture along the wall surface
                                                          3)    Varying the planes of the exterior walls in depth
                                                                and/or direc on
                                                          4)    Adding trims, projec ons and reveals along
 Pedestrian walkway iden fies building                          diﬀerent wall surfaces
 entrance
                                                          5)    Ar cula ng the building façade by varying
                                                                juxtaposi on of building elements
                                                          6)    Using natural materials such as brick and stone
                                       Roofs
                                       Roof forms should be varied to break up building massing and define the
                                       architectural character of the building.
                                                   a. Long, unbroken, horizontal roof lines are discouraged. A roof
                                                       line at the top of the structure should not run in a con nuous
                                                       plane for more than 50 feet without oﬀse ng or jogging the
                                                       roof plane.
 Parking areas should provide
 pedestrian accessways to entries
56     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT           z
                                            INDUSTRIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES

                                Community Design Element
           b. Piecemeal mansard roofs that are placed only on a por on
              of the building perimeter should not be u lized.
           c. Roo op equipment shall be screened from public view and
              located below the parapet. The method of screening should
              be architecturally compa ble with the main buildings on the
              site in terms of material, color, shape and size.
           d. The roof design should be considered as a component of the
              overall architectural design theme.
           e. Flat roofs should u lize “cool” roof design to reduce solar
              heat gain.
                                                                                    Trees and shrubs should screen
Pedestrian Access                                                                     buildings where appropriate
           a. Parking areas should be designed so that cars and pedestrians
              are separated.
           b. The need for pedestrians to cross parking aisles should be
              minimized.
           c. Landscape island walkways should be used to connect
              parking and building entries.
           d. Access between transit stops and building entrances should
              be clearly defined.
           e. The on-site pedestrian circula on system should be directly
              connected to oﬀsite public sidewalks.
Landscaping and Screening                                                       Landscape berms, trees and shrubs
                                                                                         so en and screen parking
           a. Use of landscaping along property lines and adjacent to
              buildings should be provided to help screen buildings,
              parking, storage and loading opera ons.
           b. Ac vi es that might disturb neighbors should take place
              inside of a building. The types of uses that would occur
              outside of a building as permi ed by the Zoning Ordinance
              should be provided with walls and landscaping to screen
              outdoor storage and ac vi es.
           c. Landscaping can be used to so en the impact of large
              buildings and to screen loading and service areas.
                                                                            Landscape berms decrease impact
                                                                            of loading areas and mechanical
                                                                            equipment
                                                 INDUSTRIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES       z
                                                                                      INDUSTRIAL AREAS           57

                                         City of Camarillo General Plan
                                         Industrial Signage
                                         Building signage can either enhance the building façade or completely
                                         diminish the aesthe c appeal of a building. Provisions for sign placement,
                                         sign scale in rela onship with the building and the readability of the sign
                                         should be considered in developing the overall signing concept.
                                                      a. Signs shall be in conformance with the City of Camarillo
                                                          Municipal Code, Title 17 - Signs.
                                                      b. Signs should coordinate with the building design, material,
                                                          color, size and placement.
 Apron wall helps screen loading areas                c. The method of sign a achment to the building should be
                                                          integrated into the overall sign design.
                                                      d. Signs should not cover up windows or important architectural
                                                          features.
                                                      e. A single development with mul ple users should provide a
                                                          unifying sign theme.
                                                      f. The industrial site should be appropriately signed to give
                                                          direc ons to loading and receiving, visitor parking and other
                                                          special areas.
                                         Mechanical Equipment
                                                      a. Mechanical equipment shall be properly screened and
      Signs should be placed to provide                   integrated into the design of the building. Roof-mounted
                   direc on for visitors                  equipment shall be located below the parapet and shall not
                                                          be visible from public view.
                                                      b. Exterior storage should be confined in por ons of the site
                                                          least visible to public view and should be screened.
                                                      c. Transformers should be located underground where
                                                          feasible.
                                                      d. All u lity equipment, including, but not limited to, electric
                                                          and gas meters, electrical panels, cable boxes and junc on
                                                          boxes, should be located in a u lity room within the
                                                          building.
                                                      e. U lity lines from the service drop to the site should be
 Vines and shrubs should be u lized to                    underground.
 screen mechanical areas and walls
58     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT              z
                                               INDUSTRIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES

                                 Community Design Element
            f. Where screening is required, a combina on of elements
               should be used, including solid masonry walls, berms and
               landscaping.
            g. Any outdoor equipment, whether on a roof, side of a structure
               or on the ground, should be appropriately screened from
               view and should not be placed adjacent to public ways and
               trails. The method of screening should be architecturally
               integrated with the adjacent structure in terms of material,
               color, shape and size.
                                                                             Trash and recycling enclosures should
            h. Where screen walls are used at property frontages or to         complement the building character
               conceal storage and equipment areas, the walls should be
               designed to blend with the site’s architecture.
            i. Where allowed, outdoor storage must be fully screened
               from public view.
            j. Stealth-mounted applica ons for wireless communica on
               facili es should be used whenever possible, whereby the
               facility is aesthe cally integrated into the surrounding
               environment so as not be readily seen or recognized as a
               communica on facility.
Trash and Recycling Enclosures
The trash and recycling enclosure should be designed consistent with
the project and building architecture and carefully sited and screened to       Each property should provide both
minimize the visual impact.                                                          trash and recycling enclosures
            k. The trash and recycling enclosure should be consistent with
               the design of the project and building architecture. The same
               or similar materials should be used on the enclosure as the
               buildings. Architecturally designed roof structures should be
               used to create a finished-looking structure.
            l. Every property should provide an enclosure that is capable of
               handling the refuse, recyclables and green waste generated
               by that site.
            m. At least half of the trash and recycling area should be
               dedicated to recycling containers.
            n. A pedestrian entrance to the trash enclosure should be
               provided so that the large access gates do not have to be
               opened as o en.
            o. Trash and recycling enclosures should be located away
               from residen al uses to minimize nuisance to adjacent
               proper es.
                                                 INDUSTRIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES       z
                                                                                       INDUSTRIAL AREAS           59

                            This Page Le Blank Inten onally
60 COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
                                              Community Design Element
                                                                                                                                  ND   DR.
                                                                                                                             UPLA
                                                                                                                                                              D.
                                                                                                                                                         AR
                                                                     ARNEILL RD.
                                             S   RD.
                                        POSA                                                                                      D.                   OS
 CE                                 LAS                                                                                        BLV                   AR
                                                                                                 RT
   NT                                                                                               E.                      KS                      T
                                                                                                       34                 A                       N
     R   AL
                                                                                             FLYN         )             NO                   SA
                                                                                                  N                  SIO
              AV                                                                         RD
                                                                                           .(       RD
                                                                                                       .          MIS
                 E.                                  PONDEROSA DR.                      IS
                                                                                    W
                                                                                   LE
                           VENTURA FW
                                        Y - US HWY
                                                     101
                                                                                                                    AD
                                                                                                                      OLF
                                                                                                                         OR
                                                                                                                           D.
                                           PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                                                                                                                              Map Features
                                                                                                                                                               Public & Quasi-
                                                                                                                                                               Public Facilities
                                                                                                                                                               Parks
Figure 10.8 - Public and Quasi-Public Facili es
     10.6 PUBLIC AND QUASI PUBLIC FACILITIES
     10.6.1 Introduc on
     Public and quasi-public facili es, such as libraries, recrea on centers,
     schools, parks and hospitals, add to the character of the community by
     crea ng places for social interac on, leisure, quiet and relaxa on in the
     urban environment.
     These facili es represent the posi ve contribu ons that local government
     and organiza ons can make to the everyday lives of ci zens. Some of the
     most pleasant areas in Camarillo are the parks, public spaces and schools.
     These areas provide gathering places to bolster community interac on and
                                                                                                                          Camarillo Library on Las Posas Road
     enhance the community’s small-town character.
     Some of these public and quasi-public facili es have stemmed from
     history. Adolfo Camarillo loved fiestas, horses, rodeos and barbecues. The
     community con nues to host these colorful ac vi es in the form of the
     Camarillo Fiesta and Street Fair. Future facili es should embrace Adolfo
     Camarillo’s vision of bringing the community together to celebrate its
     heritage.
     The following public facili es/items have been iden fied through public
     outreach as important contributors towards Camarillo’s character and
     sense of place.
                                                                                                     P U B L I C A N D Q UA S I - P U B L I C FA C I L I T I E S                   61

                                          City of Camarillo General Plan
 Old Town Cruise Night is a highlight within the community
                                           Civic/Public Buildings and Facili es
                                           The City should con nue to pursue development of civic/public
                                           buildings and programs that further the community’s cultural, social and
                                           recrea onal opportuni es.
                                           Community Center - Burnley Road
                                           The Pleasant Valley Recrea on and Park District’s exis ng Community
                                           Center has trained recrea on staﬀ to assist ci zens of all ages in pursuit
                                           of leisure ac vi es such as instruc onal classes, special ac vi es and
 Civic structures should include a focal
 element such as a tower feature or        programs, athle cs, workshops and clinics, trips, social ac vi es and
 rotunda                                   community mee ngs. Future programs should include those that further
                                           Camarillo’s history and culture.
                                           Events/Ac vi es
                                           The city hosts several annual events that add defini on to the
                                           community’s “hometown” feel. These events not only contribute to the
                                           city’s heritage, but also generate income for local restaurants, shops,
                                           hotels and other businesses.
 Farmers market
62      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                  Community Design Element
                                                                      The library has a desirable architectural character
University Connec on
The City of Camarillo and California State University Channel Islands
(CSUCI) have a unique opportunity to partner on projects that are
mutually beneficial. One such opportunity is the development of a bicycle
and pedestrian trail system that links the community to the university.
This proposed route includes a mul -use trail located adjacent to
Calleguas Creek, connec ng to the Village at the Park neighborhood and
beyond. Another opportunity would be to provide a mul -use trail and
enhanced landscaping adjacent to Lewis Road which would eﬀec vely link
the university to the Old Town area.
Historic Buildings                                                                        A mul -use trail system could
                                                                                        provide students a direct route to
Camarillo’s historic structures date back to 1892. Only a handful of historic       neighborhoods within the community
structures remain, therefore it is impera ve that they be preserved,
maintained and/or restored to their original status. Historic structures
shall be iden fied, protected and enhanced per Sec on 16.42 of the City
Municipal Code.
                                                                                      The historic Camarillo Ranch House
                                                                  P U B L I C A N D Q UA S I - P U B L I C FA C I L I T I E S 63

                                       City of Camarillo General Plan
                                       10.6.2 Public and Quasi-Public Facili es
                                                  Goals, Objec ves and Policies
                                       GOAL PQPF-1
                                       PROVIDE COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND SERVICES THAT MEET THE
                                       PHYSICAL, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL NEEDS OF CAMARILLO’S POPULATION.
                                       Objec ve PQPF-1.1
                                       Provide dis nc ve civic architecture, landmarks and public facili es.
                                                  Policy PQPF-1.1.1
                                                  Public buildings should present a good architectural character
 Civic structures should have a                   based on style, color, material and texture.
 dis nc ve architectural character
                                                  Policy PQPF-1.1.2
                                                  Public buildings should be arranged to maximize the opportuni es
                                                  for providing landscaped plazas and usable open space.
                                                  Policy PQPF-1.1.3
                                                  Public schools should take full advantage of their opportunity
                                                  to enhance the physical appearance of the neighborhood and
                                                  increase the educa on and ac vity base of the community.
                                                  Policy PQPF-1.1.4
                                                  Public buildings within the “civic” area should promote the
                                                  concept of an ac vity center through the use of architectural
                                                  elements, open space areas and func ons.
 Public art should be integrated into
 plaza space and landscaped areas
 surrounding buildings                            Policy PQPF-1.1.5
                                                  Public art should be integrated into public buildings and spaces
                                                  such as building façades, bridges, bus shelters, sidewalks, plazas
                                                  and parks. Art should be strategically located along established
                                                  sight lines.
                                                  Policy PQPF-1.1.6
                                                  Consider ar s c, cultural and social ac vi es unique to the
                                                  neighborhood and varying age groups that can be incorporated
                                                  into the space.
 Grand entry plaza at Camarillo Public
 Library
64      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                  Community Design Element
          Policy PQPF-1.1.7
          Develop each public space with a unique character, specific to its
          site and use.
          Policy PQPF-1.1.8
          Design public spaces to accommodate a variety of ar s c, social,
          cultural and recrea onal opportuni es including civic gatherings
          such as fes vals, markets, performances and exhibits.
          Policy PQPF-1.1.9
          Expand opportuni es for healthy and ac ve living through the
          provision of community gardens, farmers markets, pedestrian             Sculptural elements in the landscape can
          trails, bicycle paths and other recrea onal opportuni es.                      enhance the community’s iden ty
          Policy PQPF-1.1.10
          Areas that have excess right-of-way, such as at the west entrance
          to Old Town, should be u lized to create enhanced parkway focal
          points with landscaping, public art and pedestrian ameni es.
          Policy PQPF-1.1.11
          Public art and/or monuments should be used in gateway designs.
GOAL PQPF-2
IDENTIFY AND PRESERVE CULTURAL AND HISTORIC RESOURCES.
                                                                                   Public art can add a unique character
                                                                                                            to public spaces
                                                                                       The community can par cipate in
                                                                                     crea ng forms of public art such as
                                                                                                                         mosaics
                                                                 P U B L I C A N D Q UA S I - P U B L I C FA C I L I T I E S   65

                                      City of Camarillo General Plan
                                      Public Spaces
                                      Community Plazas and Parkway Focal Points
                                      Throughout the community, private plazas and landscaped parkway
                                      focal points of a variety of sizes shall be incorporated to reinforce the
                                      community’s “hometown” feeling. These public gathering spaces shall
                                      serve to establish a sense of place and iden ty and provide space for
                                      private outdoor socializing, events and streetside entertainment. Public
                                      plazas and landscaped parkway focal points within Camarillo should
                                      connect to the pedestrian circula on system and should adhere to the
                                      following guidelines:
                                                   a. Well-designed public space should provide ongoing
 Parks within the civic area become                   opportuni es for human ac vi es that create an interac ve
 ac vity centers and public gathering
 spaces                                               environment, build a sense of community and create
                                                      opportuni es for events, entertainment and gatherings.
                                                   b. Public spaces should be designed with flexibility for physical
                                                      use and should be located to accommodate a range of
                                                      desired ac vi es such as outdoor sea ng, entertainment
                                                      and fes vals.
                                                   c. A plaza should have an ar culated edge (buildings, benches,
                                                      landscaping, etc.) to define the plaza and create a comfortable
                                                      space.
                                                   d. Plazas should provide pedestrian ameni es including
                                                      sea ng, ligh ng, planters, fountains, drinking fountains,
                                                      dis nc ve paving, public art, landscaping and bicycle racks.
 Public art helps to preserve a                       They should also incorporate focal points such as sculptures,
 community’s heritage and character                   clocks, interac ve water features and community fountains.
                                                   e. So landscaping as well as hard-surfaced areas shall be
                                                      incorporated into the overall plaza design. Color, form and
                                                      texture are an integral part of the design of these public
                                                      spaces.
                                                   f. Landscaped parkway focal points are areas with enhanced
                                                      pedestrian ameni es and occur within parkways or where
                                                      excess right-of-way exists. They can be u lized to include
                                                      ameni es such as enhanced landscaping, artwork, benches
                                                      or street furnishings. Parkway focal points may also include
 Example of a landscaped parkway                      passive ameni es such as drought-tolerant demonstra on
 focal point at the intersec on of
 Carmen Drive and Ventura Blvd.                       gardens, community gardens, water features, plants, shrubs,
                                                      flowers, trees, walking paths, ligh ng, split-rail fencing and
                                                      interpre ve signage.
66      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                   Community Design Element
Trails and Bikeways
Camarillo currently has several pedestrian and bicycle systems. The three
basic types of systems include Class I bike trails, Class II bike lanes and
Class III bike routes. The public right-of-way accommodates pedestrian-
oriented sidewalks. Large through streets have incorporated bicycle lanes
to encourage recrea onal and convenience cycling.
Parks and Open Space
              a. A conscien ous a empt should be made to create posi ve,
                 iden fiable physical es from the neighborhood to open
                 space areas. This may be accomplished by crea ng a special
                 landscape treatment along walkways and roadways.
                                                                                          Picnic structures in parks and open
              b. Pocket parks should be incorporated into developments or space areas become a gathering space
                 vacant parcels where large city parks are not within walking
                 distance.
              c. Parks and trails should include a well-developed living
                 environment for all age groups.
              d. The General Plan Recrea on Element designates the loca on
                 for park sites and the func on within each type of park
                 facility.
Drainage Basins
              a. The main purpose of drainage basins is to collect, filter
                 and release stormwater. Basins are seasonally wet and are
                 designed with gentle slopes and an evenly graded base to
                 allow for a variety of uses, including open playfields and               Trail systems enhance public parks
                                                                                                                 and open space
                 seasonal agriculture.
              b. Drainage basins should be designed to allow for alterna ve
                 uses during the dry seasons.
Golf Courses
              a. The four golf courses found within the community serve as
                 important visual, recrea onal and cultural ameni es. These
                 facili es should con nue to be operated and maintained
                 with a goal of maximizing available resources while providing
                 the highest quality visual and landscape elements.
              b. Where appropriate, replace areas that have excessive fairway
                 turf with drought-tolerant grasses.
                                                                                            Deten on basins are designed to
                                                                                        collect, filter and release stormwater
                                                                      P U B L I C A N D Q UA S I - P U B L I C FA C I L I T I E S 67
                                         City of Camarillo General Plan
                                         10.6.3 Civic Architecture and Landmarks
                                                  a. Treat and locate civic architecture and landmark ins tu ons
                                                     prominently.
                                                  b. Where feasible, provide dis nc ve public open space, greens
                                                     and/or plazas around civic buildings such as courthouses,
                                                     libraries, post oﬃces and community centers to enhance
                                                     the character of these civic and public buildings. Such
 Civic buildings should form the focal               civic and public buildings should form the focal point for
 point for neighborhoods                             neighborhoods.
                                                  c. Incorporate sustainable building principles into building
                                                     design.
                                                  d. Civic buildings at prominent loca ons, such as sites
                                                     fron ng open space, sites framing a public vista and those
                                                     aﬀording a silhoue e against the sky, should exhibit notable
                                                     architecture.
                                                  e. Encourage innova ve designs that dis nguish civic and public
                                                     buildings and landmarks from the surrounding neighborhood
                                                     as a means of iden fying their role as focal points for the
                                                     community.
                                                  f. Support the preserva on of community landmarks.
 Plazas and sea ng areas should be
 located around civic buildings
 Signs should dis nguish civic buildings
 from the surrounding neighborhood
68      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                    Community Design Element
10.6.4 Public Art
Public art can provide visitors and residents of Camarillo with a visual
landmark, large or small, that inspires a sense of iden ty, history, pride
and crea vity. The City has sponsored a handful of bronze sculptures
within the community including “Don Adolfo Camarillo” at Dizdar Park,
“Two Eagles” in front of the former Camarillo Courthouse/farmers market,
and “Walter Brennan” and “Joel McCrea” on Ventura Boulevard between
Elm Drive and Arneill Road. Other examples of public art within the city
include carved wood doors, blue vases, a ceramic le fountain at the
Camarillo Public Library and the Old Town entry pilasters on the Arneill
Road bridge.
                                                                                       Public art creates a visual landmark
Public art would significantly contribute to the arts and cultural resources
of the city of Camarillo. Public art can be geared toward “cultural
representa ons” of the area, which focus on the historic and agricultural
character of Camarillo. Public art presents an opportunity not only to
facilitate desirable public spaces and aesthe cally improve streetscapes
and other public corridors, but also to celebrate the city’s historic
character and cultural diversity. By recognizing key historic individuals
and events, public art could introduce the area’s cultural heritage into the
everyday life. Whether in a public park or a small community plaza, or
through incorpora on of bougainvilleas on the back of street signs, public
art contributes to providing a sense of place. The repe on of public art
would enhance the city’s image and oﬀer another element to unify the
city.
Public Art Design Guidelines                                                              Sculptural pieces can be used to
             a. Use public art and cultural ameni es to celebrate Camarillo’s           commemorate people such as Joel
                                                                                                                            McCrea
                 diversity, history and unique character.
             b. Take advantage of opportuni es to emphasize, through art,
                 the cultural connec ons between Camarillo, CSUCI and local
                 arts groups.
             c. Use public art and cultural ameni es to help commemorate
                 local history and culturally significant places.
             d. Support artworks and cultural ac vi es that explore and
                 reflect the diverse facets of Camarillo life.
             e. Encourage larger projects (construc on > 25,000 sf) to
                 incorporate public art.
                                                                                       Public art provides a sense of place
                                                                    P U B L I C A N D Q UA S I - P U B L I C FA C I L I T I E S  69

                            This Page Le Blank Inten onally
70 COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
                                               Community Design Element
                                                                                                                                          Las Posas Hills
                                  Camarillo Hills
                                                                                                                                                            Santa Rosa
                                                                                                                             UPLA
                                                                                                                                    ND D
                                                                                                                                         R.                   Valley
                                                                                                                                                            R   D.
                                                                    ARNEILL RD.
                                                     .
                                                 S RD                                                                                                    SA
                                          POSA                                                                                       D.                RO
 CE                                   LAS                                                       RT
                                                                                                   E.                            BLV                 A
   NT                                                                                                 34                   KS                      NT
     R                                                                                      FL           )              OA                    SA
         AL                                                                                   YN
                                                                                                 N               SION
            AV                                                                          RD
                                                                                          .(       RD
                                                                                                      .      MIS
              E.                                    PONDEROSA DR.                      IS
                                                                                   W
                            VENTURA FW
                                                                                  LE                                                                        Calleguas
                                      Y - US   HWY 101
                                                                                                              AD
                                                                                                                                                            Mountains
                                                                                                                 O   LFO
                                                                                                                           RD.
                                          PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                   Oxnard                                                                                                                 Map Features
                   Plains                                                                                        Conejo                                    Agriculture
                                                                                                                Mountains                                  Open Space
                                                                                                                                                           CURB Line
Figure 10.9 - Agriculture and Open Space Areas
     10.7 OPEN SPACE AREAS
     10.7.1 Introduc on
     Camarillo open space areas include agricultural lands, hillside areas and
     waterways. The open spaces help form the perimeter of the city and
     provide viewscapes to create a visual relief and a backdrop to the city.
     The Oxnard Plains to the south of Camarillo, the Conejo Mountain and
     Santa Monica Mountains to the southeast, the Camarillo Hills, Las Posas
     Hills and Santa Rosa Valley along the northern and eastern boundaries
     and agricultural lands provide open space lands. The waterways through
     the city, including the Calleguas Creek and the Conejo Creek, provide an
     opportunity for linear paths and linkages within the community.                                                 The Santa Monica mountains create a
                                                                                                                                visual backdrop to the city
     The City has made great progress towards protec on of its scenic
     open spaces. In 1998, Camarillo amended the City’s General Plan by
     adding the voter-approved SOAR (Save Open space and Agricultural
     Resources) Ordinance. The ordinance created the Camarillo Urban
     Restric on Boundary (CURB) Element which promotes the forma on and
     con nua on of a cohesive community by defining city boundaries and by
     helping to prevent urban sprawl. SOAR ordinances have been adopted by
     the County of Ventura and other neighboring ci es as well.
                                                                                                                                     O P E N S PA C E A R E A S          71

                                        City of Camarillo General Plan
 Open space areas are an asset to Camarillo
                                        10.7.2 Open Space Areas Goal, Objec ves and
                                                    Policies
                                         GOAL OSA-1
                                         PROTECT THE VISUAL BENEFITS AND NATURAL CHARACTERISTICS OF
                                         CAMARILLO’S OPEN SPACE AREAS.
                                         Objec ve OSA-1.1
                                         Integrate open space, including parks, community gardens, natural areas
                                         and agriculture, into the community to strengthen the connec on to
                                         Camarillo’s agricultural heritage and provide a sense of openness.
                                                    Policy OSA-1.1.1
 Open space should be integrated into               New developments should incorporate appropriate public open
 the community
                                                    space into site designs.
                                                    Policy OSA-1.1.2
                                                    Integrate bicycle and pedestrian trails adjacent to open spaces
                                                    to enhance connec vity throughout the city and the region.
                                         Objec ve OSA-1.2
                                         Maintain greenbelts, which include open space and prime agricultural
                                         lands which surround the community.
                                                    Policy OSA-1.2.1
                                                    Ensure new development is consistent with City greenbelt
                                                    agreements, including the City of Camarillo General Plan CURB
                                                    Element and SOAR ini a ve.
72     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                  Community Design Element
                                                             Gateways promote community character and sense of place
10.8 GATEWAYS, STREETS AND CORRIDORS
10.8.1 Introduc on
Streets, gateways and corridors make up a significant por on of the urban
environment in Camarillo. The Community Design Element directs its
a en on towards the development of property which abuts public roads,
city entries and the visual quali es of major driving corridors.
Streets
Streets should be designed or redeveloped so that the resul ng viewscape
from the road and the pedestrian’s view will be a rac ve. Residen al
streets should be designed to be wide enough to serve local traﬃc and            Streets with large trees provide visual
visitor parking, yet narrow enough to be considered pedestrian friendly.                                            interest
They should be landscaped with trees that provide shade and are
scaled appropriately for the street width. Residen al blocks should be
short (400 foot-long blocks as a typical maximum) and/or curvilinear in
order to relieve a uniform, monotonous building setback. The roadway
improvements iden fied in the Circula on Element should integrate the
roadway beau fica on concepts iden fied herein.
Gateways
Gateways leading into the Camarillo area should trigger the percep on
that Camarillo is a community that has a quality environment and a strong
sense of character. The coordina on of design features along gateways
is extremely important. Well-designed street graphics, signs, street
ligh ng, community welcome signs and well-maintained landscaping add a
dis nc ve element to the quality of the en re community.
                                                                   G AT E WAY S , S T R E E T S A N D C O R R I D O R S   73

                                   City of Camarillo General Plan
                                   Corridors
                                   The main corridor through Camarillo is Highway 101 (Ventura Freeway).
                                   The freeway extends through the community and gives travelers a first
                                   impression of the community’s character. The city’s Heritage Zone
                                   provides a unified, architectural character that helps Camarillo establish
                                   a sense of place. Travelers on Highway 101 can “peek” into adjacent
                                   commercial and oﬃce developments as well as por ons of Old Town. The
                                   Highway 101 corridor could benefit from addi onal landscaping, especially
                                   at on/oﬀ ramp loca ons. Special a en on to site planning should be
                                   conducted to address the interface of buildings backing/fron ng onto
                                   the highway and ensure that the project is aesthe cally pleasing and
                                   compa ble with the Heritage Zone.
 Highway 101 is an area that could
 benefit from enhancement          The Lewis Road (Highway 34) corridor bisects the community in a north-
                                   south route that links the community to State Route 118 (Los Angeles
                                   Avenue) and to California State University Channel Islands (CSUCI). This
                                   corridor provides many opportuni es for streetscape beau fica on,
                                   addi on of Class II bicycle facili es and improvements to pedestrian
                                   walkability.
                                   Other significant corridors within the community include Las Posas Road,
                                   Upland Drive, Santa Rosa Road and Pleasant Valley Road. In addi on to
                                   beau fying the rights-of-way within these corridors, equally important is
                                   the protec on and enhancement of view corridors.
                                   10.8.2 Gateways, Streets and Corridors Goals,
                                              Objec ves and Policies
 Lewis Road is an area that could  GOAL GSC-1
 benefit from enhancement
                                   MAJOR CORRIDORS AND GATEWAYS WITHIN THE CITY SHOULD PROVIDE
                                   FOR ATTRACTIVE VIEWSCAPES FROM THE ROAD TO PROMOTE A
                                   QUALITY ENVIRONMENT WITH A DISTINCT SENSE OF PLACE.
                                   Objec ve GSC-1.1
                                   Preserve and frame viewsheds to and from mountains as seen from major
                                   corridors. Minimize visual impacts of development through appropriate
                                   building placement orienta on, height, bulk, style and color selec on.
                                               Policy GSC-1.1.1
                                               Preserve the visual and physical connec on to agriculture
                                               by protec ng views from streets, parks and open spaces to
                                               agriculture and hillsides. Where new streets are extended
                                               adjacent to agriculture, encourage hillside and open space views
                                               by maintaining agricultural ac vi es at the road edge.
74     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                  Community Design Element
          Policy GSC-1.1.2
          Use public streets or pathways to form the edge of developed
           areas, allowing views of open space from streets.
          Policy GSC-1.1.3
          Buildings located adjacent to Highway 101 should be
           aesthe cally pleasing and in conformance with the Heritage
           Zone requirements. Parking areas that are visible from Highway
           101 should be screened to the extent possible.
Objec ve GSC-1.2
Enhance city gateways.                                                                  Well-maintained landscapes and
                                                                                   uniquely designed gateway elements
                                                                                       create a strong sense of character
          Policy GSC-1.2.1
          Exis ng city entries should be enhanced with landscaping,
           signage and public art.
          Policy GSC-1.2.2
          Ensure that key gateways into the city receive special, character-
           defining treatments and landscaping.
          Policy GSC-1.2.3
          Encourage use of “complete street” strategies for new streets
           and redesign of older, exis ng streets. Complete streets are
           roadways designed and operated to enable safe, a rac ve, and
           comfortable access and travel for all users, including pedestrians,
           bicyclists, motorists, and public transport users of all ages and      Median landscaping helps to improve
           abili es.                                                                the visual quality of the streetscape
          Policy GSC-1.2.4
          Enhance Lewis Road between Highway 101 and Las Posas Road
           by taking advantage of the areas with excess right-of-way. With
           Caltrans’ approval, these areas should be redeveloped with
           sidewalks, landscaping, street furnishings, ligh ng, and gateway
           treatments.
                                                                                 Where landscaping is not possible, use
                                                                                    natural materials such as sandstone
                                                                    G AT E WAY S , S T R E E T S A N D C O R R I D O R S 75

                                        City of Camarillo General Plan
                                        10.8.3 Street and Corridor Guidelines
                                        The following guidelines should be considered in reviewing development
                                        and redevelopment of streets and corridors:
                                        Landscaping
                                        Each street includes a pale e of trees, shrubs, groundcover, vines to screen
                                        walls and fences or addi onal walls. Landscaping that is both a rac ve
                                        and func onal strengthens the overall appeal of these roadway corridors.
                                        Carefully planned landscape plan ng, along with the proposed median
                                        plan ng, will promote a “green corridor” look, helping these roadways
                                        incorporate more of the natural environment found in outlying undeveloped
                                        areas. The landscaped parkways are strongly encouraged in commercial
 Medians help to beau fy the street     and industrial areas, as well as residen al areas, to create roadways that are
 corridor
                                        aesthe cally pleasing and pedestrian friendly.
                                        Landscaping Design Guidelines
                                                     a. Primary and secondary arterials should include landscaped
                                                        planters/parkways between the sidewalk and street. In
                                                        commercial areas, raised planters with pockets of sea ng
                                                        should be incorporated where possible. This will help buﬀer
                                                        the pedestrian traﬃc from the busy vehicular traﬃc.
                                                     b. Landscaping should be in conformance with the City’s Water
                                                        Eﬃcient Landscape Ordinance (Chapter 14.14).
                                                     c. Encourage drought-tolerant and na ve species.
                                                     d. Choose species that are hardy and not easily aﬀected by
 Plants with contras ng foliage, flower
                                                        varying temperatures, light, water supply or handling. Near
 color and texture make a strong visual                 pedestrian traﬃc, it is important to an cipate some amount of
 statement                                              damage to plants and irriga on, and tougher plant materials
                                                        will help to maintain an a rac ve streetscape appearance.
                                                     e. Use plants with contras ng foliage, color and texture, and
                                                        scented varie es for highly visible areas such as near sea ng
                                                        area entries and at intersec ons.
                                                     f. Be aware of necessary sight distance lines for passing traﬃc
                                                        and safety issues. At crosswalks and driveways, keep plant
                                                        material below 30 inches for pedestrian visibility.
                                                     g. U lize reclaimed water where possible.
                                                     h. Choose species that need minimal maintenance and tend to
                                                        look good all year to ensure a clean and healthy appearance.
 Median plan ng promotes the look of
 a green corridor
76      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT            z
                                              STREET AND CORRIDOR GUIDELINES

                                   Community Design Element
            i. Minimize the use of turf on medians and parkways.
            j. Bougainvillea plants are characteris c of Camarillo and
                should be integrated into landscaping away from pedestrian
                areas.
            k. Natural pruning maintenance techniques should be used
                instead of formal pruning. Natural pruning is a method of
                only pruning the unwanted growth from the plant. This
                would include awkward growth, crossing branches, and
                deadwood. The goal is to keep the natural look of the shrub
                and help promote plant health.
Medians
                                                                                        Well-maintained medians imply a
Roadway medians are found on many of Camarillo’s exis ng primary and                              clean, invi ng streetscape
secondary arterial streets. The consistent treatment of medians can be
a strong unifying element citywide. Future medians or modifica ons to
exis ng medians should extend the exis ng plant pale e and hardscape
materials in order to create one cohesive citywide look and feel. Medians
also provide a place for roadway-approach street signs and direc onal
signage at key intersec ons as part of the City’s signage program. Upda ng
and maintaining planted medians should be considered a long-term
objec ve for citywide beau fica on.
Median Design Guidelines
            a. Consistent median treatments help create an iden ty that
                unites the community through the use of natural rock,
                direc onal signs and plant materials.
            b. Select median trees that have high-branching structure to
                avoid interference with truck and vehicle traﬃc, provide                               Red-toned sandstone
                safe sight lines and minimize conflicts in maintaining median
                trees.
            c. Use plant materials that are under three feet tall at maturity
                to maintain sight distance lines for passing vehicles. At
                crosswalks and pedestrian refuge islands, use plant material
                that has a mature height no greater than 18 inches for
                pedestrian visibility.
            d. Choose species that need minimal maintenance to ensure a
                clean and healthy appearance.
            e. Provide a minimum 12-inch to 18-inch wide paving strip at
                the perimeter of the median area for maintenance workers
                to walk on and to provide a buﬀer between plant materials
                and traﬃc lanes.
                                                                                   Example of a median located within a
                                                                                                   residen al neighborhood
                         STREET AND CORRIDOR GUIDELINES            z
                                                                     G AT E WAY S , S T R E E T S A N D C O R R I D O R S  77

                                      City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                  f. Avoid plants that are easily hedged. Avoid trimming plants
                                                     into box hedges or geometric shapes. This maintains a
                                                     natural look.
                                                  g. Intersec on designs shall incorporate a median with no
                                                     less than four feet of width when combined with a le -turn
                                                     lane. Minimally, this leaves suﬃcient room for a pedestrian
                                                     refuge island, direc onal signs and landscaping or textured
                                                     sandstone treatment.
                                                  h. Medians with turning lanes or tapered ends should be
                                                     enhanced with special paving.
 Outdoor dining                                   i. Keep street medians well maintained.
                                                  j. Where landscaping is not possible, use materials such as
                                                     natural red-toned Santa Barbara sandstone and boulders.
                                                     The sandstone treatment should be irregular, rough-cut
                                                     stone with relief.
                                      Sidewalks and Walkways
                                      Sidewalks and walkways can enhance a neighborhood and the overall
                                      community character of Camarillo. Sidewalk design should incorporate
                                      an appropriate walkway width, safety ligh ng, pleasant walking surface
                                      texture, benches and a landscaped separa on of pedestrian and vehicular
                                      traﬃc to create a pleasurable walking experience.
                                      Sidewalks in Residen al Neighborhoods
                                      A network of sidewalks should be established to interconnect residen al
 Planters and bollards create         areas with schools, parks and commercial areas. In higher density areas,
 pedestrian separa on from vehicles   sidewalks within developments serve to connect residen al units to open
                                      space areas, garages and neighboring units. In hillside areas, a sidewalk
                                      should be provided on at least one side of the road.
                                      Sidewalks in Commercial Areas
                                      Sidewalks in commercial areas provide access from parking to shops and
                                      oﬃces. Carefully-designed and located sidewalks can guide the movement
                                      of pedestrians and direct their a en on to, or prevent their intrusion into,
                                      certain areas. Considera on should be given to the texture and safety
                                      of the walking surface, u lizing materials that are both comfortable, safe
                                      and aesthe cally pleasing. Sidewalks can be pa erned, textured and/or
                                      colored. A change in color or texture can cause a feeling of transi on from
                                      space to space. Sidewalks in commercial areas should be at least six feet
 Landscaping at the street edge makes wide.
 pedestrians feel more comfortable
78     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT           z
                                            STREET AND CORRIDOR GUIDELINES

                                     Community Design Element
Sidewalks in Industrial Areas
The site planning of industrial developments should provide sidewalks
leading from parking areas to the building entrances and at street edges.
In larger developments, sidewalks should be incorporated into parking
areas through the use of special pavement textures.
Sidewalks and Walkways Design Guidelines
            a. Design features such as enhanced paving on sidewalks
                and crosswalks, landscaping and pedestrian-scaled ligh ng
                shall be used to dis nguish the pedestrian route from the
                vehicular route.
            b. Sidewalk widths should be appropriately sized to                                          Benches and trash cans should be
                accommodate the adjacent use.                                                     integrated into the overall streetscape
                                                                                                                                        design
            c. Crosswalks with accent paving should be located at key
                intersec ons.
            d. Sidewalk and crosswalk surfaces shall be stable, firm, smooth
                and slip-resistant.
            e. Sidewalks shall have a “through pedestrian zone” that is
                kept clear of any fixtures and/or obstruc ons. A minimum
                of four feet shall be reserved to allow for two people to
                walk comfortably side by side and in accordance with the
                Americans with Disabili es Act (ADA) requirements.
            f. Where sidewalk coloring and texture is used, color should be
                integrally applied as opposed to a surface applica on which
                requires excessive maintenance.                                                        Benches and trash cans can help to
                                                                                                         establish the character of the city
            g. Plan ng areas, bike racks, street ligh ng, news racks and
                other street furniture shall be contained in the area between
                the sidewalks and street to keep the “through pedestrian
                zone” free for walking.
                                                                                                                             Outdoor dining
                         S T R E E T A N D C O R R I D O R G U I D E L I N E S GGAATTEEWWAAYYSS, , SSTTRREEEETTSS, A N D C O R R I D O R S
                                                                               z
                                                                                                                                             79

                                     City of Camarillo General Plan
                                     Street Furniture
                                     Street furniture is an element in outdoor spaces that helps establish
                                     human scale and create a sense of community cohesiveness. Street
                                     furniture includes benches, trash cans, signs, lights, mailboxes, drinking
                                     fountains, planters, bike racks, bus stop structures, trellis features and
                                     fountains. The design, selec on and placement of street furniture can
                                     either add or detract from the overall con nuity of outdoor spaces and
                                     streets.
                                     Street furniture can play an important role in establishing the community
                                     character and in bringing a sense of a unified design approach throughout
                                     the city. This is especially important for benches, trash receptacles and
 Example of appropriate bench style
                                     transit structures.
                                     Street Furniture Design Guidelines
                                                  a. Street furniture should be unique and reflect Camarillo’s
                                                      Spanish style.
                                                  b. Street furniture shall be located along the street edge of
                                                      the sidewalk. Provisions to accommodate persons with
                                                      disabili es shall be incorporated into the design and loca on
                                                      of furnishings. This includes a provision for space adjacent to
                                                      walkways for wheelchair and/or stroller parking.
                                                  c. To create a more organized and eﬃcient use of sidewalk
                                                      space, furnishings shall be grouped together rather than
                                                      sca ered. Trash and recycling cans shall be located near
                                                      benches. A greater frequency of the number of furnishings
 Example of an appropriate trash can                  should be located in higher-use pedestrian traﬃc areas.
                                                  d. Items should be securely anchored to the sidewalk, and a
                                                      graﬃ -resistant coa ng shall be applied to street furniture
                                                      elements to ensure a longer-term appearance.
                                                  e. Adver sing is not permi ed on street furniture.
80    COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT           z
                                           STREET AND CORRIDOR GUIDELINES

                                       Community Design Element
Example of appropriate bench in black metal                             Example of appropriate bench in wood and metal
   Benches
   Benches designed to invoke a tradi onal historic style that will
   complement the Spanish architectural style of the Heritage Zone, as well
   as the other styles encouraged in Camarillo, should be placed at high-
   traﬃc pedestrian loca ons. The benches will be clustered with trash
   receptacles and other key furnishing elements. Adver sing is prohibited
   on benches within Camarillo.
                            STREET AND CORRIDOR GUIDELINES          z
                                                                      G AT E WAY S , S T R E E T S A N D C O R R I D O R S 81

                                          City of Camarillo General Plan
 Example of appropriate trash can style in bronze                                                   Example of a bike rack
                                           Trash Cans
                                           Trash receptacles should be placed at high-traﬃc pedestrian areas to
                                           provide convenient waste disposal loca ons. The receptacles will be
                                           clustered with benches and at bus shelters, as well as other key loca ons.
                                           The design is consistent with the tradi onal historic bench style.
                                           Bike Racks
                                           Bike racks shall be located near transit stops, throughout commercial
                                           areas, civic areas, parking lots and loca ons on private property. These
                                           ameni es will encourage bicycle ridership and provide an a rac ve
                                           alterna ve to locking bicycles to trees and light poles. Along Ventura
                                           Boulevard, bike racks should be provided on every block and should be
                                           consistent in style to trash receptacles and benches.
 Example of appropriate urn style
 trash can
82     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT                z
                                                 STREET AND CORRIDOR GUIDELINES

                                   Community Design Element
Transit Shelters
Bus shelters and transit stops are an important element for circula on
within Camarillo. They should be conveniently located at parking areas,
shopping areas and civic areas. Because bus shelters and stops are located
throughout the community, they need to have a clean and unclu ered
appearance. Adver sing is prohibited on transit shelters within Camarillo.
Bus shelters that are integrated into a project should reflect the project
architecture. Other transit shelters should incorporate simple forms that
complement the desired Spanish architecture of Camarillo while having a
  meless sophis cated character.                                                                              Transit shelter
Ligh ng
Ligh ng serves a number of func ons including security ligh ng, safety
ligh ng, ligh ng to provide visibility along roadways and accent ligh ng on
buildings, signs and landscaping.
Streets and corridors within Specific Plan areas have designated street
lights to help iden fy the Specific Plan neighborhood. Most other streets
and corridors should con nue to use the standard cobra street light. In key
loca ons that have high pedestrian ac vity, special ligh ng can help create
a pedestrian-friendly character.
                                                                                                              Transit shelter
            Commercial Area Ligh ng
                 Ligh ng in commercial areas must be eﬃcient and
                 adequate for the safety and welfare of pedestrians and
                 vehicular traﬃc. Commercial area ligh ng can o en be too
                 bright and may contain ligh ng standards which are out of
                 scale with the architecture or surroundings. Steps should
                 be taken to rec fy this problem in areas where intrusions
                 into residen al areas exist and to prevent its occurrence
                 in newly developed areas. Crosswalks should be provided
                 with special protec ve ligh ng. Alleys should be lit either
                 by street lights or by private area ligh ng.
                                                                                                   Commercial light fixture
                          STREET AND CORRIDOR GUIDELINES           z
                                                                     G AT E WAY S , S T R E E T S A N D C O R R I D O R S   83

                              City of Camarillo General Plan
                                        Residen al Area Ligh ng
                                            In residen al neighborhoods ligh ng should be
                                            appropriately shielded to provide for safety without
                                            intruding on the living atmosphere.
                                            Pedestrian ligh ng should be more human in scale, spaced
                                            at more frequent intervals, lower in height and lower in
                                            intensity of light than that used for commercial, industrial
                                            and major roadway intersec ons.
                              Ligh ng Design Guidelines
                                         a. Ligh ng should be shielded and directed away from adjoining
 Residen al light fixture                   proper es or streets to avoid any nuisance or hazard.
                                         b. For private developments, the style, size and shape of
                                            ligh ng fixtures should be a complement to the design of
                                            the development.
                                         c. The intensity and the type of ligh ng (e.g. mercury vapor,
                                            sodium vapor) should be appropriate for the loca on of
                                            ligh ng. High speed roadways require bright ligh ng to avoid
                                            traﬃc hazards at intersec ons, but the same type of ligh ng
                                            would not be appropriate for a pedestrian way.
                                         d. Ligh ng fixtures that are energy eﬃcient, such as LED
                                            ligh ng, should be used.
                                         e. Ligh ng fixtures should be vandal resistant and properly
                                            maintained.
                                         f. The height of pole-mounted lights in parking lots and storage
                                            yards should not be excessive. Addi onal fixtures should be
                                            provided instead of trying to light a larger area with fewer
                                            fixtures.
                                         g. Ligh ng for pedestrian areas should be provided to ensure
                                            safety.
                                         h. Ligh ng type and style of fixture should be a “full cut oﬀ ”
                                            style per the standards set by the Illumina on Engineering
                                            Society (IES).
                                         i. Street and project ligh ng should be compa ble with the
                                            requirements set forth by the County of Ventura Department
 Historic-style light fixture               of Airports and the City of Camarillo Airport Master Plan.
84     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT   z
                                    STREET AND CORRIDOR GUIDELINES

                                    Community Design Element
Fencing and Walls
Fences and walls along public corridors are very visible and have a strong
impact on a community’s character. This sec on establishes guidelines to
create consistent treatments for walls and fences citywide.
Uniform walls and fences will significantly improve the aesthe c
environment for motorists traveling through Camarillo’s vehicular corridors.
The following guidelines have been established to help enhance the
character of Camarillo’s public corridors.
Fencing and Walls Design Guidelines
            a. Fence and walls located along public corridors shall incorporate                    Open, agrarian-style fence
                 meless, appropriate styles, materials and finishes:
                  1)    Decora ve stucco walls with wall cap and
                        bougainvillea vines
                  2)    Decora ve stone walls with wall cap
                  3)    Solid, six-foot high fence
                  4)    Open, agrarian-style fence
                  5)    Wrought iron with pilasters
            b. Hedges and landscaping in place of walls and fencing are
               encouraged.
            c. Climbing vines are strongly encouraged to be planted at the
               base of rights-of-way fences and walls at reasonable intervals.
               Vines would help to visually break up large expanses of walls
               and provide added greenery and color to corridors.                                   Short stone wall with cap
            d. Walls, fences and hedges in residen al neighborhoods shall
               not exceed six feet in height. Non-residen al walls and fences
               shall not exceed eight feet in height unless required by acous c
               analysis.
            e. Open fences that do not obstruct the views should be used
               adjacent to open space.
            f. Fences and walls taller than 30 inches high should not be
               located within corner site visibility-restricted areas. The
               design, scale and installa on of walls and fences should be
               coordinated throughout new developments.
            g. Climbing vines can be planted at fence posts to add color and
               texture.
            h. Two- and three-rail fences are consistent with the rural yet
               sophis cated character of Camarillo.                                                   Tall stone wall with cap
                         STREET AND CORRIDOR GUIDELINES              z
                                                                       G AT E WAY S , S T R E E T S A N D C O R R I D O R S  85

                                        City of Camarillo General Plan
                                        U li es
                                        U li es, including u lity lines, backflow preventers, telecommunica on
                                        infrastructure, above ground irriga on boxes and mechanical equipment,
                                        provide for a func onal requirement in the urban environment. However,
                                        they need not be as obtrusive as in the past.
                                        Overhead power and telephone lines extending across and along public
                                        rights-of-way interrupt views and detract from the overall aesthe c
                                        experience of corridors throughout the city of Camarillo. The City’s
                                        Municipal Code requires that power lines and overhead cables less than
                                        33 KV be installed underground. In addi on, u li es should be placed
                                        underground for new developments, whether on the urban fringe or
                                        within an established area of the city. U lity undergrounding has also
 Backflow preventers should be          been conducted as part of the City’s Capital Improvement Program.
 screened with landscaping or fencing
                                        Whenever possible, exis ng power and cable lines should be placed
                                        underground to reduce visual clu er.
                                        U lity Design Guidelines
                                                    a. Power lines and overhead cables less than 33 KV shall be
                                                        installed underground.
                                                    b. Backflow preventers should be screened with landscaping,
                                                        incorporated into the landscape or building.
                                                    c. The placement of transformer boxes and other substructure
                                                        u lity requirements should be reviewed to insure that they
                                                        are integrated into the development plans, rather than being
                                                        highly visible at intersec ons and in front yard areas.
 A mechanical room has been                         d. Mechanical equipment within developments should be
 incorporated into the overall building                 properly screened behind building walls, roofs and such so
 design                                                 as to not take away from the character of the buildings.
                                                    e. Roo op equipment shall be properly screened from views
                                                        onto the roof from hillside areas or higher buildings. Roof-
                                                        mounted equipment can be screened behind sloping roof
                                                        areas, trellis features or parapet walls.
                                                    f. When placed on roof slopes, solar panels should be designed
                                                        into the roof forms. For example, flush-mounted panels
                                                        should be located on pitched roofs and should not be visible
                                                        from public view on flat roofs.
                                                    g. Stealth-mounted applica ons for wireless communica on
                                                        facili es should be used whenever possible, whereby the
 Solar panels should be screened from                   facility is aesthe cally integrated into the surrounding
 public view wherever possible or                       environment so as not be readily seen or recognized as a
 integrated into the roof                               communica on facility.
86     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT             z
                                              STREET AND CORRIDOR GUIDELINES

                                   Community Design Element
Public Signage
Though the basic func on of all signage should be to communicate a
message, it is important that signs are also aesthe cally pleasing. In most
instances, the oversigning and compe on between signs and lights
conveys only a sense of visual clu er. When the environment becomes
overloaded with graphic displays, the cumula ve eﬀect is nega ve; the
viewer actually sees less, not more.
A smaller number of well-designed street signs can do a be er job of
communica ng than a mul tude of gaudy graphics compe ng with one
another for the viewer’s a en on. Public signage can be a strong, unifying
element for a neighborhood and community.
                                                                                                         Wayfinding signage
The two primary types of signs include informa onal signs and adver sing
signs. Informa onal signs, such as traﬃc signs, historical markers,
direc onal signs, warning signs and the like, serve a useful purpose and
generally do not lead to clu er except when there are large numbers
of haphazardly placed signs. Camarillo has eﬀec ve, roadway approach
signs located in medians throughout the city. These signs help unify
Camarillo and create an iden ty with the bougainvillea. Development of
a comprehensive signage program is recommended to update the look
and image of roadway approach signs and to unify Camarillo’s signage and
gateways.
Adver sing signs come in a variety of types including business name signs,
price signs, sale signs and billboard signs. Most signs are “on-site” (they
are located where the business they adver se is situated). “Oﬀsite” signs,
such as billboards, do not directly relate to the site and are not permi ed
                                                                                                              District signage
with the excep on of direc onal signs for temporary sales.
Public Signage Design Guidelines
             a. Con nue to regulate and control the loca on, type, size,
                number of signs, sign colors, materials and the design of
                signs.
             b. A citywide signage program (wayfinding) should be
                implemented to create an updated, coordinated and unifying
                signage system.
             c. The City’s program for street name signs at major intersec ons
                and along major roadways should con nue to be u lized to
                aid motorists in iden fying streets.
             d. Public informa on signs should con nue to be installed at
                key intersec ons to help iden fy public facili es and to help                Commercial direc onal signage
                direct access to such facili es. The City’s sign program should
                con nue to be u lized for the design of informa onal signs.
                         STREET AND CORRIDOR GUIDELINES              z
                                                                       G AT E WAY S , S T R E E T S A N D C O R R I D O R S  87

                                    City of Camarillo General Plan
                                    Residen al Parkways
                                    Many of the city’s exis ng residen al neighborhoods have landscaped
                                    parkways. Each new or improved parkway should include a pale e
                                    of trees, shrubs, groundcover and vines to screen walls and fences.
                                    Landscaping that is both a rac ve and func onal will strengthen the
                                    overall appeal of these roadway corridors. Also, carefully planned
                                    landscape plan ng, along with the proposed median plan ng, will
                                    promote a “green corridor” look, helping these roadways incorporate
                                    more of the natural environment found in outlying undeveloped areas.
                                    The landscaped parkways are strongly encouraged in commercial and
                                    industrial areas, as well as residen al areas, to create roadways that are
 Meandering sidewalks should be     aesthe cally pleasing and pedestrian friendly.
 provided along arterial roadways
                                    Parkway Design Guidelines
                                                 a. Street trees should be planted to frame the street, add to
                                                    the aesthe cs of the street and create a “green corridor.”
                                                 b. A minimum five-foot parkway should be planted between the
                                                    curb and the sidewalk in all new residen al developments.
                                                 c. Trees should not be planted any closer than 10 feet from any
                                                    driveway.
                                                 d. The general tree character should be compa ble with
                                                    adjacent exis ng street trees and, if possible, provide a large
                                                    canopy of shade for pedestrians and bicyclists.
                                                 e. Street trees should incorporate the following characteris cs:
                                                    drought tolerant, minimal fruit drop, non-invasive root
 Parkways separate pedestrians from
 vehicle traﬃc                                      systems and high canopies (seven feet above grade).
                                                 f. Refer to the Drought Resistant Landscaping Materials within
                                                    the City’s Landscape and Irriga on Guidelines for a list of
                                                    recommended trees and landscaping to be used along
                                                    specific corridors.
                                                 g. Keep parkways well maintained.
                                                 h. Landscaping should have a natural appearance by u lizing a
                                                    natural pruning approach to maintenance.
                                                 i. Sidewalks should meander where possible.
 Parkways make the walking
 experience more pleasurable
88     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT         z
                                          STREET AND CORRIDOR GUIDELINES

                                  Community Design Element
10.8.4 Interchange Beau fica on
Freeway Beau fica on
Figure 10.10 delineates the roadways within or bordering Camarillo that
are designated as “freeways.” These include Highway 101 and State Route
34. Though these are both State highways and under the jurisdic on
of the California Department of Transporta on (Caltrans), the City is
encouraged to work with Caltrans on beau fying these corridors. These
corridors are especially important since they create a las ng impression of
the area as motorists enter or drive by the city of Camarillo. Interchanges                              Landscaped berm
should have enhanced treatments. Beau fying these freeway corridors
with landscaping, berming, fencing and gateway monuments will help
create an iden fiable character that unifies and enhances Camarillo.
Freeway On- and Oﬀ-Ramp Design
Priority should be given to landscaping Camarillo’s primary entrances and
interchange areas. Freeway on- and oﬀ-ramps are typically the first and
last impressions a motorist receives as they enter and exit the city, thus
special considera on should be taken regarding their design. As motorists
enter the city, they will experience a progression of beau fica on
improvements beginning with freeway landscaping, progressing to
gateway scenes at the freeway on- and oﬀ-ramps and reinforced at major
intersec ons.
                                                                                  Shrubs and trees beau fy the freeway
                                                                                                                     corridor
                                                                    G AT E WAY S , S T R E E T S A N D C O R R I D O R S    89

                                             City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                                                                                                      R.
                                                                                                                               ND D
                                                                                                                        UPLA
                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                           RD
                                                                  ARNEILL RD.
                                                   .
                                               S RD                                                                                                 OS
                                                                                                                                                       A
                                            OSA                                                                              D.
 CE                                L   AS P                                                   RT
                                                                                                 E.                       BLV                     AR
   NT                                                                                               34                AKS                       NT
     R   AL
                                                                                          FLYN         )            NO                     SA
                                                                                               N              SIO
                                                                                                           MIS
              AV                                                                       D. (      RD
                 E.                                                                IS               .
                                                  PONDEROSA DR.                       R
                                                                                LE
                                                                                   W
                          VENTURA FW
                                    Y - US HWY
                                                 101
                                                                                                            AD
                                                                                                              OLF
                                                                                                                 OR
                                                                                                                   D.
                                         PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                                                                                                                      Map Features
                                                                                                                                                      Freeways
Figure 10.10 - Freeways
                                              Freeway On- and Oﬀ-Ramp Design Guidelines
                                                               a. Freeway on- and oﬀ-ramps should be well landscaped with
                                                                  drought-tolerant plan ng.
                                                               b. Oﬀ-ramps at primary gateways must incorporate all of the
                                                                  elements described in Sec on 10.8.5 Gateways.
                                                               c. The use of Mediterranean and drought-tolerant plants in
                                                                  conjunc on with an eﬃcient and long-term water system
                                                                  should be u lized for the establishment and maintenance of
                                                                  a drought-tolerant landscape.
                                                               d. Trees and shrubs should be located and spaced to allow for
                                                                  mature and long-term growth. Trees and shrubs should be
                                                                  carefully located to avoid sight distance conflicts.
                                                               e. Materials may include stone, filter fabric (to reduce weed
                                                                  growth) and boulders at strategically placed loca ons.
                                                               f. Irriga on systems and controls should be placed underground
                                                                  or screened from public view.
90            COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                   Community Design Element
Bridges
Bridges provide a unique opportunity to experience and view landscapes
and street scenes. Since mul -use bridges can be found throughout
Camarillo, they provide an excellent opportunity to enhance and unify the
city. The implementa on of public art such as on the Arneill Road bridge
should be con nued where allowed.
Bridge Design Guidelines
            a. Bridges along Highway 101 should use similar forms, but may
               vary slightly from one another to convey the impression that
               all were not built at the same me and that the community
               has developed over me.                                                    Bridges should include enhanced
                                                                                                     details where possible
            b. Bridges should include enhanced details where possible.
            c. Barrier rails on bridge structures should appear to be integral
               with the structure.
            d. Bridge abutment walls should receive a pa ern that is
               compa ble with the wall and bridge treatments.
            e. Pilasters, light standards and fencing on the bridge structures
               are visually prominent features and should complement the
               aesthe c of the structure.
            f. Slope paving occurs at overcrossings, undercrossings,
               alongside ramps and other areas adjacent to major road
               structures that are too narrow for landscaping. Surfaces
               of the slope paving should be treated to complement the             Public art helps to establish a sense of
               bridge abutment walls.                                                             entry into the community
                                                                                        Pilasters help to create a sense of
                                                                                                                      iden ty
                                                                     G AT E WAY S , S T R E E T S A N D C O R R I D O R S   91
                                            City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                                                                                             ND   DR.
                                                                                                                        UPLA
                                                                                                                                                      R   D.
                                                                 ARNEILL RD.
                                                  .
                                              S RD                                                                                                 SA
 CE                                    POSA                                                                                LVD
                                                                                                                              .                  RO
                                   LAS                                                       RT
                                                                                                E.                       SB                    A
   NT                                                                                              34
                                                                                                                     OA
                                                                                                                        K                    NT
     R   AL
                                                                                         FLYN        )
                                                                                                               ION                      SA
                                                                                              N              S
            AV                                                                       RD
                                                                                       .(       RD
                                                                                                   .     MIS
              E.                                 PONDEROSA DR.                      IS
                                                                                W
                                                                               LE
                         VENTURA FW
                                 FWY - US   HWY 101
                                                                                                          AD
                                                                                                             OLF
                                                                                                                 OR
                                                                                                                       D.
                                       PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                                                                                                                         Map Features
                                                                                                                                                     Primary Gateway
                                                                                                                                                     Secondary Gateway
 Figure 10.11 - Gateway Loca ons
                                             10.8.5 Gateways
                                             Gateways are intended to iden fy primary entrances into the city of
                                             Camarillo with “gateway scenes.” Gateway scenes will not only signify
                                             entry into the city, but enhance and announce the iden ty of Camarillo
                                             as a whole. The composi on of elements and materials in the gateway
                                             monumenta on should func on as a visual anchor. The specific design
                                             may vary at diﬀerent gateways; however, the elements of the design scene
                                             should be repeated. Refer to Sec on 10.8.2 and 10.8.3 for gateway goals,
                                             objec ves, policies and design guidelines.
                                             Gateway Design Guidelines
                                                       a. The gateway designs should reflect natural elements
 Example of a City monument sign                          and materials found within the Camarillo Valley and the
                                                          surrounding area.
                                                             b. The gateways should be of significant scale to clearly iden fy
                                                                these areas as major city entries and should be easily legible
                                                                to motorists.
                                                             c. Monument signs should be lighted and have well-maintained
                                                                landscape surroundings.
                                                             d. The following gateway loca ons have been iden fied in
                                                                Figure 10.11 and have been categorized as primary and
                                                                secondary gateways. Gateway designs and improvements
                                                                at the following loca ons should be coordinated with the
                                                                California Department of Transporta on (Caltrans), relevant
                                                                Specific Plan(s) or private landowners as appropriate.
92          COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                    Community Design Element
                                                                                          Gateway Sketch
                                                                          Highway 101 at Central Avenue
Primary Gateways
Primary gateways provide city iden fica on signage:
      1)   Central Avenue at Highway 101
      2)   Lewis Road at Las Posas Road/Upland Drive
      3)   Camarillo Springs Road at Highway 101
      4)   Lewis Road at Pleasant Valley Road
Secondary Gateways
Secondary gateways announce special districts or                     Example of exis ng City monument
neighborhoods:                                                                                           sign
      1)   Ventura Boulevard at Carmen Drive
      2)   Las Posas Road at Highway 101
      3)   Pe t Street at Highway 101
      4)   Lewis Road at Ventura Boulevard and Highway 101
      5)   Santa Rosa Road at eastern city limits
                                                    G AT E WAY S , S T R E E T S A N D C O R R I D O R S    93
                            This Page Le Blank Inten onally
94 COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
                                                Community Design Element
                                                                                                                                             R.
                                                                                                                                      ND D
                                                                                                                              UPL A
                                                                                                                                                                   D.
                                                                                                                                                              AR
                                                                       ARNEILL RD.
                                                  S   RD.
                                             POSA                                                                                  .                        OS
 CE                                    LAS                                                         RT                           LVD                       AR
      NT                                                                                              E. 34               AK  SB                       N T
        RA                                                                                     FLYN         )           NO                        SA
          LA                                                                                        N              SIO
            VE
                                                                                           RD
                                                                                             .(       RD
                                                                                                         .      MIS
              .                                        PONDEROSA DR.                      IS
                                                                                      W
                                                                                     LE
                             VENTURA FW
                                       Y - US   HWY 101
                                                                                                                 AD
                                                                                                                      OLF
                                                                                                                         OR
                                                                                                                            D.
                                             PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                                                                                                                             Map Features
                                                                                                                                                          Scenic Corridors
Figure 10.12 - Scenic Corridors
        10.9 SCENIC CORRIDORS
         A scenic corridor consists of land that is visible from, adjacent to and
         outside the highway right-of-way, and is comprised primarily of scenic and
         natural features.
         Much of what forms the visual image of Camarillo comes from what is
         seen from motor vehicles. The city’s primary corridors provide a variety of
         views including commercial centers, residen al neighborhoods, industrial
         developments, open space, agriculture, and mountain ridgelines.
         The intent of establishing scenic corridors is the preserva on of public                                                                      Landscaping on berm
         views of important scenic resources. Four scenic corridors have been
         iden fied as described and shown on Figure 10.12. The following routes
         have been recognized for their contribu ons towards Camarillo’s high
         quality of life and are intended to highlight, promote and preserve the
         community’s scenic and environmental characteris cs and help reflect the
         community’s character:
        •     Highway 101
        •     Lewis Road
        •     Las Posas Road/Upland Drive
        •     Pleasant Valley Road/Santa Rosa Road                                                                                    View of Calleguas Mountains
                                                                                                                                      SCENIC CORRIDORS                       95

                              City of Camarillo General Plan
                              10.9.1 Scenic Corridors
                                        Goals, Objec ves and Policies
                              GOAL SC-1
                              MAINTAIN THE VISUAL QUALITY AND SCENIC VIEWS ALONG DESIGNATED
                              CORRIDORS WHERE THEY CONTRIBUTE AND BECOME AN ESSENTIAL
                              PART OF THE COMMUNITY’S URBAN FABRIC.
                              Objec ve SC-1.1
                              Enhance exis ng view corridors along scenic corridors. Maintain the visual
                              quality and scenic views along designated corridors.
                                         Policy SC-1.1.1
 View South on Las Posas Road            The following roadways shall be maintained and preserved as
                                         major or minor scenic corridors with key entry points as shown
                                         in Figure 10.12:
                                         a. Highway 101
                                         b. Lewis Road
                                         c. Las Posas Road/Upland Drive
                                         d. Pleasant Valley Road/Santa Rosa Road
                                         Policy SC-1.1.2
                                         Bridges, culverts, drainage ditches and other roadway ancillary
                                         elements shall be of an appropriate design quality for visual
                                         corridor func ons.
 Santa Rosa Road                         Policy SC-1.1.3
                                         Side slopes, walls, and earthen berms adjacent to roadways shall
                                         be natural in appearance to minimize visual impacts along scenic
                                         corridors.
                                         Policy SC-1.1.4
                                         All landscaping located within designated scenic corridors shall
                                         be designed in accordance with established design guidelines
                                         herein as well as the Street Median and Parkway Master Plan.
                              Objec ve SC-1.2
                              Ensure that development is sited and designed to protect scenic corridors
                              and open space/landscape areas, blending man-made and man-
                              introduced features with the natural environment.
 Upland Drive
96     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                 Community Design Element
           Policy SC-1.2.1
           Development shall provide compa ble landscaping themes with
           the visual character of the designated scenic corridors.
           Policy SC-1.2.2
           Review the heights and setbacks of all structures to ensure the
           preserva on of visual corridors and the maintenance of an open,
           scenic quality within each corridor.
           Policy SC-1.2.3
           Review the size, height, numbers and type of on-premise signs to
           minimize their impact to scenic corridors.
           Policy SC-1.2.4
           Locate new and relocated u li es underground when possible.
           All others should be placed and screened when feasible to
           minimize public viewing.
10.9.2 Scenic Corridor Design Guidelines
In addi on to the design guidelines iden fied in Sec on 10.8.3 (Street and
Corridor Guidelines), the following design guidelines shall apply to scenic
corridors:
            a. There should be increased vegeta on and a en on to wall
               and fence design along scenic corridors.
            b. The plan ng of climbing vines is encouraged along fences
               and walls.
            c. Exis ng na ve vegeta on should be retained and enhanced
               to the greatest extent possible, except to provide proper
               sight distance.
            d. Plant species and densi es should be consistent with the
               surrounding landscape character of the specific loca on.
            e. Encourage landscaping at the street edge and adjacent to
               large buildings to reduce the visibility of commercial and
               industrial structures.
            f. Encourage the use of landscaped berms where feasible along
               Highway 101 when adjacent to residen al development.
            g. Encourage fencing that does not interfere with public
               views.
                                                                            SCENIC CORRIDORS 97
                         City of Camarillo General Plan
                                 h. Chain link fences along scenic corridors should be
                                    discouraged.
                                 i. Straight, uninterrupted walls should not exceed 150 feet in
                                    length. Walls greater than 150 feet in length should be jogged,
                                    provide landscape pockets and include pilasters.
                                 j. Trash containers, loading docks, transformers and large
                                    mechanical and/or electrical equipment should be screened
                                    from view with materials and/or colors that are compa ble
                                    with primary structures.
                                 k. Vehicle entrances and exits along scenic corridors should be
                                    limited. Encourage the use of shared driveways and parking
                                    for commercial development wherever possible.
                                 l. Wireless communica on facili es, such as cell towers, are to
                                    be hidden and blend in with the surrounding environment.
                                    Stealth-mounted applica ons should be used whenever
                                    possible.
                                 m. Preserve distant views by discouraging development on ridge
                                    tops and encouraging landform grading.
98 COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
                                  Community Design Element
                                                                          Conceptual Lewis Road improvements
Lewis Road Improvements                                                        including landscaping, addi onal
                                                                           travel lanes, separated sidewalk, and
The Lewis Road corridor is one of the most important visual corridors in                                   bike lanes
the city as it is the primary north/south route through town. However,
it currently is one of the least visually appealing corridors in the city
due to excessive pavement/right-of-way, overhead u li es, intermi ent
pedestrian facili es, incompa ble fencing, poorly screened walls and
unar culated industrial structures.
The City should work with Caltrans to beau fy and enhance the street
edges with improved sidewalks, gateway signage, u lity undergrounding,
elimina on of paved street right-of-way where possible, full paveout of
street right-of-way where required, crea on of a linear park and mul -
use path in excess right-of-way areas, landscaping, wall screening and
provision of street furnishings.
Lewis Road improvements should include the following:
                                                                                                Lewis Road - Before
•    Four (4) travel lanes
•    Landscaped median
•    Class II bike lanes on both sides of Lewis Road
•    Mul -use path on north side that is separated from the vehicle ROW
     with landscaping
•    Enhanced landscaping adjacent to railroad tracks
                                                                                 S U S TA I N A B L E D E S I G N   99

                                 City of Camarillo General Plan
   Photo By Cheri Lucas
  McGrath Farm, Camarillo
                                    10.10 SUSTAINABLE DESIGN
                                    The City is commi ed to leading by example through its ability to design
                                    and construct environmentally friendly public buildings and public streets.
                                    The following core policies iden fy the overall sustainable design goals
                                    rooted in New Urbanism and Smart Growth policies, and the Green
                                    Building and Sustainable Design Concepts developed by the United States
                                    Green Building Council (USGBC) for the LEED (Leadership in Energy and
                                    Environmental Design) ra ng system. The policies and guidelines in this
                                    chapter are designed to guide a project from early site planning stages
                                    through building design and construc on.
  Drip Irriga on                    10.10.1 What is Sustainable Design and How Can it be
                                                Measured?
                                    Sustainable design refers to design and construc on prac ces that
                                    significantly reduce or eliminate the nega ve impacts of development on
                                    the environment and its inhabitants. A sustainable design approach can
                                    be defined by a variety of green building prac ces and the availability of
100        COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
                                    Community Design Element
pedestrian-oriented ameni es. The essen al components that make up a
successful sustainable development have been iden fied by various green
building organiza ons as well as the California Green Building Code. These
programs recognize that the layout and design of the built environment
influences the way residents and visitors experience a neighborhood, and
it can impact their quality of life and sense of community.
The following sustainable design criteria should be employed to examine
future development proposals within the community and to ensure that
low impact alterna ves are integrated into projects.
10.10.2 Sustainable Design Goals and Policies                                        Village at the Park mixed-use
GOAL S-1
ENCOURAGE DEVELOPMENT LOCATIONS THAT ARE CONNECTED WITH
GOODS, SERVICES, NEIGHBORING USES AND TRANSIT.
           Policy S-1.1
           Encourage development within and near exis ng communi es
           or public transporta on infrastructure to reduce vehicle trips
           and induce pedestrian ac vity.
           Policy S-1.2
           Promote neighborhoods that are physically connected to each
           other to foster community and connectedness beyond the
           individual project.
                                                                                Developments should incorporate
           Policy S-1.3                                                                        pedestrian linkages
           Minimize erosion to protect habitat and reduce stress on natural
           water systems by preserving steep slopes in a natural, vegetated
           state.
           Policy S-1.4
           Design parking to increase the pedestrian orienta on of projects
           and minimize the adverse environmental eﬀects of parking
           facili es (locate parking at the side or rear of buildings leaving
           building frontages and streetscapes free of parking facili es
           where feasible).
                                                                              Buildings should be oriented toward
                                                                                    the street with loading behind
                                                                    CAMARILLO COMMUNITY CHARACTER               101

                                       City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                Policy S-1.5
                                                New development should consider the natural and financial
                                                resources required for construc on and maintenance of
                                                infrastructure.
                                       GOAL S-2
                                       PROMOTE THE USE OF GREEN BUILDING PRACTICES IN NEIGHBORHOOD
                                       PATTERN AND DESIGN.
                                                Policy S-2.1
                                                Encourage the design of projects that incorporate high levels
                                                of internal connec vity and connec ons to surrounding
  Projects should encourage pedestrian          development to promote a variety of travel op ons.
  connec vity and recrea onal areas
                                                Policy S-2.2
                                                Provide direct and safe connec ons for pedestrians, bicyclists
                                                and drivers to key components of a project, local des na ons
                                                and neighborhood centers.
                                                Policy S-2.3
                                                Encourage the design and construc on of buildings to u lize
                                                green building prac ces.
                                                Policy S-2.4
                                                Preserve exis ng tree canopy, na ve vegeta on and pervious
  Tree helps shade in summer
                                                surfaces.
                                                Policy S-2.5
                                                Preserve community livability, transporta on eﬃciency and
                                                walkability.
                                                Policy S-2.6
                                                Provide appealing and comfortable pedestrian           street
                                                environments in order to promote pedestrian ac vity.
                                                Policy S-2.7
                                                Promote bicycling and transporta on eﬃciency.
  Deciduous tree allows solar gain in
  winter
102     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                  Community Design Element
GOAL S-3
PROMOTE DEVELOPMENT TO USE GREEN CONSTRUCTION AND
TECHNOLOGY PRACTICES. THIS REFERS TO STRUCTURES THAT USE
ENVIRONMENTALLY RESPONSIBLE PROCESSES AND THAT ARE RESOURCE-
EFFICIENT THROUGHOUT A BUILDING’S LIFE-CYCLE; FROM SITING TO
DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION, MAINTENANCE, RENOVATION
AND DEMOLITION.
           Policy S-3.1
           Encourage the design and construc on of energy-eﬃcient
           buildings to reduce air, water and land pollu on and
           environmental impacts from energy produc on and
           consump on.
                                                                                       Solar shade structure
           Policy S-3.2
           Reduce the impact of “heat islands” by providing shade structures
           and trees that can produce large canopies to provide shade. In
           addi on, choose roof and paving materials that possess a high
           level of solar reflec vity.
           Policy S-3.3
           Achieve enhanced energy eﬃciency by crea ng the op mum
           condi ons for the use of passive and ac ve solar strategies.
           Policy S-3.4
           Use recycled and other environmentally-friendly building
           materials whenever possible.
10.10.3 Sustainable Design Guidelines
The eﬃcient layout of the built environment presents an opportunity
to enhance the quality of life within the Plan Area while reducing the
development’s ecological footprint to help protect the environment.
Both compact neighborhood design and infill developments are
strongly encouraged. In general, compact neighborhood design refers
to a development that oﬀers a diverse mix of land uses that are well-
connected, both internally and to surrounding neighborhoods. Infill
development includes building in a previously developed area or an area
adjacent to exis ng development. Infill development also preserves the
need for extending expensive and resource-deple ng infrastructure to
remote areas.
The following guidelines examine the poten al impacts related to site
planning and building design and the corresponding sustainable solu ons
that should be implemented to reduce those impacts.
                                                                    CAMARILLO COMMUNITY CHARACTER         103

                                    City of Camarillo General Plan
                                    Sustainable Site Planning Guidelines
                                               a. The project site should be designed to maintain natural
                                                   stormwater flows by promo ng infiltra on. Pervious paving
                                                   and other measures to minimize impervious surfaces are
                                                   encouraged. Stormwater should be reused for non-potable
                                                   uses such as landscape irriga on.
                                               b. Impervious paving should be minimized, increasing on-
                                                   site infiltra on and reducing or elimina ng pollu on from
                                                   stormwater runoﬀ and contaminants.
                                               c. Reduce pollu on from construc on ac vi es by controlling
                                                   soil erosion, waterway sedimenta on and airborne dust
  Solar panels                                     genera on.
                                               d. Minimize the impact of light pollu on through the use and
                                                   placement of appropriate ligh ng technology.
                                               e. Building placement should be sensi ve to site topography
                                                   and should be integrated seamlessly with minimal impact.
                                               f. Site drainage should be designed integra ng a decentralized
                                                   system that distributes stormwater across a project site to
                                                   replenish groundwater supplies. In addi on, various devices
                                                   that filter water and infiltrate water into the ground should
                                                   be considered.
                                               g. Constructed surfaces on the site should be shaded with
                                                   landscape features and u lize high-reflectance materials
                                                   and other materials to reduce the heat absorp on of
                                                   hardscape.
  Swales help infiltrate pollutants
                                               h. Ensure consistency with the Ventura County Municipal
                                                   Stormwater Permit (“MS4 Permit”) which requires specified
                                                   new development and redevelopment projects to control
                                                   pollutants, pollutant loads and runoﬀ volume emana ng from
                                                   impervious surfaces by specifying an Eﬀec ve Impervious
                                                   Area (EIA) site limita on and a fixed runoﬀ volume to be
                                                   retained on-site.
                                               i. Low Impact Development (LID) techniques that emphasize
                                                   conserva on and use of on-site natural features to protect
                                                   water quality should be u lized. These features replicate the
                                                   pre-development water flows through infiltra ng, filtering,
                                                   storing, evapora ng, and detaining runoﬀ.
104     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                  Community Design Element
10.10.4 Streetscape/Landscape Design
The following guidelines discuss the importance of a project’s rela onship
to the streetscape and integra on of landscape features.
Sustainable Streetscape/Landscape Design Guidelines
            a. Limit the use of potable water or other natural surface or
                subsurface water resources available on or near the project
                site for landscape irriga on.
            b. Drought-tolerant landscaping is encouraged. Plant selec on
                should be based on the climate and environment of the
                area as well as site characteris cs such as exposure, light            Porous concrete has a higher
                intensity, soil analysis, site drainage and irriga on. Proper       reflectance than porous asphalt
                plant selec on based on site characteris cs should enhance
                the plants’ likelihood of becoming established in the site
                and reduce poten al incidences of low vigor, excessive
                maintenance, disease or death. Na ve species are preferred
                for natural landscapes.
            c. Permeable paving should be used in parking lanes, alleys
                and paving surfaces in plazas where feasible.
            d. All permeable paving surfaces must be ADA-accessible.
            e. Swales to convey stormwater should be provided along the
                edges of streets along parkways where feasible.
            f. Where infiltra on is possible, swales should be designed
                with a subsurface infiltra on trench to allow infiltra on.
                                                                               Non-potable water can be u lized for
                                                                                                          irriga on
10.10.5 Descrip on of Sustainable Techniques
Cool Roofs
Cool roofs are roofs consis ng of materials that eﬀec vely reflect the sun’s
energy from the roof surface.
Cool roofs reduce the roof surface temperature, thereby reducing the
heat transferred into the building below. This helps to reduce energy
costs (by keeping a cs and ducts cooler), improve occupant comfort, cut
maintenance costs, increase the life cycle of the roof and reduce urban
“heat islands.”
                                                                                  U lize low water-requiring plants
                                                                      CAMARILLO COMMUNITY CHARACTER              105

                                      City of Camarillo General Plan
                                      Solar Panels
                                      Solar panels make use of the sun’s energy by harves ng sunlight and
                                      ac vely conver ng it to electricity. Solar cells, or photo voltaic cells, are
                                      arranged in a grid-like pa ern on the surface of the solar panels and
                                      collect sunlight during the daylight hours. Solar power provides consistent,
                                      low maintenance electricity and any excess solar power from a home or
                                      business can poten ally be sold into local electricity grids, further reducing
                                      a building’s electricity costs. Unlike non-renewable energy sources, solar
                                      power does not pollute the air or water. It replaces electricity generated
                                      from facili es powered by coal, natural gas and other non-renewable
                                      fuels, elimina ng threats to public health such as carbon monoxide,
                                      par culate and toxic chemical emissions from those facili es. The design,
  Reflec ve material on buildings     construc on, and installa on of solar photo voltaic systems on buildings
  reduces heat absorp on              shall be regulated by Title 24 of the California Building Standards Codes.
                                      Permeable Paving
                                      Permeable paving typically refers to pavers, porous concrete or, in some
                                      cases, a pathway material such as decomposed granite. These materials
                                      are generally eﬀec ve for stormwater infiltra on to help prevent excess
                                      runoﬀ. Depending on soil types, recommended permeable materials may
                                      include pervious concrete, which has a permeability rate of 12 inches per
                                      hour and has the appearance of exposed aggregate concrete; unit pavers/
                                      bricks/stone that provide a durable and a rac ve surface, have been
                                      spaced to expose a permeable joint and placed on a permeable base;
                                      crushed aggregate that provides a wide variety of aggregate types and
                                      which must be bounded by a rigid edge; turf blocks; and flagstone which is
                                      suited for low traﬃc areas.
  Solar panels transfer sunlight into
  energy                              Permeable paving may be used in appropriate loca ons including
                                      sidewalks, plazas, pedestrian paseos, parking spaces, and driveways. This
                                      method will allow water to infiltrate the ground where it lands and will
                                      help to mi gate new development impacts.
                                      Bio-swales
                                      The use of bio-swales represents an evolu on in the conven onal civil
                                      engineering solu ons addressing stormwater runoﬀ. While ac ng as
                                      a func onal stormwater management system, the bio-swales redesign
                                      tradi onal curbs and gu ers to redirect stormwater into planter strips,
                                      rather than capturing runoﬀ in pipes and diver ng it to a remote loca on.
                                      These low impact techniques maximize eﬃciency by irriga ng landscaping
                                      and filtering and reducing stormwater runoﬀ.
  Permeable paving
106     COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                     Community Design Element
Subsurface Irriga on Systems
Subsurface irriga on systems may be used as an alterna ve to sprinkler
and other types of mainstream irriga on systems. These irriga on
systems employ “green” technology that uses gravity and a concept
called “capillary rise” to irrigate, while using approximately 60 percent
less water on average that tradi onal sprinklers. Beneath the turf lies a
special layer of sand and gravel, and below this layer are mul ple plas c
liner pans. Water is stored in these pans and the system relies on capillary
flow to wet the root zone of the plants. The pans maintain a level of
approximately three inches of water, either from harvested rain water or
another non-pressurized water irriga on source. When the water level in
the pans drops too low, a sensor automa cally refills the water in all of the
chambers. Through this technique, water is not lost into the subsoil and is                          Bio-swale
only used when needed.
An cipated benefits using a subsurface irriga on system include:
•   Reduced water use of approximately 60 percent
•   Increased drainage capacity
•   Generally lower maintenance costs compared to sprinkler irriga on
•   Lower opera onal costs
•   Eﬄuent use without public exposure issues                                      Subsurface irriga on system
•   Reduc on of environmental pollu on
•   The capture and recycling of water
                                                                                               Subsurface liner
                                                                     CAMARILLO COMMUNITY CHARACTER           107

                                       City of Camarillo General Plan
                                       Water Eﬃcient Irriga on
                                       Employing water-eﬃcient irriga on techniques is a simple and eﬀec ve
                                       way to conserve water. A drip irriga on system should be used to water
                                       trees, shrub beds and areas of groundcover to eliminate evapora on
                                       losses. Plants should be grouped based upon similar water requirements
                                       into common zones to match precipita on heads and emi ers. Controllers
                                       should be selected that oﬀer adjustable watering schedules and moisture
                                       sensors to account for seasonal varia ons, and should be calibrated
                                       appropriately. Automa c water controllers should be scheduled for
                                       night irriga on to reduce losses due to evapora on and wind dri . If
                                       eﬃcient irriga on techniques are implemented, water use can be reduced
                                       significantly.
  Irriga on systems should have
  eﬃcient flow and coverage            Landscaping
                                       Trees are an eﬀec ve means to reducing the heat island eﬀects. They
                                       help to keep areas cool by providing shade and consequently keeping
                                       streets, parking areas and building surfaces cooler. In addi on, trees
                                       use evapotranspira on to cool themselves and the surrounding air.
                                       Evapotranspira on is the process by which trees “perspire” from both
                                       their leaves and the root systems. The result: as the water evaporates, it
                                       dissipates the heat in and around the tree which leads to cooler air in the
                                       area encompassing the tree.
                                       The leaves on a tree can also help reduce air pollu on by “capturing”
                                       airborne par cles, such as nitrogen dioxide (NO2), nitrogen oxide (NO),
                                       and sulfur dioxide (SO2), while at the same me releasing oxygen (O2). In
                                       addi on, trees intercept and absorb rain through their leaves and roots,
  Plants help cool the environment     thus reducing the amount of water falling on the pavement and hard
  around them                          surfaces, thus reducing stormwater runoﬀ.
  Leaves capture airborne par cles and
  convert them into oxygen
108      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                 Community Design Element
                                                                       Dawson Drive Area Concepts and Design Guidelines
10.11 EXISTING REGULATIONS AND
           DOCUMENTS
10.11.1 Introduc on
The goals, objec ves and guidelines detailed in the Community Design
Element guide citywide development, crea ng a consistent, unified image
to enhance and preserve the overall character of Camarillo.
There are exis ng regula ons and documents that also guide and regulate
future development and improvements. These documents and regula ons
include the following:
General Plan, Zoning Ordinance, Sign Ordinance, Grading Ordinance,
CURB Ordinance, planned development permits, architectural                                             Springville Specific Plan
review, Subdivision Ordinance, Specific Plans, historical preserva on,
environmental review, Hillside Ordinance and the Street Median and
Parkway Landscape Master Plan.
The various development standards and controls promote the applica on
of the General Plan goals including its various elements.
                                                               E X I S T I N G R E G U L AT I O N S A N D D O C U M E N T S   109
                                      City of Camarillo General Plan
                                      10.11.2 City of Camarillo Planning Commission Design
                                                  Review Guidelines
                                      The purpose of the Planning Commission Design Review Guidelines is to
                                      assist the implementa on of Specific Plans and other design guidelines
                                      when reviewing projects. They support the preserva on and enhancement
                                      of the character of the city of Camarillo consistent with the Community
                                      Design Element.
                                      The Architectural Review Commi ee shall interpret the guidelines and
                                      recommend approval, condi onal approval, modifica on, or denial if the
  City of Camarillo
  General Plan Elements               design does not comply with the established standards.
                                      10.11.3 Old Town Camarillo Ventura Boulevard Design
                                                  Guidelines
                                      Adopted in 1997, the Old Town Camarillo Ventura Boulevard Design
                                      Guidelines encourage and guide improvements, both public and private,
                                      within the area of the city commonly known as “Old Town.” These
                                      guidelines illustrate the design objec ves of the community, including
                                      business and property owners within the Old Town area.
                                      All proposed structural or façade changes, as well as new public or private
                                      construc on within the Old Town area should be designed to be consistent
                                      with these Design Guidelines.
  Old Town Camarillo
  Ventura Boulevard Design Guidelines Public and private investments along Ventura Boulevard have rejuvenated
                                      Old Town, crea ng an invi ng, pedestrian-oriented commercial district
                                      that is home to restaurants and specialty retailers.
  Old Town Camarillo
  Ventura Boulevard Design Guidelines
110      COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                                               Community Design Element
                                                                                                                                                                                     R.
                                                                                                                                                                              ND D
                                                                                                                                                                      UPL A
                                                                                                                                                                                                        R   D.
                                                                                                  ARNEILL RD.
                                                                     .
                                                                 S RD                                                                                                                                SA
                                                              OSA                                                                                                            D.                    RO
CE                                                   L   AS P                                                                           RT
                                                                                                                                           E.                            BLV                     A
  NT                                                                                                                                          34                  AKS                          NT
    R   AL
                                                                                                                                    FLYN        )               NO                        SA
                                                                                                                                         N                 SIO
           AV                                                                                                                    RD
                                                                                                                                   .(      RD
                                                                                                                                              .         MIS
             E.                                                      PONDEROSA DR.                                            IS
                                   SPRINGVILLE
                                                                    CIVIC CENTER
                                                                                              CAMARILLO                      W
                                SPECIFIC PLAN AREA                                            COMMONS                    LE
                                                                    SPECIFIC PLAN
                                   VENTURA FW                                                 STRATEGIC
                                             Y - US           HWY 101   AREA
                                                                                                PLAN
                        AIRPORT NORTH                                                           AREA
                      SPECIFIC PLAN AREA                                                                                                                 AD
                                                                                                                                                              OLF
                                                                                                                                                                 OR
                                                                             OLD TOWN CAMARILLO
                                                                                SPECIFIC PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                    D.
                                                                                                                                    VILLAGE
                                                                                                                                     AT THE
                                                                                                                  DAWSON              PARK
                                                                                                                   DRIVE         SPECIFIC PLAN
                                                                                                                INDUSTRIAL            AREA
                                                            PLEASANT VALLEY RD.                                    AREA
Figure 10.13 - Specific Plan Area Map
        10.11.4 Village at the Park Specific Plan
         The Village at the Park Specific Plan, provides the City of Camarillo with
         a comprehensive planning program to direct the orderly development of
         the Village at the Park site. The Specific Plan provides a conceptual land
         use plan, regula ons, guidelines and programs to ensure that this area of
         the city is developed in a manner consistent with the goals, objec ves,
         principles and policies of the City of Camarillo General Plan.
         This Specific Plan allows development of a wide variety of residen al,
         commercial, recrea onal and ins tu onal uses within the 330-acre
         Specific Plan Area.
                                                                                                                                                                         Village at the Park development
         The majority of this Plan Area is built out. Remaining development areas
         should be constructed consistent with the goals, objec ves, policies and
         design guidelines found in the Specific Plan.
                                                                                                                                      E X I S T I N G R E G U L AT I O N S A N D D O C U M E N T S               111
                                           City of Camarillo General Plan
                                           10.11.5 Springville Specific Plan
                                           The Springville Specific Plan provides the City of Camarillo with a
                                           comprehensive planning program to direct the orderly development of
                                           the Springville site located at the western gateway to the city. The Specific
                                           Plan provides a conceptual land use plan, regula ons, guidelines and
                                           programs to ensure that this area of the city is developed in a manner
                                           consistent with the goals, objec ves, principles and policies of the City of
                                           Camarillo General Plan.
                                           The Specific Plan allows development of a variety of uses, including
                                           residen al, mixed use and recrea onal, within the 173-acre Specific Plan
         Springville Specific Plan sketch Area. As this area develops, special considera on should be given to the
                                           following:
                                           •   Interface with Highway 101 – Provide an a rac ve sound berm with
                                               landscaping
                                           •   Consider providing a city gateway monument at the western boundary
                                               of the project area
                                           •   Ensure architectural compliance with the Heritage Zone
                                           •   Incorpora on of public art and enhanced bridge treatment into bridge
                                               design
                                           •   Enhance on-ramp and oﬀ-ramp with landscaping
  Springville Specific Plan Village Center
                      Master Plan Layout
  Dawson Drive Industrial Area
  Concepts and Design Guidelines
112    COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                   Community Design Element
10.11.6 Dawson Drive Industrial Area Concepts and
            Design Guidelines
The approximately 180-acre Dawson Drive Industrial Area houses many of
the city’s industrial businesses, in addi on to large parcels of vacant and
underu lized land such as the Ima on and EJM proper es. While centrally
located, the area is not easily accessible by vehicle, foot or bicycle. Lewis
Road, Highway 101, Dawson Drive and the railroad tracks crisscross the
area, making it very diﬃcult to navigate, par cularly from east to west.
The Dawson Drive Industrial Area Concepts and Design Guidelines
establish a set of design standards and improvements that will guide its
redevelopment into a vibrant district. Key components of the plan are to:               Dawson Drive Industrial Area
                                                                                        Concepts and Design Guidelines
•   Enhance signage
•   Improve circula on and access
•   Improve exis ng proper es
•   Create new infill development
•   Create unity within the Plan Area through quality design
10.11.7 Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan
The Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan establishes a long range plan for
the revitaliza on of the 55-acre Camarillo Commons Plan Area. The plan
ar culates a vision for the Plan Area and provides development standards                Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan
and guidelines for new development and redevelopment. It establishes
a framework for development within the area with a new system of
circula on and parking, and a cohesive set of streetscape improvements
that will create a pedestrian-friendly environment and sense of place
in the heart of Camarillo. The plan includes a mixed-use component to
infuse a vibrant atmosphere on a more con nuous 24/7 basis. This plan
supports the goals and objec ves of the City’s General Plan.
                                                                 E X I S T I N G R E G U L AT I O N S A N D D O C U M E N T S 113

                          City of Camarillo General Plan
                          10.11.8 City of Camarillo Landscape and Irriga on
                                      Guidelines
                          The purpose of the guidelines is to assist in the prepara on of landscape
                          plans and water conserva on measures to ensure that they sa sfy the
                          City of Camarillo landscape requirements and State of California water
                          conserva on requirements. It is also the intent of the guidelines to
                          provide the landscape architect with as much la tude as possible when
                          designing the project landscaping, while at the same me mee ng water
                          conserva on requirements and the City’s landscaping standards.
                          10.11.9 Street Median and Parkway Landscape
                                      Master Plan
                          The Street Median and Parkway Landscape Master Plan was adopted
                          in April of 2001. The purpose of the Master Plan is to develop a unique
                          streetscape theme for the major streets and intersec ons of the city. All
                          recommenda ons of the Master Plan are restricted to the space within
                          the boundaries of the city street rights-of-way. The major entrances to the
                          city and certain key intersec ons are designated as “focal points” which
                          are areas that include enhanced landscaping, paving materials and street
                          furniture to accent these key areas. The following streets are included in
                          the Master Plan:
                          •   Las Posas Road
                          •   Ponderosa Drive
                          •   Carmen Drive
                          •   Adolfo Road
                          •   Arneill Road
                          •   Temple Avenue
                          •   Santa Rosa Road
                          •   Upland Drive
114 COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                    Community Design Element
10.11.10 Camarillo Municipal Code
Stormwater Quality Ordinance (Title 9)
The Stormwater Quality Ordinance implements the Federal Clean Water
Act and California Water Code by prohibi ng the discharge of pollutants
to the city’s stormdrain system and local waterways. The Ordinance
implements requirements established in the city’s Municipal Stormwater
Permit, including standards for new development and redevelopment.
Zoning Ordinance (Title 19)
The Zoning Ordinance is the most comprehensive tool in establishing
development standards. The Zoning Ordinance establishes permi ed
uses, building coverages, lot areas, setbacks, height limita ons and
similar restric ons. The standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance
work together with other Municipal Code requirements to ensure the
appropriate development and proper use of land in accordance with the
General Plan.
Parking Code (Chapter 19.44)
The Parking Ordinance establishes development standards for the
minimum amount of parking required for various types of uses. The
Parking Code (Chapter 19.44) also addresses the development standards
for parking lot landscaping. In conjunc on with the requirements for
loading spaces, the parking and loading ordinances address the minimum
number of loading zones, their loca on and their minimum size.
Sign Ordinance (Title 17)
The Sign Ordinance for the City of Camarillo establishes controls to
regulate the loca on, type and number of signs, colors, materials and
the design of signs. It sets forth the permi ed types of signs within the
various land uses and contains principles for eﬀec ve sign programs.
The maintenance and the abatement of nonconforming signs has been
eﬀec ve in removing signs which were classified as nonconforming. The
City should con nue with the provisions of the Sign Ordinance to restrict
both on-site and oﬀsite adver sing signs and to ensure that signs are
appropriate and aesthe cally pleasing.
Hillside Development Standards (Chapter 18.100)
The Hillside Development Standards regulates changes in the topography
of the land, development of the hills, mountains and natural land forms
within the city. It also ensures the maintenance of open space, the
reten on of scenic resources and addresses grading design. Grading design
includes cut-and-fill slopes, soil stabiliza on and drainage to enhance
development in hillside areas.
                                                                E X I S T I N G R E G U L AT I O N S A N D D O C U M E N T S 115

                          City of Camarillo General Plan
                          Any cu ng or filling of land requires review by the City. The review
                          considers the exis ng topography, exis ng facili es or features, exis ng
                          vegeta on and proposed changes. The proposed grading can be required
                          to retain exis ng features such as rock outcroppings or mature vegeta on.
                          The grading should also incorporate features to blend into the exis ng
                          environment through design of the grading plan. Preliminary grading
                          informa on should accompany proposed development plans at the me
                          of considera on by the Planning Commission.
                          Subdivisions (Title 18)
                          It is the purpose of this tle to regulate and control design and
                          improvement of subdivisions within the city and to implement and
                          supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the
                          design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions, the form and
                          content of all maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act and the
                          procedure to be followed in securing approval (from the City Council,
                          Planning Commission, Director of Engineering Services/City Engineer,
                          Director of Planning and Community Development and Planning
                          Department) regarding such maps. To accomplish this purpose, the
                          regula ons outlined in this tle are determined to be necessary for the
                          preserva on of the public health, safety and general welfare, to promote
                          orderly growth and development, to provide for housing needs of the
                          region, to promote open space, conserva on, protec on and proper use
                          of land, and to ensure provision for adequate traﬃc circula on, u li es
                          and services.
116 COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                   Community Design Element
10.11.11 Development Controls
Accessibility Standards
Title 24 of the State of California Administra ve Code sets forth
regula ons known as the Architectural Barriers Law. The regula ons aﬀect
the development of building through standards for buildings and site
development and are enforced by the Department of Building and Safety.
The Architectural Barriers Law promotes the use of ramps and other
facili es to encourage accessibility for handicapped persons. The City’s
development standards also promote the use of ramping and handicapped
parking facili es.
Planned Development Permit
The Zoning Ordinance requires Planning Commission review and approval
of planned development permits for developments in most zones. The
excep ons are the open space and agricultural zones and the rural and
R1 single-family residen al zones. The zones that require Planning
Commission review set forth precise findings in approving projects so
that they are adequately served by streets and u li es, consistent with
the General Plan and surrounding uses, and are not detrimental to the
environment. The review by the Planning Commission involves the site
planning of projects, their rela onship to adjoining uses and the design
and style of the proposed buildings. In approving planned development
permits, the Planning Commission should not only consider them
with regard to ordinance requirements, but the project should also be
compa ble with the principles contained in the General Plan and its
elements.
Architectural Review
The purpose of an architectural review commi ee is to review
development plans for the parameters of architectural design, exterior
building materials, landscape materials, graphics and signage. The
Architectural Review Commi ee is comprised of two Planning
Commissioners. The Review Commi ee aids in the review of projects
to ensure that buildings conform to design standards, such as in
Specific Plans and the Community Design Element, so that they are
complementary to surrounding buildings and environmental features.
Public Lands and Easements
The City has the opportunity and the direc ve to ensure that lands under
public ownership be properly managed and that they complement the
area and the character of the community. In the management of public
lands, unique quali es within the community should be protected and
provide for public purposes, such as park lands, viewscapes or other
environmental purposes. Should any public land be sold or exchanged,
appropriate restric ons should be considered to carry out the intent
of the Community Design Element. The acquisi on of lands should be
considered for public use for lands which would enhance the character of
the community.
                                                              E X I S T I N G R E G U L AT I O N S A N D D O C U M E N T S 117

                          City of Camarillo General Plan
                          Maintenance Controls
                          The maintenance of both developed and undeveloped lands is important
                          in promo ng a posi ve image and quality environment. There are a
                          variety of maintenance controls including housing code, fire preven on
                          programs, li er controls, weed and insect controls and water pollu on
                          controls. These are in addi on to the Municipal Code requirements
                          which set forth standards for the maintenance of lands in conformance
                          with the ordinance provisions. The enforcement of these provisions
                          with mandatory abatement of persistent viola ons should be of primary
                          importance.
                          Specific Plans
                          Specific Plans generate more precise land use pa erns, development
                          standards, street alignments, u lity improvements and design themes
                          for par cular areas. Specific Plans can be u lized to coordinate planning
                          among various parcels. Specific Plans can also be beneficial in coordina ng
                          development of new areas which may have otherwise been restricted
                          from development because of access, property lines, lack of u li es, etc.
                          Public Improvements
                          Public improvements, such as streets, public buildings and u li es, should
                          be reviewed in terms of their design, loca on, func on and surrounding
                          areas to ensure that the projects are compa ble with the exis ng
                          environment and surrounding land uses. In addi on, they should be of a
                          high quality design and promote the character of the city.
                          Environmental Guidelines
                          The City of Camarillo has adopted guidelines for the prepara on of
                          environmental impact reports which are consistent with the California
                          Environmental Quality Act. The first policy of the state legislature in
                          requiring environmental review of development is to develop and maintain
                          a high-quality environment now and in the future, and to take all ac on
                          necessary to protect, rehabilitate and enhance the environmental quality of
                          the state. Addi onally, ac ons necessary to provide the people of the state
                          with clean air and water, enjoyment of aesthe c, natural scenic and historic
                          environmental quali es and freedom from excessive noise should be taken.
                          The applica on of the environmental guidelines is to iden fy any and
                          all poten ally significant environmental impacts and to iden fy various
                          alterna ves and mi ga ng measures that could be required in the approval
                          of a project. The intent is to provide decision makers more informa on
                          to render a decision on a project to ensure that the highest quality
                          environment will result.
118 COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
                                   Community Design Element
SOAR
In an eﬀort to help control development within its sphere of influence,
Camarillo amended the City’s General Plan in 1998 by adding the SOAR
(Save Open space and Agricultural Resources) Ordinance. The ordinance
created the Camarillo Urban Restric on Boundary (CURB) line to encourage
eﬃcient growth pa erns and protect agriculture, natural resources and
other open space uses by confining development within urban limits. A
SOAR ordinance has been adopted by the County of Ventura and other
neighboring ci es to help prevent the loss of watershed, subdivision of
prime agricultural land and exploita on of resources of lands in the county.
Camarillo Urban Restric on Boundary (CURB)
The City of Camarillo General Plan CURB element discusses the unique
character of the city of Camarillo and the quality of life that city residents
depend on, as well as the protec on of a substan al amount of open space,
natural resources and agricultural lands. The protec on of such lands not
only ensures the con nued viability of agriculture, but also contributes to
flood control and the protec on of wildlife, environmentally sensi ve areas
and irreplaceable natural resources. The adop on of the CURB around the
city of Camarillo promotes the forma on and con nua on of a cohesive
community by defining the boundaries and by helping to prevent urban
sprawl. The CURB promotes eﬃcient municipal services and facili es
by confining urban development to defined development areas. CURB
restric ons remain in eﬀect un l December 31, 2020.
Ventura County Municipal Storm Sewer System Permit (MS4 Permit)
Camarillo is subject to the Ventura County Municipal Stormwater Permit
(MS4 Permit) for stormwater discharges and urban runoﬀ. The Ventura
County Watershed Protec on District is the principal permi er and the
City of Camarillo is a co-permi ee along with the County of Ventura and
all of the other ci es within the county. In addi on to the MS4 Permit
requirements, the Countywide Stormwater Technical Guidance Manual
and related Countywide Stormwater Quality Urban Impact Mi ga on
Plan (SQUIMP) were prepared to describe in detail all ac vi es subject
to regula on, management measures, schedules for implementa on of
measures and specific standards against which success is measured within
Ventura County.
                                                                   E X I S T I N G R E G U L AT I O N S A N D D O C U M E N T S 119

                          City of Camarillo General Plan
                          Camarillo Airport Master Plan
                          Owned and operated by Ventura County, Camarillo Airport serves as a vital
                          economic asset for Ventura County and the region. As such, the Camarillo
                          Airport Master Plan (February 2010) ensures the careful and though ul
                          planning of development in a manner which matches the developmental
                          goals of the community. An important result of the Master Plan is to
                          ensure a comprehensive development plan that is tailored to meet future
                          facility needs. A comprehensive and proac ve development plan protects
                          surrounding development areas and ensures that they will be readily
                          available when required to meet future needs.
                          Historic Preserva on
                          The preserva on of buildings having historical significance and other
                          environmental features helps to e genera ons together and fit into
                          the fabric of the community. They are also beneficial in promo ng the
                          theme and character of the area and oﬀer a richness that o en cannot be
                          duplicated. A empts should be made to preserve and properly maintain
                          those significant features. Surrounding developments should be a
                          complement to historical buildings.
120 COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT

                                   Community Design Element
10.12 IMPLEMENTING ACTIONS
The following list iden fies physical improvements and recommended
ac ons that the City, private property owners, or non-profit organiza ons
can pursue in order to implement the Community Design Element.
            a. Con nue to look for opportuni es to provide public art.
            b. Update the Street Median and Parkway Landscape Master
                Plan.
            c. Select appropriate plant materials so higher levels of
                maintenance are not required. Where plants require less
                pruning this can reduce maintenance costs, green waste and
                allow plants to grow healthier.
            d. Construct gateway monuments consistent with Figure
                10.11.
            e. Prepare a study regarding the poten al loca on for enhanced
                parkway focal points within the community.
            f. Update Citywide Wayfinding Signage Program.
            g. As a major corridor through the city, improve Lewis Road
                to its full right-of-way sec on as a complete street with
                landscaping, bike and pedestrian paths.
            h. Improve the following scenic corridors:
                   1)   Lewis Road
                   2)   Highway 101 interchanges
                   3)   Highway 101 median and shoulders
            i. Prepare a street furniture program to adopt criteria for
                selec ng street furniture within the city.
            j. Develop an incen ve program to encourage the renova on
                of outdated commercial shopping centers.
            k. Explore redevelopment opportuni es that may be available
                to further enhance Camarillo.
            l. As the city matures, addi onal events that further the city’s
                character and agricultural heritage should be promoted.
                                                                             I M P L E M E NI N
                                                                                              T ITNRGO DAUC CT TI OI ONNS 121

                             This Page Le Blank Inten onally
122 COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
                                   CIRCULATION ELEMENT 2014
                                     CAMARILLO
    This element provides goals,
   objectives, and policies which
      support safe, efficient, and
accessible circulation throughout
                        Camarillo.
                                         C I T Y O F C A M A R I L L O C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T | 2014
Contents
SECTION                                                                PAGE
5.1	INTRODUCTION	                                                         3
5.2	     PURPOSE 	                                                        4
5.3	     GENERAL PLAN CORRELATION	                                        5
5.4	     EXISTING CONDITIONS	                                             8
5.5	     CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS, OBJECTIVES, and POLICIES	             9
5.6	     CIRCULATION PLAN	                                               20
5.7	PROGRAMS	                                                            33
5.8	     PLANNED IMPROVEMENTS	                                           34
5.9	     MODES OF TRANSPORTATION	                                        37
5.10	 COORDINATION WITH OTHER JURISDICTIONS	                             46
5.11	 EVACUATION PLAN	                                                   47
5.12	 COMMUNITY FACILITIES	                                              47
Adopted
April 23, 2014
Previously Adopted
January 12, 2000
Prepared by
RRM Design Group
Cover and document photography used with permission by John B. Mueller
www.johnbmueller.com
                                                      Circulation Element
                                                                                                                                John Mueller Photography
Old Town Camarillo is a pleasant place to walk as extra wide sidewalks and landscaping separate pedestrians from vehicular traffic
     5.1	          INTRODUCTION
                   The City of Camarillo is a rural suburban community whose focus is on the people that live, work,
                   and play within the city. Accordingly, the circulation system should provide safe, efficient, flexible,
                   and accessible transportation.
                   Camarillo is well served by a diverse transportation system. The U.S. 101/Ventura Freeway runs
                   conveniently through the southern portion of the city. Other forms of transportation include the
                   Amtrak and Metrolink passenger trains that stop in Old Town and the bus transit provided by the
                   Camarillo Area Transit (CAT). Plans are included to increase the already extensive bicycling and
                   walking networks throughout the city to provide further options for travel within the city.
                   The Circulation Element is one of the mandatory elements of the City’s General Plan. As stated in
                   Section 65302(b) of the Government Code, the Circulation Element consists of the general location
                   and extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals and other
                   public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the Land Use Element of the General Plan.
                   The primary function of the Circulation Element is to describe the circulation system for the safe and
                   efficient movement of people, goods, and services within the community’s existing and proposed
                   land use patterns.
                                                                                                      C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T           3

                                     City of Camarillo General Plan
5.2	    PURPOSE
        The Circulation Element of the General Plan discusses the various forms of circulation, transportation
        and related facilities as they apply to the City of Camarillo and its environs. The purpose of the
        circulation element is to develop and maintain a comprehensive circulation and transportation
        system that will serve the city and its environs as efficiently and safely as possible. The circulation
        pattern within the city should be a pleasant one, with vistas and route design in harmony with the
        natural topographic characteristics of the area.
        This Element addresses objectives and policies consistent with the goals and values of the
        community. In addition, the plan consists of mapped routes for major forms of circulation, such as
        streets, railways, and bikeways, which comprise a coordinated system of all modes of movement
        within Camarillo.
4    CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN
                                  Circulation Element
5.3	 GENERAL PLAN CORRELATION
     The Circulation Element addresses current transportation related issues and future challenges
     associated with the growth posed by the General Plan. Since the General Plan must be internally
     consistent, the Circulation Element has been prepared and correlated with all General Plan Elements.
     Correlation with Land Use Element
     Although the Circulation Element is a separate element within the General Plan, it is linked to the
     entire General Plan. To accomplish this, the Circulation Element correlates with the demands of basic
     traffic needs projected by the land uses (as illustrated on the Land Use Element of the General Plan)
     as well as the restrictions of the Camarillo Urban Restriction Boundary (CURB), as set forth in Section
     3.0 of the General Plan.
     The Circulation Element is required by Section 65302(b) of the Government Code to correlate with
     the Land Use Element and other elements of the General Plan. To ensure that the basic traffic needs
     projected by the land uses (as shown on the Land Use Element of the General Plan) will be met, a
     traffic model was used to evaluate whether the Circulation Element street system is sufficient for
     the current General Plan land use designations. The traffic model showed no areas of insufficient
     capacity except on the U.S. 101/Ventura Freeway; however, it is important to examine each
     development application to ensure the amount of traffic generated can be adequately served.
     When considering a land use change for a particular area under the Land Use Element of the General
     Plan, it is necessary to analyze the impacts of the project and the requirements of the Circulation
     Element. This review is necessary to make sure that the various classifications or intensities of
     development can be adequately served with the street systems planned for the immediate area. In
     addition, the residual impact of that project on the remaining system under the Circulation Element
     of the city should be examined. To assist in implementing the correlation between the Land Use
     Element and the Circulation Element, goals, objectives, and policies are provided in Section 5.5.
                                                                            C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 5
                                  City of Camarillo General Plan
     Correlation with CURB Element
     The Camarillo Urban Restriction Boundary (CURB) preserves agriculture and open space surrounding
     the city and between Camarillo and adjacent cities. The Circulation Element correlates with the
     CURB Element as it provides for the widening of certain arterial streets and the U.S. 101/Ventura
     Freeway, but the circulation map does not propose or support the adding of any new inter-regional
     arterial roadways.
     Correlation with Recreation Element
     The Circulation Element correlates with the Recreation Element, which ensures that land areas
     and programs be established to provide a wide range of recreation that will serve the people of
     Camarillo and its environs with year round recreation, by incorporating the city’s recreation locations
     within the Master Bikeway Plan and providing various forms of access to the designated recreation
     locations via streets, sidewalks, bikeways, and trails.
     Correlation with Noise Element
     The Circulation Element correlates with the Noise Element by setting goals, principles, and standards
     which aid in protecting existing regions within Camarillo where noise environments are deemed
     acceptable and existing or future areas throughout Camarillo that are considered to be noise
     sensitive. Since vehicular, train, and airport transportation are major causes of noise, standards have
     been established to ensure that within noise-sensitive locations; transportation impacts are kept to
     a minimum. An example of this is the goal to keep major transportation routes from going through
     residential neighborhoods.
     Correlation with Community Design Element
     The Circulation Element correlates with the Community Design Element by ensuring clean, well
     maintained, and complete streets with sidewalks, roadways, and bikeways. It is the goal of the City
     to have well maintained trees along the streets to uphold the aesthetic quality of the community
     consistent with the Street Median and Parkway Landscape Master Plan. Just as the community
     design goal is to ensure pleasant vistas from the road, the Circulation Element contains goals to
     ensure that the road is pleasant to view as well. This is accomplished by planted medians on larger
     streets, and natural greenery along side the streets wherever feasible. Landscaping that is both
     attractive and functional will strengthen the overall appearance of Camarillo’s streets. Refer to the
     Community Design Element for guidelines on landscape design and maintenance.
     Correlation with Safety Element
     The Circulation Element includes policies that ensure the planning, development, and maintenance
     of all forms of circulation provide safety for those using the various modes of transportation
     throughout the city. Through the coordinated effort of planning land uses and circulation, the
     adjacent land uses are protected, as well, by measures to ensure compatibility.
6 CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                                                Circulation Element
Camarillo Metrolink Station
                   Correlation with Open Space Element
                   The Circulation Element correlates with the Open Space Element by ensuring that the goals of
                   preservation of farmland and conservation of open space locations, within the city and its environs,
                   is maintained by preserving the viability of the areas protected under greenbelt and open space
                   policies. While transportation routes have been established to serve existing and future needs,
                   the plan does not include any new routes which may otherwise compromise the longevity of the
                   protected greenbelts.
                   Correlation with Housing Element
                   Finally, the Circulation Element correlates with the Housing Element by ensuring that the Circulation
                   Element adequately serves the needs of the existing residential units as well as the units proposed
                   for future housing needs. This is supported by maintaining a balance of housing, jobs, community
                   services, and open space.
                                                                                         C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 7
                                                                    City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                                                                                                                           John Mueller Photography
  City of Camarillo birds-eye perspective
       Looking for the HTML code and photo file link? Check out this FAQ.
         5.4	              EXISTING CONDITIONS
                           Camarillo is located in the center of southern Ventura County. The city is a rural suburban
  About Flickr             community        which has benefited from
                                    Community                                  Help a planned community philosophy   Apps and the API over the years as it                     Follow us
  Who we are               transitioned
                                    Communityfrom     a stop on the early
                                               Guidelines                      Needrailroad       line. Today, the city
                                                                                     help? Start here!               Flickrisforwell
                                                                                                                                mobileserved by a train line and
                                                                                                                                                                               Like us
  Take the tour                     Report abuse                               Help forum                            App Garden
                           regional    automobile routes including                 the U.S. 101/Ventura Freeway.                 In addition, the city contains an
  Flickr blog                                                                  FAQs                                  API documentation
  Jobs
                           extensive system of streets which serve the various land uses within                                  the area. Going forward, the
                                                                                                                     Developer blog
                           City looks to build upon the current multimodal system, to augment                        DeveloperitGuide
                                                                                                                                   with improvements, and to
                           manage the ever increasing demand for transportation with a balance of mobility options.
              Deutsch English Español Français        Italiano Português Tiếng Việt Bahasa Indonesia                Terms of Service | Your privacy | Yahoo! Safely | Copyright/IP Policy
                                                                                                                                        Copyright © 2012 Yahoo! Inc. All rights reserved.
http://www.flickr.com/photos/johnmueller/2680135926/sizes/l/in/photostream/ 4/3/2012
         8         CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                                  Circulation Element
5.5	 CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS, OBJECTIVES, AND
     POLICIES
     The essence of the Circulation Element lies in its goals, objectives, and policies. These are
     declarative statements that set forth the City’s approach to various issues. The definitions below are
     intended to serve as a “reader’s guide” to the goals, objectives, and policies, of this Element.
     Goal
     A general statement of desired community outcome.
     Objective
     A subset of a goal. An objective is more specific and provides measurable strategies.
     Policy
     Policies are actions that a community will undertake to meet the goals and objectives.
     ROADWAY NETWORK
     GOAL 1	 CORRELATE THE CITY’S CIRCULATION SYSTEM WITH THE POLICIES
                   OF THE GENERAL PLAN LAND USE ELEMENT.
     Objective 1.1	        Provide a circulation system which meets the needs of the
                           community in an efficient and attractive manner commensurate
                           with current and future land uses.
         Policy 1.1.1	     Residential areas shall be protected from unsafe or incompatible traffic
                           from other land uses so as to maintain quality residential areas through
                           proper land use planning. Discourage parking of non-residential vehicles
                           on residential streets.
         Policy 1.1.2	     Land use plans shall be designed to improve alternative modes of
                           transportation, provide direct routes between uses, and strive to reduce
                           the total vehicle miles traveled.
         Policy 1.1.3	     The City should explore opportunities for mixed land uses with
                           increased density and intensity near the train station.
                                                                             C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 9

                              City of Camarillo General Plan
         Policy 1.1.4	 At time of development application submittal, traffic shall be analyzed.
                       A traffic study may be required to evaluate traffic impacts and any
                       potential mitigation measures.
         Policy 1.1.5	 City standards for street design and construction shall promote safety,
                       convenience, and efficiency.
      Objective 1.2	   Provide adequate capacity for the City’s circulation needs while
                       minimizing negative impacts.
         Policy 1.2.1	 A system of local and collector streets which serve residential
                       neighborhoods should be established while protecting them from
                       intrusion of cut through traffic.
         Policy 1.2.2	 Residential neighborhood streets should be designed to avoid creating
                       local streets which will ultimately function as collectors.
         Policy 1.2.3	 Direct residential driveway access onto arterial streets should be
                       avoided.
         Policy 1.2.4	 The City shall maintain circulation system standards for roadway and
                       intersection classifications, right-of-way width, pavement width, design
                       speed, capacity, maximum grades, and associated features such as
                       medians and bicycle lanes.
         Policy 1.2.5	 The City shall continue to analyze level of service performance
                       for existing streets, roads, and highways, and make improvement
                       recommendations when performance falls below desired levels.
         Policy 1.2.6	 The City should maintain a level of service (LOS) of “C” or better on all
                       streets and intersections. Brief periods of LOS “D” during peak a.m. and
                       p.m. traffic hours may be tolerated where improving to LOS “C” would
                       be unreasonably costly.
         Policy 1.2.7	 Design of circulation infrastructure shall consider minimizing
                       environmental impacts including those related to adjacent land uses,
                       habitat, and visual resources.
         Policy 1.2.8	 A project shall be responsible for providing improvements immediately
                       adjacent to and between the limits of the project in accordance with
                       the City’s pave-out policy. A project is also responsible for its fair share
                       of improvements at other intersections, roadways, and highways where
                       significant impacts are created or where the project contributes to
                       cumulative impacts.
10 CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                         Circulation Element
  Policy 1.2.9	  On‑site circulation patterns shall be examined to ensure that traffic
                 will flow in a reasonable manner and not interfere with normal traffic
                 movement adjacent to the project or on the subject site.
Objective 1.3	   Develop measures that would reduce motor vehicle emissions,
                 consistent with regional air quality and transportation plan
                 policies.
  Policy 1.3.1 	 The City shall estimate air quality impacts of motor vehicle trips
                 generated by land use changes in accordance with Ventura County Air
                 Pollution Control District (VCAPCD) guidelines.
  Policy 1.3.2	  The City shall identify and evaluate measures that will reduce the air
                 quality impacts of motor vehicle trips that are consistent with regional
                 air quality and transportation plans.
  Policy 1.3.3	  New development shall mitigate air quality impacts, based on the
                 amount of emissions that must be reduced to bring the project below
                 the thresholds established by the VCAPCD, through contribution of
                 funds toward a Transportation Demand Management (TDM) plan.
  Policy 1.3.4	  The City shall encourage strategies to support the use of electric and
                 other alternative fuel vehicles.
                                                              C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 11

                             City of Camarillo General Plan
      GOAL 2	 PROMOTE A WELL-BALANCED, CONNECTED, ECONOMICALLY
                  FEASIBLE, AND SUSTAINABLE MULTIMODAL TRANSPORTATION
                  SYSTEM THAT PROVIDES FOR SAFE AND EFFICIENT MOVEMENT
                  ON WELL-MAINTAINED ROADS WHILE MEETING THE NEEDS OF
                  CAMARILLO RESIDENTS, BUSINESSES, EMPLOYEES, VISITORS,
                  SPECIAL NEEDS POPULATIONS, AND THE ELDERLY.
      Objective 2.1	   Minimize the amount of conflict between all modes of transit
                       (primarily automobiles, commercial vehicles, pedestrians, and
                       bicycles) in order to promote safety and efficiency.
         Policy 2.1.1	 Streets shall be designed to provide for efficient circulation movement
                       and safety through the proper use of controlled access points such as
                       those on arterial roadways.
         Policy 2.1.2	 Streetscapes shall be improved to enhance access, lighting, safety, and
                       the overall experience for pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, and
                       vehicles.
         Policy 2.1.3	 The City’s street design standards shall support public transit, bicycles,
                       and walking where appropriate and feasible based on street types.
         Policy 2.1.4	 New developments shall provide for safe and efficient roadway
                       operations through careful control of access, and overall street and
                       development design. Strive to operate new and existing streets and
                       intersections at accident rate levels below statewide averages.
         Policy 2.1.5	 Streets shall be well maintained with a citywide average pavement
                       condition index above 80.
12 CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                       Circulation Element
GOAL 3	 PROVIDE A TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM THAT IS COORDINATED
           WITH REGIONAL AGENCIES AND ENCOMPASSES A VARIETY OF
           TRANSPORTATION MODES.
Objective 3.1	   Coordinate with local, regional, and state agencies to provide a
                 comprehensive transportation system.
  Policy 3.1.1	  The City shall work with other agencies to provide consistency among
                 plans and policies, including the Ventura County Comprehensive
                 Transportation Plan.
  Policy 3.1.2	  The City shall coordinate with the California Department of
                 Transportation (Caltrans) to achieve timely construction and
                 beautification of programmed freeway and interchange improvements.
  Policy 3.1.3	  Applicable county, regional, state, and federal transportation plans,
                 programs, and proposals regarding traffic and circulation shall be
                 monitored.
  Policy 3.1.4	  The City shall encourage coordination with adjacent jurisdictions
                 to ensure that roadway projects adjacent to the city limits do not
                 negatively impact city transportation systems, as well as, preserve and
                 protect the character of Camarillo and open space protected by Save
                 Our Agricultural Resources (SOAR).
Objective 3.2	   Provide transportation systems that serve a specific circulation
                 function and provide adequate service to the community. These
                 systems include freeways, arterials, collectors and local streets,
                 walkways, trails, and bikeways.
GOAL 4	 PROVIDE ADEQUATE PARKING THAT IS ATTRACTIVE, CONVENIENT,
           EFFICIENT, AND APPROPRIATE IN CAPACITY WITHOUT
           OVERSHADOWING THE USES WHICH THE PARKING SUPPORTS.
Objective 4.1	   Ensure appropriate parking is provided and considers shared
                 parking opportunities for uses with varied peak parking periods on
                 a case-by-case basis.
Objective 4.2	   Periodically evaluate parking standards to ensure that standards
                 reflect existing parking demand and market trends. Include safety
                 considerations in parking standards and design.
                                                              C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 13
                             City of Camarillo General Plan
      PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE CIRCULATION
      GOAL 5	 PROVIDE A CITYWIDE SYSTEM OF SAFE, EFFICIENT, AND ATTRACTIVE
                  BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN ROUTES FOR COMMUTER, SCHOOL, AND
                  RECREATIONAL USE.
      Objective 5.1	   “Complete Streets” should provide safe, comfortable, and
                       attractive access for all users: pedestrians, motorists, bicyclists,
                       and public transportation riders of all ages and abilities.
         Policy 5.1.1	 Provide for streetscapes which present an aesthetically pleasing
                       appearance and promote ease of use for pedestrian and bicycle traffic
                       while also ensuring public safety.
         Policy 5.1.2	 The City shall support pedestrian and bicycle connectivity by providing a
                       network of streets with landscaping and amenities for transit, bicycles,
                       pedestrians, and people with disabilities.
         Policy 5.1.3	 Commercial, industrial, and residential areas shall provide walkways
                       and trails to promote walking where appropriate and consistent with
                       the neighborhood character. Retrofit existing facilities where applicable
                       and possible.
         Policy 5.1.4	 The City should plan for providing “Complete Streets”where appropriate
                       and feasible with bikeways, sidewalks, transit facilities, and enhanced
                       parkway landscaping, with consideration for emergency vehicle
                       operations. Make safety and convenience of bicycle riders a primary
                       concern when planning for bicycle facilities.
         Policy 5.1.5	 The City’s Street and Parkway Landscape Master Plan shall be
                       maintained to provide details on the implementation of the planting
                       and maintenance of trees along city streets.
      Objective 5.2	   Safe, adequate, and attractive sidewalks should be provided
                       throughout the city, especially between major uses, such as
                       schools, parks, shopping areas, and transit.
         Policy 5.2.1	 Support national and state Safe Route to Schools goals and work with
                       school districts to make walking and bicycling to school safer, and to
                       increase the number of children who choose to walk and bicycle.
         Policy 5.2.2	 Where pedestrian facilities are provided, they shall be accessible to
                       persons with disabilities.
         Policy 5.2.3	 Promote pedestrian-oriented features that create and sustain vibrant
                       and active streets in major places of activity.
14 CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                        Circulation Element
  Policy 5.2.4	 Provide connections between residential and non-residential areas to
                encourage walking and biking.
Objective 5.3	  Maximize opportunities for bicycle use for transportation and
                recreation.
  Policy 5.3.1	 Promote bicycle accessibility to public facilities, including schools, parks,
                and centers of activity.
  Policy 5.3.2	 Facilities for bicycle travel shall be developed as shown in Figure 5-8,
                Bikeway Network and the Camarillo Bikeways Master Plan.
  Policy 5.3.3	 Planting plans for street trees shall take into consideration shade and
                comfort for pedestrians and bicyclists. Tree types that significantly lift
                sidewalks should be avoided.
  Policy 5.3.4	 Businesses, public facilities, and multi-family residential developments
                should provide bicycle parking facilities.
  Policy 5.3.5	 The City shall encourage the development of amenities such as benches,
                shelters, trees, bicycle parking, and lighting along pedestrian and bike
                routes.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
GOAL 6	 MAINTAIN A SAFE AND EFFICIENT PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
           NETWORK THAT PROVIDES MOBILITY TO ALL CITY RESIDENTS AND
           EMPLOYEES AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO AUTOMOBILE TRAVEL.
Objective 6.1	  Promote the use of public transportation for daily trips to public
                and quasi-public places, such as the library and city hall, as well as
                to workplaces, shopping, and entertainment.
  Policy 6.1.1	 The circulation network should support public transportation for riders
                of all ages and abilities.
  Policy 6.1.2	 Bus turnouts should be considered in newly developed areas to allow
                for minimal disruption to traffic.
  Policy 6.1.3	 In conformance with federal and state requirements, the City shall
                continue to routinely evaluate the transportation needs of the public.
  Policy 6.1.4	 Support commuter rail (Metrolink) opportunities for both residents and
                employees in the City.
                                                               C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 15
                             City of Camarillo General Plan
      Objective 6.2	   Promote new development that encourages reduction in employee
                       vehicle trips and facilitates provision or expansion of transit
                       service.
         Policy 6.2.1	 The potential for transit use shall be maximized by encouraging
                       developers to work with transit service agencies.
         Policy 6.2.2	 The City shall encourage employers to reduce employee vehicular trips
                       through programs such as employee incentives and/or coordinated trip
                       management.
         Policy 6.2.3	 The City shall encourage new developments to include transit facilities
                       such as bus shelters, pads or turnouts, where appropriate, within or in
                       proximity to their development.
      Objective 6.3	   Plan for the current and future impacts/needs of the City to and
                       from the California State University at Channel Islands, including
                       the consideration of different modes of transportation.
         Policy 6.3.1	 Ongoing coordination with campus representatives regarding campus
                       development and transportation alternatives shall be conducted to
                       encourage a variety of transportation modes to serve the University.
         Policy 6.3.2	 Transit stops shall be situated at locations that are convenient for transit
                       users and promote increased transit ridership through the provision of
                       shelters, benches, bike racks on buses, and other amenities.
         Policy 6.3.3	 A multi-use trail should be developed in coordination with the City,
                       county and state to link the university with key Camarillo locations such
                       as Old Town and the train station.
16 CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN
                        Circulation Element
AVIATION, RAIL, AND GOODS MOVEMENT
GOAL 7	 MAINTAIN AND ENSURE LAND USE COMPATIBILITY WITH THE
           CAMARILLO AIRPORT.
Objective 7.1	  The Camarillo Airport shall continue to be limited as a general
                aviation airport.
  Policy 7.1.1	 The Camarillo Airport shall not be utilized for regularly scheduled
                commercial passenger services.
Objective 7.2	  Maintain compatibility of Camarillo Airport operations with
                development in the surrounding area.
  Policy 7.2.1	 The City shall continue to participate in efforts to ensure compatibility
                through compliance with the Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan and
                involvement in monitoring noise impacts upon the city.
GOAL 8	 PROVIDE FOR THE SAFE AND EFFICIENT MOVEMENT OF GOODS.
Objective 8.1	  Promote the safe and efficient movement of goods via truck and
                rail with minimum disruptions to residential areas.
  Policy 8.1.1	 The City shall identify truck routes that sustain an effective transport of
                commodities while minimizing the negative impacts on local circulation
                and on noise-sensitive land uses.
  Policy 8.1.2	 Clear signage shall be provided from freeways to truck routes into the
                City.
  Policy 8.1.3	 Rail lines and spurs shall be considered in support of commercial,
                industrial, and freight business needs.
                                                              C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 17
                               City of Camarillo General Plan
      GOAL 9	 PROMOTE RAILROAD SAFETY.
      Objective 9.1	    Promote safe railroad services to move goods, passengers, and
                        commuters into and out of the Planning Area.
         Policy 9.1.1	  The City should cooperate with regional agencies that improve rail
                        safety within the city.
      UTILITIES
      GOAL 10	 PROVIDE SAFE, RELIABLE, AND EFFICIENT UTILITY SERVICE WHILE
                  MINIMIZING UTILITY IMPACTS AND HAZARDS.
      Objective 10.1	 Ensure the provision of safe, reliable, efficient and economical
                        electricity, gas, telecommunications, and similar services while
                        minimizing potential land use conflicts, and health, safety,
                        environmental, and aesthetic impacts.
         Policy 10.1.1	 The City shall continue to coordinate with electric utility regulatory
                        agencies on transmission line routing and electromagnetic field buffers.
         Policy 10.1.2	 The location of transformers and other above-ground utility devices
                        shall be coordinated with the City.
         Policy 10.1.3	 The City shall encourage the co-location and consolidation of multiple
                        transmission lines into common transmission corridors wherever
                        possible. Secondary preferred locations are adjacent to freeway and
                        railroad corridors.
         Policy 10.1.4	 Undergrounding of utilities shall be provided in accordance with City
                        standards.
         Policy 10.1.5	 New transmission corridors shall be identified to the extent warranted
                        in all master plans and specific plans created for new growth areas.
         Policy 10.1.6	 Wireless telecommunication facilities within the public right-of-way
                        shall be designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and
                        minimize visual impact. Antennas shall be installed on existing utility or
                        light poles wherever feasible.
18 CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN
                       Circulation Element
Policy 10.1.7	 Utilities and wireless communication facilities located within the public
               right-of-way shall be designed so as to not adversely impact the use of
               the public right-of-way including the movement and visibility of vehicles
               and pedestrians.
Policy 10.1.8	 The City shall identify the locations of utility infrastructure for
               potential adverse conditions for pedestrians and bicyclists and make
               recommendations for improvement.
                                                               C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 19
                                                 City of Camarillo General Plan
U.S. 101/Ventura Freeway on-ramp at Las Posas Road
5.6	          CIRCULATION PLAN
              This section presents the existing hierarchy of the streets throughout the city and provides solutions that
              balance vehicular circulation with bikes and pedestrians. It is important to establish a well-connected
              city with a safe system of streets and non-motorized facilities to encourage a variety of transportation
              methods.
    20      CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN
                                    Circulation Element
5.6.1	 Complete Streets
       Assembly Bill 1358, The California Complete Streets Act, requires the California Office of Planning
       and Research (OPR) to provide guidance to local jurisdictions on how to plan for multimodal
       transportation networks in general plan circulation elements. As of January 2011, all cities and
       counties, upon the next update of their circulation element, must plan for the development of
       multimodal transportation networks. This network should consist of complete streets which are
       designed and constructed to serve all users of streets, roads, and highways, regardless of their age or
       ability, or whether they are driving, walking, bicycling, or taking transit.
       This element introduces policies to provide streets, where appropriate and feasible, to be
       designed to accommodate all modes of travel. From a circulation perspective, this translates into
       transportation planing that responsibly manages capital infrastructure costs, and supports and
       creates a well-connected multimodal network to increase travel choices. This has many benefits
       besides providing a well-finished and complete system. It aids in the promotion of, and is a viable
       alternative to, vehicular transportation.
                                     What Are Complete Streets?
                     Complete Streets are roadways designed and operated to enable safe,
                     attractive, and comfortable access and travel for all users including
                     pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, movers of commercial goods, and public
                     transportation users of all ages and abilities.
5.6.2	 Hierarchy of Streets
       This section defines and designates the various types of streets throughout the city. The designations
       provide for a clear vision of the purpose and intended capacity for each of the City’s streets. The
       designations are as follows: arterials, both primary and secondary, major and minor collectors,
       industrial collectors, and local streets. Each designation serves a particular purpose and ensures that
       aesthetic and practical vehicular transportation needs of an area are met.
       The level of service (LOS) designation of a roadway or an intersection indicates whether the capacity
       is adequate to handle the volume of traffic using the facility. LOS “A” indicates excellent service
       level, with minimal stacking of vehicles, while LOS “F” describes densely congested conditions. A
       description of service level categories is provided in Table 5-1.
       U.S. 101/Ventura Freeway
       The City of Camarillo and its environs are currently served by the U.S. 101/Ventura Freeway
       (U.S 101), which runs in an east-west direction through the city. The U.S. 101 is also the primary
       vehicle route connecting Ventura county to Los Angeles and Santa Barbara counties. The California
       Department of Transportation (Caltrans) is responsible for maintenance and operation of U.S. 101.
       Access to U.S. 101 is provided at the following locations in Camarillo: Camarillo Springs Road, Santa
       Rosa Road/Pleasant Valley Road, Flynn Road, Petit Street, Lewis Road (via Daily Drive and Ventura
       Boulevard), Carmen Drive, Las Posas Road, Springville Drive, and Central Avenue.
                                                                                C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 21

                                               City of Camarillo General Plan
              Street Standards
              To provide continuity that supports the functional hierarchy of streets, the following street standards
              for each type of road are provided on the following pages. It should be noted that variations of these
              standards may occur to accommodate turn lanes and special conditions.
 5.6.3	       Arterials
              Arterial streets are intended to provide maximum movement of traffic to-and-from major traffic
              generators, such as commercial centers and industrial districts. They also collect and distribute traffic
              to-and-from freeways. This plan recognizes two classes of arterial streets: primary and secondary.
  Table 5-1 - Level of Service Definitions
     Level of                                                                                     Arterials ADT**
      Service        V/C Ratio*                         Intersections
                                                                                           2-Lane      4-Lane       6-Lane
                                      EXCELLENT: No vehicle waits longer than
         A            0.00-0.60       one red light and no approach phase is                5,000      18,000        28,000
                                      fully used.
                                      VERY GOOD: An occasional approach phase
                                      is fully utilized; many drivers begin to feel
         B            0.61-0.70       somewhat restricted within groups of                  8,000      21,000        32,000
                                      vehicles.
                                      GOOD: Occasionally drivers may have to
                                      wait through more than one red light;
         C            0.71-0.80                                                            10,000      24,000        36,000
                                      backups may develop behind turning
                                      vehicles.
                                      FAIR: Delays may be substantial during
                                      portions of the rush hours, but enough
         D            0.81-0.90       lower volume periods occur to permit                 12,000      27,000        40,000
                                      clearing of developing lines, preventing
                                      excessive backups.
                                      POOR: Represents the most vehicles
                                      intersection approaches can accommodate;
         E            0.91-1.00                                                            13,000      30,000        45,000
                                      may be long lines of waiting vehicles
                                      through several signal cycles.
                                      FAILURE: Backups from nearby locations
                                      or on cross streets may restrict or
                       Greater
                                      prevent movement of vehicles out of the
         F              than                                                                     NOT MEANINGFUL
                                      intersection approaches. Tremendous
                         1.00
                                      delays with continuously increasing queue
                                      lengths.
 * = Volume/Capacity
 ** = Average Daily Trips, “rule of thumb” only. These figures are affected by intersections (number and configuration), degree
 of access control, number of lanes, grades, design, geometrics, truck traffic, etc.
22      CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                                                    Circulation Element
                 Primary Arterial Streets
                 Primary arterial streets are intended to provide for the movement of large volumes of traffic between
                 major traffic generators. Direct vehicular access should be provided to and from these arterials at limited
                 intervals, through the use of well‑designed, controlled, and safe intersections. Parking should be limited
                 to emergency parking. Bike lanes, bike paths, and bike routes where shown on the Bikeway Master Plan
                 also need to be provided.
                 The primary arterial is designed to accommodate four to six lanes of traffic with a capacity of 30,000 to
                 45,000 ADT (Average Daily Trips). A LOS (Level of Service) of “C” can accommodate between 24,000 and
                 36,000 ADT. Refer to Table 5-1 for level of service definitions.
                 A median divider is required, which can provide a method to channel traffic, facilitate left turn
                 movements, and improve the visual appearance of the arterial corridor. Median openings should only be
                 allowed at intersections and major driveways.
      10'-0"     5'-0"       12'-0"       12'-0"           12'-0"                14'-0"                 12'-0"           12'-0"          12'-0"     5'-0"     10'-0"
  Sidewalk
     Sidewalkand Bike
                  Bike    Travel  Lane
                           Travel Lane Travel  Lane
                                       Travel Lane     Travel
                                                        Travel Lane
                                                               Lane               Turn
                                                                          Turn Lane/Median           Travel  Lane
                                                                                                      Travel Lane     Travel  Lane
                                                                                                                      Travel Lane     Travel   Lane
                                                                                                                                       Travel Lane  Bike
                                                                                                                                                    Bike  Sidewalk
                                                                                                                                                            Sidewalk and
  Landscaping
        and      Lane
                 Lane                                                       Lane/Median                                                             Lane
                                                                                                                                                    Lane  Landscaping
                                                                                                                                                               and
    Landscape                                                                                                                                              Landscape
                                                                                116’-0”
                                                                                116'-0"
                                                                     Primary Arterial
                                                                    Primary  Arterial Right of Way
                                                                                        Right-of-Way
                                                     Conceptual Primary Arterial Street
                                                     Additional Width May be Required for Turn Lanes
Figure 5-1 Conceptual Primary Arterial Street
                 The General Plan designates the following routes as primary arterial streets:
                       •	 Las Posas Road – From Pleasant Valley Road to Ponderosa Drive
                       •	 Lewis/Somis Road – From Pleasant Valley Road to northern city limit
                       •	 Pleasant Valley Road – From western city limit to the U.S. 101/Ventura Freeway
                       •	 Santa Rosa Road – From U.S. 101/Ventura Freeway to eastern city limit
                                                                                                                  C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T      23

                                                City of Camarillo General Plan
                 Secondary Arterial Streets
                 Secondary arterial streets make up the bulk of the urban arterial circulation network within the
                 City of Camarillo and its environs. Secondary arterials, therefore, are the foundation of an efficient,
                 attractive, and safe circulation system. The Street Median and Parkway Landscape Master Plan
                 provides a unique streetscape theme for a major portion of the city’s street medians and parkways.
                 Implementation of this document is nearly complete which helps create a unified streetscape theme
                 for major streets and intersections. Bike lanes, bike paths, and bike routes where shown on the
                 Bikeway Master Plan also need to be provided.
                 Secondary arterial streets provide for the movement of vehicles to and from collectors streets,
                 primary arterial streets, and freeways. They usually have four lanes (two lanes in each direction)
                 and a landscaped median divider. Median openings in secondary arterials should be limited to
                 intersections and major driveways.
                 The secondary arterial can accommodate approximately 24,000 ADT at a LOS of “C.” Capacity is
                 approximately 30,000 ADT at level of service “E.” Refer to Table 5-1 for level of service definitions.
      10'-0"       5'-0"      12'-0"           13'-0"                 14'-0"                 13'-0"         12'-0"     5'-0"    10'-0"
  Sidewalk
     Sidewalkand  Bike
                   Bike    TravelLane
                          Travel  Lane     Travel
                                            TravelLane
                                                   Lane                Turn
                                                               Turn Lane/Median           Travel  Lane
                                                                                          Travel Lane    Travel
                                                                                                       Travel    Lane
                                                                                                              Lane    Bike
                                                                                                                       Bike  Sidewalk
                                                                                                                               Sidewalkand
  Landscaping
        and       Lane
                  Lane                                            Lane/Median                                         Lane
                                                                                                                       Lane  Landscaping
                                                                                                                                  and
    Landscape                                                                                                                 Landscape
                                                                     94’-0”
                                                                      94'-0"
                                                         Secondary Arterial
                                                        Secondary  ArterialRight of Way
                                                                             Right-of-Way
                                        Conceptual Secondary Arterial Street
                                          Additional Width May be Required for Turn Lanes
 Figure 5-2 Conceptual Secondary Arterial Street
24         CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                           Circulation Element
The following are designated as secondary arterial streets:
   •	 Adolfo Road – From Ponderosa Drive to Camarillo Springs Road and U.S. 101/Ventura
        Freeway interchange
   •	 Arneill Road – From Las Posas Road to Ventura Boulevard
   •	 Camarillo Springs Road – From U.S. 101/Ventura Freeway to the Camarillo Springs Golf
        Course
   •	 Carmen Drive – From Las Posas Road to Pleasant Valley Road
   •	 Central Avenue – From the westerly city limit to Verdulera Street
   •	 Dawson Drive – From Petit Street to Mission Oaks Boulevard
   •	 Earl Joseph Drive - From West Ponderosa Drive to Las Posas Road
   •	 Flynn Road – From Adolfo Road to Upland Road
   •	 Las Posas Road – From West Ponderosa Drive to Lewis Road
   •	 Mission Oaks Boulevard – From Dawson Drive to Upland Road
   •	 Petit Street – From Dawson Drive to Village at the Park Drive
   •	 Ponderosa Drive – From Antonio Avenue to Central Avenue
   •	 Ridgeview Street – From Camarillo Springs Road to Pleasant Valley Road
   •	 Springville Drive - From West Ventura Boulevard to West Ponderosa Drive
   •	 Upland Road - From Lewis Road to Santa Rosa Road
   •	 Ventura Boulevard - From Lewis Road to Las Posas Road
   •	 Verdulera Street - From West Ventura Boulevard to Central Avenue
   •	 Village at the Park Drive - From Petit Street to Village Commons Boulevard
   •	 West Ventura Boulevard - Las Posas Road to Verdulera Street
                                                                    C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 25

                                                   City of Camarillo General Plan
     5.6.4	          Collectors
                     Collector streets are intended as the intermediate route to convey traffic between local area streets,
                     which contain either origins or destinations, and arterial streets. This plan recognizes three types of
                     collector streets: major, minor, and industrial.
                     Major Collectors
                     The major collector street system is intended as the intermediate route to accommodate traffic
                     between intra-regional travel corridors, such as shopping centers, parks, and schools. This system
                     includes those streets which provide for traffic movements within larger areas other than minor
                     collectors. Traffic using the major collector streets should have either an origin or destination within
                     the larger local area or routes with higher classification. Bike lanes, bike paths, or bike routes should
                     be provided where shown on the Bikeway Master Plan.
              10'-0"         8'-0"     5'-0"       13'-0"            12'-0"                   13'-0"    5'-0"   8'-0"      10'-0"
         Sidewalk
            Sidewalkand   Parking
                           Parking   Bike
                                       Bike     Travel
                                                 Travel Lane
                                                        Lane Turn
                                                               Turn Lane/Median
                                                                    Lane/Median            Travel  Lane
                                                                                            Travel Lane Bike
                                                                                                         Bike Parking
                                                                                                               Parking Sidewalk
                                                                                                                         Sidewalk and
         Landscaping
               and                   Lane
                                      Lane                                                              Lane
                                                                                                         Lane          Landscaping
                                                                                                                            and
           Landscape                                                                                                    Landscape
                                                                     84’-0”
                                                                         84'-0"
                                                             Primary Arterial Right-of-Way
                                             Conceptual Major Collector Street
                                              Lanes, Dimensions, and Right-of-Way Vary
Figure 5-4 Conceptual Major Collector Street
    26       CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                               Circulation Element
The following are designated as major collectors:
   •	 Camarillo Center Drive – From Las Posas Road to Ventura Boulevard
   •	 Crestview Avenue – From Las Posas Road to Valley Vista Drive
   •	 Daily Drive – From Las Posas Road to Lewis Road
   •	 Los Pueblos Drive – From Santa Rosa Road to Adolfo Road
   •	 Oak Canyon Road – From Santa Rosa Road to Mission Oaks Boulevard
   •	 Rosewood Avenue – From Las Posas Road to Daily Drive
   •	 Temple Avenue - From Las Posas Road to Lewis Road
   •	 Verdugo Way - From Santa Rosa Road to Camino Ruiz
   •	 Village Commons Boulevard - From Pleasant Valley Road to Village at the Park Drive
   •	 Woodcreek Road - From Santa Rosa Road to Upland Road
                                                                     C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 27

                                               City of Camarillo General Plan
                   Minor Collectors
                   The minor collector street system is intended as the route to accommodate traffic between locally
                   important traffic generators. This system includes those streets which provide for traffic movements
                   within a relatively small area, such as a residential neighborhood. Traffic using the minor collector
                   streets should have either an origin or destination within the local area. Bike lanes, bike paths, or
                   bike routes should be provided where shown on the Bikeway Master Plan.
               10'-0"             8'-0"             12'-0"                  12'-0"           8'-0"           10'-0"
           Sidewalk and         Parking         Travel                                                  Sidewalk and
             Sidewalk
           Landscaping           Parking         TravelLane
                                                        Lane            Travel
                                                                       Travel   Lane
                                                                              Lane        Parking
                                                                                           Parking         Sidewalk
                                                                                                        Landscaping
                                                                60’-0”
                                                                60'-0"
                                                        Collector and Local
                                             Conceptual Minor Collector Street
                                               Lanes, Dimensions, and Right-of-Way Vary
Figure 5-3 Conceptual Minor Collector Street
    28      CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                               Circulation Element
The following are designated as minor collectors:
   •	 Avenida Acaso – From Adolfo Road to Flynn Road
   •	 Avenida de Aprisa - From Ponderosa Drive to Crestview Avenue
   •	 Beardsley Road – From Ramona Drive to Central Avenue
   •	 Bridgehampton Way – From Pleasant Valley Road to Davenport Street
   •	 Crestview Avenue – From Valley Vista Drive to Avenida de Aprisa
   •	 Davenport Street – From Bridgehampton Way to Village at the Park Drive
   •	 Fieldcrest Drive – From Mission Oaks Boulevard to Woodcreek Road
   •	 Lantana Street – From Daily Drive to Las Posas Road
   •	 Mobil Avenue – From Daily Drive to Dunningan Street
   •	 Modesto Avenue and Dunnigan Street - From Carmen Drive to Arneill Road
   •	 Mission Drive, West Loop Drive, North Loop Drive, East Loop Drive and Loma Drive - North
        of Las Posas Road
   •	 Paseo Camarillo - From Carmen Drive to Rosewood Avenue
   •	 Pickwick Drive and Hartnell Street - From Mobil Avenue to Temple Avenue
   •	 Rancho Calleguas - From Adolfo Road to Mission Oaks Boulevard
   •	 Temple Avenue - From Las Posas Road to Amber Drive
   •	 Valley Vista Drive, Calle Aurora, Camino Corcordia, Ramona Drive - From Crestview Avenue
        to Beardsley Road
   •	 Verdugo Way - From Camino Ruiz to Camino Carillo
   •	 Village at the Park Drive – From Village Commons Boulevard to Davenport Street
                                                                      C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 29

                                                City of Camarillo General Plan
                 Industrial Collectors
                 The industrial collector street system is intended as the intermediate route to accommodate traffic
                 between local industrial streets and arterial streets. This system includes those streets that provide
                 for traffic movements within a relatively small area, such as a commercial or industrial zone. Traffic
                 using the collector street should have either an origin or destination within the local area. Individual
                 streets are designed specifically to facilitate truck traffic, which is an element of the industrial
                 district. The accommodation of larger and heavier vehicles, which may be necessary in this area,
                 requires that lanes be wider than normal (13 feet) and pavement be thicker. Parking should not be
                 permitted on industrial streets in order to maintain adequate clearance for truck traffic. Bike lanes,
                 bike paths, or bike routes should be provided where shown on the Bikeway Master Plan.
           8'-0"               13'-0"                  13'-0"                  13'-0"           13'-0"           8'-0"
      Sidewalk and          Travel Lane            Travel                                                    Sidewalk and
         Sidewalk
      Landscaping           Travel Lane             TravelLane
                                                           Lane            Travel
                                                                            Travel Lane
                                                                                   Lane     Travel
                                                                                             Travel Lane
                                                                                                    Lane      Sidewalk
                                                                                                             Landscaping
                                                                  68’-0”
                                                                  68'-0"
                                                                Industrial
                                      Conceptual Industrial Collector Street
                                           Lanes, Dimensions, and Right-of-Way Vary
 Figure 5-5 Conceptual Industrial Collector Street
30       CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                           Circulation Element
The following are designated as industrial collectors:
   •	 Adohr Lane – From Pancho Road to Ridgeview Street
   •	 Flynn Road – From Mission Oaks Boulevard to Adolfo Road
   •	 Pancho Road – From Pleasant Valley Road to Howard Road
                                                              C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 31

                                         City of Camarillo General Plan
 5.6.5	      Local Streets
             The primary functions of local streets are to provide vehicular access to abutting properties and
             to move smaller amounts of traffic in and out of specific neighborhoods. Local streets should not
             carry through traffic or buses and heavy trucks, except in commercial and industrial districts. Higher-
             density residential areas and commercial areas should not use local roads for access where they go
             through lower-density residential neighborhoods.
             The basic design of the Local Street is to encourage slower traffic speeds through neighborhoods and
             discourage through traffic.
             Parking is an auxiliary function of the local street. On‑street parking is generally provided but may
             need to be restricted for specific reasons such as safety or visibility in limited situations.
             Local streets are not individually identified in this plan; however, all are recognized as an integral part
             of the circulation system.
               10'-0"             8'-0"          12'-0"                  12'-0"           8'-0"           10'-0"
           Sidewalk and         Parking      Travel                                                  Sidewalk and
             Sidewalk
           Landscaping          Parking       TravelLane
                                                     Lane            Travel
                                                                    Travel   Lane
                                                                           Lane         Parking
                                                                                         Parking        Sidewalk
                                                                                                     Landscaping
                                                             60’-0”
                                                             60'-0"
                                                     Collector and Local
                                            Conceptual Local Street
                                         Lanes, Dimensions, and Right-of-Way Vary
 Figure 5-6 Conceptual Local Street
32      CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                                   Circulation Element
5.7	 PROGRAMS
     Traffic Mitigation Fee
     To maintain circulation efficiency and capacity throughout the City of Camarillo, it is necessary to
     improve the street system to accommodate growing use and demand. The widening of a road,
     extension of a street, development of a bridge, and other capital improvement projects all require
     funding and are necessitated by the development that occurs within the city; therefore, the City has
     instituted a traffic mitigation fee. The mitigation fee aids in funding and building the infrastructure
     necessary to sustain the levels of service the City maintained prior to any new development
     occurring. This impact fee is required of any new development. The fee is assessed by calculating the
     fair share that a particular development should pay based on the amount of impact that a particular
     development will have on the street system. The traffic impact fee allows the capital improvements
     to be made as efficiently and economically as possible, while requiring each development to
     contribute to the circulation system on an equitable basis.
     Traffic Forecast Model
     The City utilizes a computer model that evaluates the Circulation Element in conjunction with the
     Land Use Element to make sure that they are compatible. Existing land use and street system data
     are placed within the model and the outcomes are tested against existing traffic volumes collected in
     locations throughout the city. After the model mimics this empirical data, future General Plan Land
     Use and Circulation Element data are entered into the model and processed to validate that the
     elements are compatible.
     State Bill 375
     Senate Bill 375 was passed by the state in 2008, and is in keeping with the state’s goals to decrease
     greenhouse gas emissions, as set by the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (Assembly Bill 32).
     Senate Bill 375 requires that every Municipal Planning Organization, including Southern California
     Association of Governments (SCAG), must create a Sustainable Community Strategy (SCS) which
     will provide a plan for their region to decrease greenhouse gas emissions produced by passenger
     vehicles by decreasing the vehicle miles traveled through future land use planning.
     Capital Improvement Plans (CIP)
     The City of Camarillo monitors the street system and regularly updates a list of capital improvements
     that, through modeling and street studies, show the projects are essential for the street system to
     continue to meet the transportation needs of the city.
                                                                              C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 33

                                     City of Camarillo General Plan
 5.8	    PLANNED IMPROVEMENTS
         The circulation network shown in Figure 5-7 identifies the functional classifications of key routes at
         build-out. To achieve the standard dimensions and capacity assumptions made in the circulation
         network diagram, as well as a balance between existing and future land use and roadway service,
         improvements to the roadway network will be needed. New arterial and collector roads will
         provide access to the residential, commercial, and industrial areas, connecting those areas with
         the existing local and regional transportation system. New local roads in neighborhoods will serve
         those residents. The new roadways will continue the street network that currently characterizes
         Camarillo’s circulation network, following the spacing and access opportunities in a similar manner,
         and creating connections between new development areas and established neighborhoods,
         employment centers, shopping centers, and other destinations.
         Additionally, intersection improvements will be required at major intersections along new
         roadways and improved roadways, including but not limited to turn channelization, signalization,
         and construction of pedestrian and bikeway facilities. Street improvements include both the
         construction of new streets in specific plan areas as well as improvements to existing roadway
         segments within the current urbanized area.
         The future circulation network is included in Figure 5-7. No General Plan amendment is required if
         the general location, anticipated level of service, and connections to street network are maintained.
         Designs for the proposed roads should conform to the typical street widths and design elements
         defined in Section 5.6. All street designs are subject to review and approval by the Public Works
         Department and the City Engineer.
34    CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                              µ                                                                          Circulation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LOOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D   R.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          µ
                UPL
                      A ND
                                  RD
                                        .                                                                                                                                                               R.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ND
                                                   D .
                                                 R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      UPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SIO
                                    SL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MIS
                                       EY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                   D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RD
                         BE
                           AR                                                                                        R   D.                                                                                                                                                                            IS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D.                                                                                                                                            RD.
                                                                  D    .                                      A                                                                                              AS R                                                                                     LE
                                                                                                            OS                                                                                   POS                                                                                              .
                                                              BLV                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R         W
                                                                                                     R                                                                                       LAS                                                                                          D                                                                      REEK
                                                       S                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SA
                                                     AK                                      TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RD                                                                                                                         .
                                 N               O                                       N                                                                                                                                                                                       O                                                                                                                                                RD
                             SIO                                                      SA                                                                                                                                                                                    ER                                                                               WOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OS
                            S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D                              FL
                          I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C
                         M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N                                    YN                                                                                   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D.                              R
                       CE                                                                                                                        .                                                                                                             PO                                                                                                                  BLV            K    .          TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OA N RD
                                                                            CRESTVIEW AVE.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                              NT                                                                                                              DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SA
                                                                                                                                          H                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ARNEILL RD.
                                RA                                                                                                     EP                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ION                              O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NY
O                                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ¬
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          «                                                            MIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TEMPLE AVE.
                                    L                                                                                              JO
       RD                                   AV
                                                                                                                          Street L                                                                                                                                                        34
                                                                                                                              AR Legend
                                                                       W. P
                                                                                                                                                                     ROSEWOOD AVE.
            .                                  E .                          O   NDE                                           E
                                                                                   RO S                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AD
                                                                                       A DR                                       Freeway                                                                                                                                                                          OL
                                                                                              .                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RD
                                                                                                                                                                                           CARMEN DR.
                                                                                                   .                              Freeway On/Off Ramp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .                                                                                                Street Legend
                                                                                              SPRINGVI LL       £
                                                                                                                ¤
                                                                                                                                  Primary Arterial
                                                                                                                101
                                                                                                         E DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Freeway
                                                                                                                                  Secondary Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Freeway On/Off Ramp
                                                                                                                                  Future Secondary Arterial                                              DAILY DR.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Primary Arterial
                                                                                                                                  Industrial Collector Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Secondary Arterial
                                                                                          W. VENTURA BLVD.                                                                           DR.
                                                                                                                                  Major Collector Street                 TER
                                                                                                                                                                     CEN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Future Secondary Arterial
                                                       £
                                                       ¤ 101                                                                      Minor Collector Street RILLO
                                                                                                                                                 LAS POSAS RD.
                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                   CAM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Industrial Collector Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LEWIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RID                                                                                                       Major Collector Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VILLAGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RD.                                        COMMONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .                 £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¤   101                                                          Minor Collector Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BLVD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ADOHR LN.
                                                                                                     PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                                                   µ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PANCHO RD.
                                                          0         0.25 0.5                                     1                  1.5                          2
                                                                                                                                                                  Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0        0.25 0.5                        1                     1.5                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Miles
                                             .
                                        RD
   .                                A
 D                                OS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 5-7 Circulation Network
                              R
                     N   TA
                  SA
                                                                                                                Figure 5-7 Circulation Network
                                            Street Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T             35
                                                         Freeway                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 5-7 Circulation Network
                                                         Freeway On/Off Ramp
                                                         Primary Arterial

     Circulation Element
This Page Was Left Blank Intentionally
                                       C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T
                                                     Circulation Element
Scenic Class III bike route
     5.9	              MODES OF TRANSPORTATION
     5.9.1	           Circulation Safety
                      The City of Camarillo places great importance on pedestrians and cyclists and their contribution
                      to a living and thriving environment. In order to promote increased usage of these modes of
                      transportation, a safe transportation network should continue to be developed. Where practical, the
                      network should include multi-use trails, separate bike lanes, bridges, and overpasses that increase
                      separation between bike traffic and vehicular traffic.
     5.9.2	           Pedestrian Circulation
                      Walking is a healthy and sustainable form of transportation being enjoyed by a growing number of
                      people everyday. The primary reasons for walking include: health, exercise, pleasure, and as the
                      most basic mode of transportation. Therefore, it is a goal of the City to provide safe, adequate and
                      attractive sidewalks. It is also critical for these walkways to be built in accordance with state and
                      federal guidelines.
                      A system of pedestrian walkways should be established in new neighborhoods, taking into
                      consideration the provision of pathways as access routes to sources of employment, shopping, and
                      recreation, and interconnects to allow for access throughout the community. Walkways should be
                      separated from vehicle traffic (except where street crossing is required) and should be of sufficient
                      dimension to allow, at minimum, two persons to walk side-by-side and to accommodate the
                      disabled. Lighting should be considered and be designed to enhance the visual quality of the area.
                      Special study should be given to the hillside and rural areas to determine the need and design of
                      walkways.
                                                                                                 C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 37
                                         City of Camarillo General Plan
        Opportunities to provide landscaped parkway focal points should be explored, which may include areas for
        pedestrian rest stops, trail heads, landscape enhancements, community art, parking, or other similar accent
        features. These areas would include widened parkways, small remnant parcels or other unique features that
        would be functional and/or decorative. More information is provided in the Community Design Element
        (Section 10.6.2).
5.9.3	  Trails
        Trails provide a recreational form of circulation for hiking or exercising. Currently, the City maintains trails
        within the “F” Canyon area and along a portion of Calleguas Creek. These are popular locations for the
        residents in the area. It is proposed that additional trails be established, including multi-use trails, in concert
        with open space areas and flood control areas, such as Calleguas Creek and Conejo Creek. Ultimately, a trail
        system leading to CSUCI is recommended. Since most of the recommended trail system is in the County
        unincorporated area, multi-agency coordination will be required. In the meantime, as opportunities arise,
        additional trail segments are desired so long as maintenance and security issues can be addressed.
5.9.4	  Bikeway System
        Camarillo enjoys a fine setting and climate for increasing the use of bikeways as a mode of transportation, as
        well as continuing to support recreational use of the city’s bikeway infrastructure. The Circulation Element
        identifies a network of bikeways to serve as a circulation system between housing, schools, recreation, and
        commercial areas based on the City’s Bikeway Master Plan. The City of Camarillo promotes bicycling as a
        cost-effective and achievable means of reducing traffic congestion and improving air quality in Camarillo. This
        Chapter outlines four types of bikeway facilities per the Camarillo Bikeway Master Plan and welcomes other
        innovative bikeway solutions that encourage safe biking and are consistent with the intent of the Circulation
        Element and the Bikeway Master Plan.
        The Bikeway Master Plan was originally adopted in 1999 and then updated in 2008. The Bikeway Master Plan
        incorporates a mixture of Class I bike paths, Class II bike lanes, Class III bike routes, and shoulder bike routes
        within the city. Locations of these bikeway facilities are shown in Figure 5-8, Bikeway Network.
        Class I – Bike Paths
        Bicycle or multi-use paths are separated from roadways with at-grade or grade-separate roadway crossings.
        Bike paths are typically located beside long, uninterrupted corridors, such as rivers, creeks, flood control
        channels, railroad rights-of-way, on properties with schools and parks, and in areas where separate bike
        paths have been committed for development in adopted plans. These paths should be placed along scenic
        areas for recreational riders as well.
        Class II – Bike Lanes
        Bike lanes provide a striped lane for one-way travel on the right of each direction of vehicle traffic along a
        roadway. Bicycle lanes are four feet (4’) to six feet (6’) wide. They are typically located along collector and
        arterial roadways that provide direct connections through the city’s street system.
  38   CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                                      Circulation Element
       Class III – Bike Routes
       Bike routes are those in which bicycles share the roadway with automobiles and are only identified
       by bike route signs. In Camarillo, bike routes are typically on low-volume, residential streets for travel
       to-and-from bike lanes or schools.
       Shoulder Bike Routes
       Shoulder bike routes are shared roadways, with no bikeway signing, that provide continuous striped
       shoulders to improve safety and convenience for bicyclists. The shoulder bike routes are typically
       located along state routes and long collector streets.
       Figure 5-8 is the adopted Bikeway Network from the Camarillo Bikeway Master Plan.
5.9.5	 Public Transit
       Public transit is an important part of the transportation program and provides services to meet the
       mobility demand within the city.
       At the present time, the City of Camarillo operates an intracity public bus transit system. The City
       owns the buses and contracts with a private company to provide drivers and maintenance. One
       bus is operated on a fixed schedule and fixed route from Leisure Village to Camarillo’s community
       center. It operates every day of the week, with the exception of Sunday. Pamphlets of the route and
       schedule are available at City Hall and online at the City’s website. The other buses are used within
       the City of Camarillo’s Dial-A-Ride service, which accommodates the needs of American Disabilities
       Act (ADA)-defined disabilities, and is a general service Dial-A-Ride, transporting patrons any where
       within the city limits. Camarillo Area Transit (CAT) carries a ridership of approximately 8,000 a month
       and 1,200 of that ridership is on the fixed-route bus.
       In addition, the Ventura County Transportation Commission provides several Vista bus system
       local stops in Camarillo. These buses provide intercity transportation throughout Ventura County;
       specifically, the cities of Thousand Oaks, Moorpark, Simi Valley, Camarillo, Oxnard, and Ventura. The
       Vista system also has a Coastal Express connection to Santa Barbara and Goleta, as well as a route
       that makes several runs a day from the city’s Metrolink station to California State University Channel
       Islands.
                                                                                C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 39

                           City of Camarillo General Plan
                      This Page Was Left Blank Intentionally
40 CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                               µ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    µ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Circulation Element
UPL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UPL
        A ND                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AND
                    RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RD.
                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IS                                                        RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       RD.                                                                                              LE
                                                                                                                                                                                           PO    SAS                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .                    W
                                                                                                                                                                                       LAS                                                                                    D                                                                                    REEK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RD
                                                                                                         .                                                                                                                                                           O                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                    RD                                                                                                                                                          ER                                                                                             WOOD                                                             RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FL
                                D.                 SA                                                                                                                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D                                              YN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C                     .     CA                         SA
                             BLV CRESTVIEW AVE. RO                                                                                                                                                                                                 PO                                                                                                                               LVD                               RO
             CE            S                                                                                                      .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B                   K    .       TA
                       OA
                          K                     A                                                                              DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             KS                  OA N RD      AN
                                              NT
              NT                                                                                                           H
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ARNEILL RD.
                R A ON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ION                            O        S
                                            A                                                                           EP
                   I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ¬
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              «
                                          S                                                                            S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S
                 SL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TEMPLE AVE.
             MIS A                                    W. P                                                     RL
                                                                                                                    JO                                                                                                                                                        34
                                                                                                                                                             ROSEWOOD AVE.
                                 VE
                                   .                       O   NDE
                                                                  RO S                                       EA
                                                                      A DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AD
                                                                             .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RD
                                                                                                                                                                                   CARMEN DR.
                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .                                                                                                Existing and Future Facilities
                                                                             SPRINGVI LL       £
                                                                                               ¤101
                                                                                        E DR
                                                                                                      Existing and Future Facilities                                                            DAILY DR.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Class I - Bike Path
                                                                                                                  Class 1 - Bike Path                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Future Class I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Class II - Bike Lane
                                                                         W. VENTURA BLVD.                         Future Class 1                                             DR.
                                                                                                                                                                     TER
                                                                                                                  Class 2 - Bike Lane                            CEN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Future Class II
                                                                                                                                                           LLO
                                                                                                                                                       A RI
                                                                                                                                  LAS POSAS RD.
                                                                                                                  Future Class 2                  C A M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Class III - Bike Route
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LEWIS
                                                                                                                  Class 3 - Bike Route                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Future Class III
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VILLAGE
                                           £
                                           ¤
                                           101                                                                    Shoulder Route
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RD.                                              COMMONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¤
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                101                                                        Shoulder Route
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BLVD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ADOHR LN.
                                                                                    PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PLEASANT VALLEY RD.
                                            0
                                                 µ  0.25 0.5                                    1                    1.5                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           uas C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Calleg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 reek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PANCHO RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0             0.25 0.5                     1                 1.5                    2
                                                                                                                                                        Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Miles
                         .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 5-8 Bikeway Network
                    RD
               SA
            RO
   N   TA
SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure    5-8 Bikeway Network           41
                                                                                               Figure 5-8 Bikeway Network
                     Street Legend
                                       Freeway
                                       Freeway On/Off Ramp

     Circulation Element
This Page Was Left Blank Intentionally
                                       C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T
                     Thumbnail (100 x 67)
                                                                     Circulation Element
                                                                                                                                                             John Mueller Photography
   Tank car on a spur line in Camarillo
          5.9.6	             Rail Transportation
       Looking for the HTML code and photo file link? Check out this FAQ.
                             Union Pacific Railroad tracks traverse the City of Camarillo providing both freight and passenger
                             service. Camarillo is served by Metrolink-Southern California Regional Rail Authority’s regional
                             passenger train system. The Camarillo train station is located at the intersection of Lewis Road and
                             Ventura Boulevard. What was once a temporary stop, made available by funds through the Federal
  About Flickr               Emergency
                                     CommunityManagement Agency (FEMA)         Help       after the Northridge Apps
                                                                                                                  earthquake
                                                                                                                         and the API in 1994, has become a Follow us
  Who we are                         Community Guidelines                      Need help? Start here!             Flickr for mobile
                             permanent station and valuable asset to Camarillo.                                                                                              Like us
  Take the tour                      Report abuse                              Help forum                         App Garden
  Flickr blog                                                                  FAQs                               API documentation
  Jobs                       Camarillo’s Metrolink station serves as a stop for Amtrak’s Pacific                        SurfLiner
                                                                                                                  Developer   blog      Route, which stops in
                             Camarillo as it travels to-and-from San Luis Obispo and San Diego;                           Amtrak’s
                                                                                                                  Developer   Guide      Coast Starlight, which
                             travels between Los Angeles and Seattle; and Metrolink’s Ventura County Line, which stops in
              Deutsch EnglishCamarillo     as it travels
                               Español Français       Italianoto-and-from       LosBahasa
                                                               Português Tiếng Việt    Angeles     Union Station and
                                                                                            Indonesia            TermsVentura.
                                                                                                                         of Service | Your privacy | Yahoo! Safely | Copyright/IP Policy
                                                                                                                                      Copyright © 2012 Yahoo! Inc. All rights reserved.
http://www.flickr.com/photos/johnmueller/3188789880/sizes/l/in/photostream/ 4/3/2012
                                                                                                                              C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T                 43

                                              City of Camarillo General Plan
Camarillo Airport
    5.9.7	        Air Transportation
                  The Camarillo Airport is located at the southwest portion of the city and is owned by the County of
                  Ventura. It is operated by the County of Ventura Department of Airports. The airport lies within the
                  city limits and a Joint Powers Agreement (JPA) is in place between the City and the County to jointly
                  oversee airport operations and development. The airport operates as a general aviation reliever
                  airport for the Los Angeles Basin for use by private aircraft along with charter aircraft, aircraft
                  maintenance, and flight training activities. It also is home to World War II aircraft, and has a separate
                  runway for ultralight aircraft.
                  An updated Airport Master Plan was completed in 2010. The Airport Compatibility Land Use Plan
                  provides control measures for achieving compatible land uses in and around the Camarillo Airport.
                  Monitoring programs to ensure compatibility between the airport and its surrounding uses include:
                  community participation, noise abatement, aircraft operator training, and noise monitoring. An
                  aircraft control tower has been installed in order to monitor flight patterns and to assist in safe flying
                  activities.
                  The nearest commercial airport facility is the Oxnard Airport which is also operated by the County
                  of Ventura Department of Airports. The Oxnard Airport is an FAA FAR Part 139 airport with
                  limited commuter air service and general aviation activities. Additional airport facilities which
                  serve Camarillo include: Los Angeles International Airport, Hollywood/Burbank Airport (Bob Hope
                  Airport), Santa Barbara Airport, and many small airfields located throughout the Ventura-Los Angeles
                  region.
   44        CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN
                                      Circulation Element
5.9.8	 Trucking/Goods Movement
       Within the City of Camarillo, a significant amount of truck traffic is received for commercial centers
       and industrial zones. The movement of goods and services is essential to the success of the city, but
       the noise impacts and congestion of truck traffic are undesirable and inconvenient for other types of
       traffic. Therefore, it is essential that trucking and goods movement be organized and be separated
       from the various other forms of traffic, as possible. As the hierarchy of streets has been established
       to provide for more efficient mobility throughout the city and its environs, these classifications of
       streets can also be used to indicate what streets large trucks and the movement of goods should
       primarily use — unless the destinations unavoidably require otherwise. Large trucks should remain
       on arterials and industrial collectors. Residential collectors and local streets should not be used by
       large trucks.
5.9.9	 Parking
       The Circulation Element addresses parking in relation to its effect on the circulation of traffic
       throughout the city. Issues, such as on-site parking deficiencies, can increase traffic congestion by
       the recirculation of parking seekers, which reduces capacity for thru-traffic. The City requires new
       development to be in compliance with the Parking Ordinance.
       Since parking cannot be considered a primary function of streets of any type, on-street parking
       should be regulated on the basis of existing conditions such as land use, right-of-way, and traffic flow.
       However, Old Town from the intersection of Carmen Drive and Ventura Boulevard to the intersection
       of Lewis Road and Ventura Boulevard is an area where the City supports on-street parking, since the
       streets then accommodate a pedestrian-focused, market atmosphere and less thru traffic. This area
       has been reviewed as part of a separate study and will continue to be monitored for longer-term
       improvements.
       The City requires that all new development and redevelopment provide adequate off-street parking
       facilities in order to reduce the need for on-street parking. With regard to public parking, the
       City should investigate the possibility of building parking structures and lots at strategic locations
       throughout the city, and specifically, within Old Town.
                                                                                C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 45

                                      City of Camarillo General Plan
 5.10	 COORDINATION WITH OTHER JURISDICTIONS
         The City of Camarillo is interested in supporting inter-regional goals to accomplish a more efficient
         circulation network that serves Camarillo and its environs. This means coordinating efforts with
         neighboring cities, such as Thousand Oaks and Oxnard, as well as working with Ventura County
         and Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG), the region’s metropolitan planning
         organization.
         As the City of Camarillo recognizes that the U.S. 101/Ventura Freeway is the main inter-regional
         route through Ventura County, and very few viable options exist to create alternative routes, the
         City acknowledges the need to preserve the remaining space on either side of the U.S. 101/Ventura
         Freeway that runs through Camarillo, in preparation for potential freeway expansions in the future,
         and to continue to accommodate regional traffic and the needs of the city.
         The City of Camarillo also has interest in working with Caltrans in the beautification of State Route
         34/Lewis Road, per the Camarillo Community Design Element.
 5.10.1	 SCAG Regional Transportation Plan
         The Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), developed by SCAG, is a multimodal, long-range planning
         document. SCAG presented their 2012-2035 RTP which contains its vision for this region through the
         year 2035. With the primary goal of increasing mobility for the region’s residents and visitors, the
         2012-2035 RTP emphasizes sustainability and integrated planning. The 2012-2035 RTP includes a
         significant consideration of the interrelationships between the economy, the regional transportation
         system, and land use.
         The passage of Senate Bill 375 directs SCAG with an additional area of responsibility and provides
         the region with an opportunity for integrated planning for the future. Because greenhouse gas
         emissions in the transportation sector are closely related to vehicle miles traveled (VMT), SCAG is
         tasked with devising a regional plan and a series of strategies that will produce a per capita reduction
         in VMT over the next 25 years.
         Senate Bill 375 calls for the 2012-2035 RTP to include a Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS)
         that reduces greenhouse gas emissions from passenger vehicles, as determined by the California Air
         Resources Board at two points in the future - 2020 and 2035.
 5.10.2	 Ventura County Circulation Element
         The Circulation Element of the Ventura County General Plan identifies the system of regional arterial
         streets and bikeways in unincorporated portions of the planning area. This Circulation Element
         correlates with the current and proposed (2020) Regional Road Network set forth in the Ventura
         County Circulation Element.
46   CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                                       Circulation Element
5.11	 EVACUATION PLAN
        The City recognizes that circulation will come under the most demand during times of emergency.
        Therefore, the circulation infrastructure must be designed to handle the normal demand of traffic
        and that emergency evacuation and detour plans are kept and updated to ensure that this system
        can be most efficiently used during times of natural disasters or catastrophes. The City’s Emergency
        Operations Center (EOC) will coordinate with the appropriate agency during an emergency.
        Additional safety information can be found in the City of Camarillo General Plan Safety Element.
5.12	 COMMUNITY FACILITIES
        According to the State General Plan Guidelines, the Circulation Element is not simply a
        transportation plan, but an infrastructure plan addressing the circulation of people, goods, energy,
        water, sewage, storm drainage, and communications. Therefore, this section will address the
        circulation of public utilities. The City of Camarillo’s public utilities are monitored and assessed to
        ensure that they meet the needs of the city and coincide with the goals, objectives, and standards in
        the General Plan. These public utilities are: water, storm drainage, law enforcement, fire protection,
        schools, major medical facilities, electricity, gas, trash, and waste treatment.
5.12.1	 Water
        The City of Camarillo’s water supply is obtained from both local groundwater sources and imported
        water sources. Two major water purveyors for the City of Camarillo are the City of Camarillo Water
        Division and the Camrosa Water District. The Camarillo Water Division supplies close to 9,600 acre
        feet of water to the city each year. The City of Camarillo Water Division receives approximately 42
        percent of its water from groundwater sources obtained from the Fox Canyon Aquifer System. The
        city’s imported water is obtained from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California and
        is purveyed to the city by the Calleguas Municipal Water District, which also delivers to the cities of
        Thousand Oaks, Simi Valley, and Oxnard. The City’s Water Department maintains six reservoirs with a
        total capacity of 13,375,000 gallons.
        The Camrosa Water District obtains about 35 percent of its water from the groundwater sources
        with 65 percent being imported. It operates three reservoirs which serve the city and have a total
        capacity of 5,250,000 gallons.
        Several smaller agencies also supply water to portions of the city. These agencies include the
        Pleasant Valley Mutual Water, Crestview Mutual Water Company, and California American Water
        Company. These smaller agencies obtain most or all of their water from either groundwater sources
        or imported water sources.
                                                                                    C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 47

                                           City of Camarillo General Plan
             The annual average per capita water use rate for the City of Camarillo in 2010 was 0.22 acre feet
             which is approximately 71,698 gallons per person, per year or 200 gal/day. The per capita rate not
             only includes water use by residents in their homes, but a proportionate share of water consumed
             by industry, businesses, and public agencies which indirectly benefit those residents. The city’s
             future water needs will rely heavily upon imported state water from the Calleguas Municipal Water
             District, as increases in groundwater sources are expected to be limited. The Metropolitan Water
             District indicates that sufficient water exists to meet all domestic water demands for the area in the
             foreseeable future; however, restrictions placed on state water imported by Metropolitan Water
             District forced their Metropolitan Supply Allocation to its member agencies to a Level 2 reduction.
             Since Camarillo’s water allocation is based on previous water allocations, this reduction requires
             the City to ensure that every future development can provide proof that current water supply is
             sufficient for the new use, or demonstrate that their water needs can be mitigated.
   Figure 5-9 Water District Boundaries
48    CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                                      Circulation Element
5.12.2	 Storm Drains
        The City of Camarillo has a comprehensive storm drain system throughout the city. The system collects
        stormwater runoff and funnels it to the Revolon Slough/Beardsley Wash, or to the Calleguas, or Conejo
        Creeks, depending on which watershed the water runoff originates. Calleguas and Conejo Creeks and
        Revolon Slough are Ventura County Watershed Protection District jurisdictional red line channels with
        existing limited capacity, and that the Watershed District owns and operates those reaches of the
        channels that are located within the city limits. The City maintains this public storm drain system by
        inspecting over 1,400 City-owned catch basins at least annually and cleaning those that contain 25
        percent, or more, debris. Approximately 20 tons of debris are removed each year from these catch
        basins. In addition, the City has installed trash excluders and waste receptacles in high-trash generating
        areas.
        Camarillo is subject to and complies with the Ventura County Municipal Stormwater NPDES Permit
        for stormwater and urban runoff. The City supports helping maintain our creeks and oceans as clean
        as possible and attempts to do this through the installation of the trash excluders, maintenance of
        the storm drain system, and inspections and outreach to the construction, residential, and business
        communities. In addition, the City requires all new development and redevelopment to mitigate their
        stormwater runoff from their site, so as to remove pollutants from any runoff before it reaches the storm
        drains, creeks, and ocean. Where feasible, this includes requirements for green streets which incorporate
        a wide variety of design elements including street trees, permeable pavements, bioretention, and
        swales in order to provide source control of stormwater, limit its transport and pollutant conveyance
        to the storm drain system, restore predevelopment hydrology to the extent possible, and provide
        environmentally enhanced roads.
5.12.3	 Waste Treatment
        The City of Camarillo is served by the Camarillo Sanitary District and the Camrosa Water District. The
        Camarillo Sanitary District water reclamation plant has a designed capacity of 7,250,000 gallons per
        day. It is a tertiary treatment facility where biosolids are anaerobically digested and dewatered in drying
        beds. Dried biosolids and grit are beneficially reused for various land applications. The treatment plant
        presently generates approximately 1,343 tons of biosolids as of 2009.
        The sanitary treatment facility recently underwent a number of modifications and improvements in
        order to provide tertiary treatment capability and beneficially reuse the treated effluent.
        The Camarillo Sanitary District was one of the first facilities in the county to provide reclaimed water for
        agricultural irrigation. Approximately 1 million gallons per day of the Camarillo Sanitary District effluent
        is used for agricultural irrigation.
        The Camrosa Water District wastewater treatment plant is operated by the Ventura Regional Sanitation
        District and is located near California State University Channel Islands, about one-half mile east of
        Calleguas Creek. The designed capacity of the secondary treatment plant is 2,500,000 gallons per day.
        The biosolids at that treatment plant are also treated by anaerobic digestion, and the dried biosolids and
        grit are beneficially reused.
                                                                                  C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 49
                                            City of Camarillo General Plan
 Figure 5-10 Sanitation District Boundaries
 5.12.4	 Solid Waste Disposal
              The City of Camarillo’s waste disposal service is provided by several private contracts. The refuse
              disposed of consists of industrial/commercial and residential waste, greenwaste, recyclables, and
              hazardous waste. Although non-exclusive contracts can be made for roll-offs for particular locations
              and for an indefinite amount of time, the bulk of the city’s waste disposal is carried out through
              two, main 10-year contracts: one for commercial and industrial waste disposal, and the second
              for residential waste disposal. A third, five-year contract, hires a company that provides a drop-off
              facility for hazardous waste.
              Since the City promotes the recycling of reusable goods, not only does it provide bins for recycling
              through its contracted disposal service, but it also has permitted redemption buy-back centers
              throughout the city.
 5.12.5	 Electricity
              The City of Camarillo is served by the Southern California Edison Company which operates two
              plants along the coastal area in or near the City of Oxnard. One distribution substation serving the
              Camarillo area is located on Adolfo Road, west of Santa Rosa Road, in the City of Camarillo.
50       CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN

                                      Circulation Element
5.12.6	 Gas
         The city is also served by the Southern California Gas Company which has major distribution lines in
         Las Posas Road, east of Arneill Road, and along Lewis Road and Mission Oaks Boulevard.
5.12.7	 Communication/Media
         The supply of cable, internet, and phone services are not operated, monitored, nor maintained
         by the City. Although multiple vendors are available through various sources, the lines which run
         through the city are either owned by Time Warner or Verizon FIOS, as of 2013. Multiple companies,
         as well as Verizon, also own antennas throughout the city to provide signal strength to cell phones.
5.12.8	 Law Enforcement
         The City of Camarillo has its police protection contract with the Ventura County Sheriff’s
         Department. The contract, which began in 1965, provides a full range of law enforcement services
         for the city. The Camarillo station is a 27,000 square foot facility at 3701 Las Posas Road.
5.12.9	 Fire Protection
         The Ventura County Fire Protection District provides fire protection, fire suppression, rescue, and
         emergency-related services for the City of Camarillo. The Fire Protection District has three stations
         located within the city and has two additional stations located in the nearby unincorporated areas,
         which help to serve the needs of the Camarillo Planning Area.
5.12.10	 Schools
         The Pleasant Valley Elementary School District serves the city and its unincorporated areas:
         Camarillo Heights, Las Posas Estates area, and Santa Rosa Valley. In the 2013-14 school year, the
         district was budgeted for a total average daily attendance of 6,725 students. Seven elementary
         schools within the district include: Camarillo Heights (K-5), Dos Caminos (K-5), El Descanso (K-5), La
         Mariposa (K-5), Las Posas (K-5), Rancho Rosal (K-5), and Tierra Linda (K-5) Elementary Schools.
         Two intermediate schools include Las Colinas Middle School (6-8) and Monte Vista Middle School
         (6-8).
         Schools that are both elementary and intermediate include: Los Primeros School of Sciences and
         Arts (K-8) and Santa Rosa Technology Magnet School (K-8).
         The Oxnard Union High School District (OUHSD) provides high school facilities for the City of
         Camarillo. The city is served by two high schools: Adolfo Camarillo High School (9-12) and Rio Mesa
         High School (9-12). A third high school, Camarillo Academy High School and Performing Arts Center,
         is planned to accommodate future growth. Additionally, a continuation high school, Frontier, is
         located at the nearby Camarillo Airport.
         Charter schools include: Camarillo Academy of Progressive Education (CAPE), ACE school which
         focuses on architecture, construction and engineering and University Charter Schools at CSU Channel
         Islands.
                                                                                   C I R C U L AT I O N E L E M E N T 51

                                  City of Camarillo General Plan
      Schools administered by Ventura County Office of Education include: Phoenix School, (6-12) (special
      education at the airport), Gateway School, (6-12) at the airport, Phoenix - Los Nogales School, (K-5)
      special education, and Triton Academy for autistic students.
52 CAMARILLO GENERAL PLAN
  City of Camarillo
     2013-2021
Housing Element
 Adopted January 8, 2014
 CC Resolution No. 2014-6

                                                                                                                                                  
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
7.1  Introduction .............................................................................................................................. 1 
      7.1.1  Overview ....................................................................................................................... 1 
      7.1.2  Public Participation ....................................................................................................... 1 
      7.1.3  Consistency with Other Elements of the General Plan................................................. 1 
 
7.2  Housing Needs Assessment ...................................................................................................... 3 
      7.2.1  Population Characteristics ............................................................................................ 3 
      7.2.2  Household Characteristics ............................................................................................ 6 
      7.2.3  Housing Problems ......................................................................................................... 8 
      7.2.4  Employment ................................................................................................................ 12 
      7.2.5  Housing Stock Characteristics ..................................................................................... 14 
      7.2.6  Persons with Special Needs ........................................................................................ 22 
      7.2.7  Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion ...................................................................... 35 
 
7.3  Resources and Opportunities ................................................................................................. 43 
      7.3.1  Land Resources ........................................................................................................... 43 
      7.3.2  Financial and Administrative Resources ..................................................................... 56 
 
7.4  Constraints .............................................................................................................................. 59 
      7.4.1  Governmental Constraints .......................................................................................... 59 
      7.4.2  Non‐Governmental Constraints .................................................................................. 81 
      7.4.3  Fair Housing ................................................................................................................ 85 
 
7.5  Housing Plan ........................................................................................................................... 87 
      7.5.1  Goals and Policies ....................................................................................................... 87 
      7.5.2  Housing Programs ....................................................................................................... 87 
      7.5.3  Quantified Objectives ................................................................................................. 96 
 
Appendix A – Evaluation of the 2008‐2014 Housing Element 
Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory 
Appendix C – Public Participation Summary 
                                                                                                                  JANUARY 2014    7‐i

                                                                                                                                            
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
 TABLES
 
TABLE 7‐1 Population Trends, 1990‐2010—Camarillo vs. Ventura County ...................................... 4 
TABLE 7‐2 Age Characteristics ........................................................................................................... 5 
TABLE 7‐3 Race/Ethnicity ................................................................................................................... 5 
TABLE 7‐4 Household Composition ................................................................................................... 6 
TABLE 7‐5 Housing Tenure ................................................................................................................. 7 
TABLE 7‐6 Median Household Income – Ventura County and Cities ................................................ 7 
TABLE 7‐7 Income Distribution .......................................................................................................... 8 
TABLE 7‐8 Housing Assistance Needs of Lower Income Households (2005‐2009) ......................... 10 
TABLE 7‐9 Overcrowding ................................................................................................................. 11 
TABLE 7‐10 Labor Force – Camarillo vs. Ventura County ................................................................ 12 
TABLE 7‐11 Employment by Occupation – Camarillo ...................................................................... 12 
TABLE 7‐12 Projected Job Growth by Occupation, 2008‐2018 ....................................................... 13 
TABLE 7‐13 Job Location for Camarillo Residents ........................................................................... 14 
TABLE 7‐14 Housing by Type ............................................................................................................ 15 
TABLE 7‐15 Age of Housing Stock by Tenure ................................................................................... 16 
TABLE 7‐16 Kitchen and Plumbing Facilities by Tenure ................................................................... 17 
TABLE 7‐17 Housing Vacancy ........................................................................................................... 18 
TABLE 7‐18 Median and Average Rent by Number of Bedrooms (Jan to Mar 2013) ...................... 19 
TABLE 7‐19 Maximum Affordable Housing Costs (2013) ................................................................. 20 
TABLE 7‐20 Special Needs Groups in Camarillo ............................................................................... 22 
TABLE 7‐21 Persons with Disabilities by Age – Camarillo ................................................................ 23 
TABLE 7‐22 Elderly Household by Tenure – Camarillo .................................................................... 25 
TABLE 7‐23 Household Size by Tenure – Camarillo ......................................................................... 27 
TABLE 7‐24 Household Type by Tenure – Camarillo ........................................................................ 28 
TABLE 7‐25 Agricultural Employment .............................................................................................. 31 
TABLE 7‐26 Homeless Profile ........................................................................................................... 33 
TABLE 7‐27 Assisted Housing Developments – Camarillo ............................................................... 36 
TABLE 7‐28 Market Value of At‐Risk Housing Units ........................................................................ 39 
TABLE 7‐29 Rental Subsidies Required ............................................................................................ 40 
TABLE 7‐30 Estimated New Construction Costs .............................................................................. 41 
TABLE 7‐31 Remaining Residential Capacity in the Springville Specific Plan .................................. 45 
TABLE 7‐32 Residential Capacity in the Camarillo Commons Specific Plan ..................................... 46 
TABLE 7‐33 Residential Capacity of Proposed Projects ................................................................... 53 
TABLE 7‐34 Residential Capacity of Opportunity Areas .................................................................. 55 
TABLE 7‐35 Land Inventory Summary .............................................................................................. 55 
TABLE 7‐36 Residential Land Use Categories – Camarillo General Plan .......................................... 59 
TABLE 7‐37 Residential and Mixed Use Development Standards ................................................... 63 
TABLE 7‐38 Permitted Residential Development by Zone .............................................................. 65 
TABLE 7‐39 Residential Parking Requirements ................................................................................ 72 
                                                                                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐ii

                                                                                                                               
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
TABLE 7‐40 Summary of Apartment Development Fees ‐ 2013 ...................................................... 77 
TABLE 7‐41 Summary of Townhouse Development Fees ‐ 2013..................................................... 78 
TABLE 7‐42 Summary of Single‐Family Development Fees ‐ 2013 .................................................. 79 
TABLE 7‐43 Comparison of Development Processing Fees ............................................................. 79 
TABLE 7‐44 Disposition of Home Purchase Loans ........................................................................... 82 
TABLE 7‐45 Quantified Objectives – 2013‐2021 City of Camarillo .................................................. 96 
 
FIGURES 
 
FIGURE 7‐1 Population Growth, 1990‐2010—Camarillo vs. Ventura County ................................... 4 
FIGURE 7‐2 Median Home Sales Price (2012) .................................................................................. 18 
                                                                                              JANUARY 2014    7‐iii


                                                                                                           
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
7.1         INTRODUCTION 
 
7.1.1       Overview 
 
State law requires the preparation of a Housing Element as part of a jurisdiction's General Plan 
(Government  Code  §65302(c)).  The  Element  is  to  consist  of  an  identification  and  analysis  of 
existing and projected housing needs, and a statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives 
and scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement and development of housing. It is 
also  required  to  identify  adequate  sites  for  housing  and  to  make  adequate  provision  for  the 
existing and projected needs of all economic segments of the community (§65583). 
 
The guidelines adopted by the Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) are 
also  to  be  considered  in  the  preparation  of  the  Element  (§65585).  Periodic  review  of  the 
Element is required to evaluate (1) the appropriateness of its goals, objectives and policies in 
contributing to the attainment of the state housing goals, (2) its effectiveness in attaining the 
City's housing goals and objectives and (3) the progress of its implementation (§65588). 
 
7.1.2       Public Participation 
 
Public  participation  is  an  important  component  of  the  planning  process  in  Camarillo,  and  this 
update to the Housing Element has provided Camarillo residents and other interested parties 
numerous opportunities for review and comment. Appendix C provides a detailed discussion of 
these  opportunities  along  with  a  summary  of  comments  received  and  how  those  comments 
have been addressed in the Housing Element update. 
 
Annual reviews of the Housing Element have also been accomplished in accordance with state 
law.  The  most  recent  annual  report  was  placed  on  the  City’s  website  in  accordance  with  the 
State of California Department of Housing and Community Development guidelines. 
 
7.1.3       Consistency with Other Elements of the General Plan 
 
State law requires that all portions of the General Plan be internally consistent. A number of the 
General  Plan  Elements  are  related  to  the  Housing  Element,  while  others  serve  as  a  means  to 
carry out the goals and policies of the Housing Element. Three elements in particular address 
environmental  or  man‐made  factors  that  limit  the  location  or  type  of  housing  that  can  be 
developed:  Safety,  Noise,  and  Open  Space  and  Conservation.  The  Safety  and  Noise  Elements 
address hazards or nuisances that should be avoided in the location of housing, or mitigated in 
the  construction  of  housing.  The  Open  Space  and  Conservation  Element  concerns  land 
resources  that  should  be  protected  from  development.  All  these  factors  affect  the  type, 
                                                                                     JANUARY 2014    7‐1

                                                                                                                 
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
location,  and  cost  of  housing  and  could  also  affect  the  City’s  ability  to  meet  the  goals  of  the 
Housing Element. 
 
The  Housing  Element  is  closely  related  to  development  policies  contained  in  the  Land  Use 
Element,  which  establishes  the  location,  type,  intensity  and  distribution  of  land  uses 
throughout the City. The Land Use Element determines the number and type of housing units 
that can be constructed in the various land use districts. Areas designated for commercial and 
industrial  uses  create  employment  opportunities,  which  in  turn,  create  demand  for  housing. 
The  Circulation  Element  establishes  the  location  and  scale  of  streets,  highways  and  other 
transportation routes that provide access to residential neighborhoods. 
 
The analysis of available sites for housing as described in this Housing Element is based upon 
the land use designations in the Land Use Element. The development of the residential areas is 
tempered in accordance with the limitations and controls  as indicated under the Open Space 
and  Conservation  Element,  Safety  Element,  and  Community  Design  Element.  Because  of  the 
requirement  for  consistency  between  the  various  General  Plan  elements,  any  proposed 
amendment  to  an  element  will  be  evaluated  against  the  other  elements  to  ensure  that  no 
conflicts occur. 
 
Pursuant  to  SB  162  and  SB  244,  the  City  will  review  and  update,  as  necessary,  its  Land  Use, 
Safety  and  Conservation  Elements  upon  completion  of  the  Housing  Element  to  address  flood 
hazards  and  management,  and  the  provision  of  services  and  infrastructure  in  disadvantaged 
unincorporated communities (if any).  
                                                                                         JANUARY 2014    7‐2

                                                                                                                          
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
7.2             HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT 
 
Camarillo lies in the center of Ventura County, midway between Santa Barbara and Los Angeles. 
The  City  is  economically  diverse  and  provides  a  range  of  employment,  lifestyle,  and  housing 
opportunities. Since its incorporation in 1964, the City has grown from 10,350 residents to over 
65,000  in  2010.  Camarillo  is  nearly  20  square  miles  in  area  and  is  surrounded  by  agricultural 
greenbelts  and  hillside  open  space.  The  population  is  relatively  affluent  with  a  median  family 
income  of  $101,300  in  2011.  The  2011  American  Community  Survey  (ACS)1  indicated 
Camarillo's median family income was 18 percent greater than that of Ventura County and 44 
percent greater than California as a whole ($70,321). 
 
This  chapter  examines  general  population  and  household  characteristics  and  trends,  such  as 
age, race and ethnicity, employment, household composition and size, household income, and 
special  needs.  Characteristics  of  the  existing  housing  stock  (e.g.,  number  of  units  and  type, 
tenure,  age  and  condition,  costs)  are  also  addressed.  Finally,  the  City’s  projected  housing 
growth needs based on the 2014 Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) are examined. 
 
The Housing Needs Assessment utilizes data from the 2010 U.S. Census2, United States Housing 
and  Urban  Development  (HUD)  Comprehensive  Housing  Affordability  Strategy  (CHAS), 
American  Community  Surveys  (ACS),  California  Employment  Development  Department  (EDD), 
Southern  California  Association  of  Governments  (SCAG)  and  other  relevant  sources. 
Supplemental data was obtained through field  surveys and from private vendors. In addition, 
the  City’s  Consolidated  Plan  provides  useful  information  for  this  update  of  the  Housing 
Element. 
 
7.2.1           Population Characteristics 
 
A.              POPULATION GROWTH TRENDS 
 
Camarillo has grown steadily since 1990, with the total population increasing by approximately 
14 percent between 2000 and 2010 to an estimated 65,201 persons (see TABLE 7‐1 and FIGURE 
7‐1).  The City’s 2010 population represents approximately eight percent of the County’s total 
population of 823,318. 
 
1
     U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011. 
2
     Although some more recent Census estimates exist, the 2010 Decennial Census is the most widely accepted benchmark for 
     demographic analysis. 
                                                                                                  JANUARY 2014    7‐3

                                                                                                                  
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
              TABLE 7‐1 Population Trends, 1990‐2010—Camarillo vs. Ventura County 
                                                                                  Growth           Growth 
                                            1990           2000        2010      1990‐2000        2000‐2010 
      Camarillo                            52,100         57,084      65,201       9.6%             14.2% 
      Ventura County                      669,016        753,197     823,318       12.6%            9.3% 
      Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1990‐2010
             FIGURE 7‐1 Population Growth, 1990‐2010—Camarillo vs. Ventura County 
                                 30.00%
                                 25.00%
                                 20.00%
                      % Change
                                 15.00%                                             Camarillo
                                                                                    Ventura County
                                 10.00%
                                  5.00%
                                  0.00%
                                          1990‐2000      2000‐2010   1990‐2010
                                                                                                      
                Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1990‐2010 
 
B.            AGE 
 
Housing  needs  can  be  influenced  by  a  city’s  age  characteristics.  Different  age  groups  require 
different  accommodations  based  on  lifestyle,  family  type,  income  level,  and  housing 
preference.  TABLE  7‐2  provides  a  comparison  of  the  City’s  and  County’s  population  by  age 
group in 2010. This table shows that the City’s population is somewhat older than the County’s, 
with  seniors  (65  years  and  over)  representing  17  percent  of  the  City  compared  to  only  12 
percent of the County. The City’s median age also exceeds the County’s by five years (41 vs. 36). 
 
                                                                                              JANUARY 2014    7‐4

                                                                                                                                
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                               TABLE 7‐2 Age Characteristics 
                                                         Camarillo                          Ventura County 
                      Age Group                Persons              Percent            Persons           Percent 
                Under 18 years                   15,115              23.2%             211,915            25.7% 
                18 to 24 years                    5,164              7.9%               81,371             9.9% 
                25 to 44 years                   15,895              24.4%             216,543            26.3% 
                45 to 64 years                   17,825              27.3%             217,180            26.4% 
                65 to 74 years                    5,195              8.0%               51,396             6.2% 
                75 to 84 years                    3,783              5.8%               30,870             3.8% 
                85 and over                       2224               3.4%               14,043             1.7% 
                Total                            65,201             100.0%             823,318            100.0% 
                Median Age                                 40.8                                  36.2 
                Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census,2010
C.             RACE AND ETHNICITY 
 
The racial and ethnic composition of the City differs from the County in that a lower proportion 
of Camarillo residents are Hispanic/Latino or other racial minorities. Approximately 62 percent 
of  City  residents  are  non‐Hispanic  white,  compared  to  49  percent  for  the  County  as  a  whole. 
Camarillo’s  proportion  of  Hispanic  residents  (23  percent)  is  also  about  one‐half  that  of  the 
County’s (40 percent). Asians, at ten percent, represent the largest non‐Hispanic minority group 
in the City (TABLE 7‐3). 
 
                                                    TABLE 7‐3 Race/Ethnicity 
                                                                         Camarillo                    Ventura County 
                                                                 Persons          Percent        Persons          Percent 
       Not Hispanic or Latino                                    50,243            77.1%         491,751           59.7% 
         ‐  White                                                40,324            61.8%         400,868           48.7% 
         ‐  Black or African American                             1,106             1.7%          13,082           1.6% 
         ‐  American Indian/Alaska Native                          139              0.2%           2,389           0.3% 
         ‐  Asian                                                 6,491            10.0%          54,099           6.6% 
         ‐  Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander                       107              0.2%           1,353           0.2% 
         ‐  Other races or 2+ races                               2,076             3.2%          19,960           2.4% 
       Hispanic or Latino (any race)                             14,958            22.9%         331,567           40.3% 
       Total                                                     65,201           100.0%         823,318          100.0% 
       Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2010 
 
                                                                                                           JANUARY 2014    7‐5

                                                                                                                  
                7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
7.2.2          Household Characteristics 
 
A.             HOUSEHOLD COMPOSITION AND SIZE 
 
Household characteristics are important indicators of the type and size of housing needed in a 
city.  The  Census  defines  a  “household”  as  all  persons  occupying  a  housing  unit,  which  may 
include  single  persons  living  alone,  families  related  through  marriage  or  blood,  or  unrelated 
persons  sharing  a  single  unit.  Persons  in  group  quarters  such  as  dormitories,  retirement  or 
convalescent homes, or other group living situations are included in population totals, but are 
not considered households. 
 
TABLE 7‐4 provides a comparison of households by type for the City and County as a whole, as 
reported  by  the  2010  Census.  Family  households  comprised  approximately  69  percent  of  all 
households in the City, compared to 74 percent for the County. The City also had fewer families 
with  children,  more  singles  living  alone,  and  a  noticeably  lower  average  household  size  than 
Ventura County. These statistics suggest that there is less need for large units in Camarillo than 
for other areas of the County. 
 
                                            TABLE 7‐4 Household Composition 
                                                             Camarillo                Ventura County 
                                                   Households          Percent  Households        Percent 
        Total Households                             24,504             100.0%   266,920          100.0% 
        Families                                     17,029             69.5%    197,178           73.9% 
          ‐  w/ children under 18                     7,420             30.3%     94,083           35.3% 
        Non‐Family Households                         7,475             30.5%     69,742           26.1% 
          ‐  Single living alone                      5,986             24.4%     53,037           19.9% 
        Average Household Size                                 2.64                         3.47 
        Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2010 
 
B.             HOUSING TENURE 
 
Housing  tenure  (owner  versus  renter)  is  an  important  indicator  of  the  housing  market. 
Communities need an adequate supply of units available both for rent and for sale in order to 
accommodate  a  range  of  households  with  varying  income,  family  size  and  composition,  and 
lifestyle.  TABLE  7‐5  provides  a  comparison  of  the  number  of  owner‐occupied  and  renter‐
occupied units in the City in 2010. According to the Census, the City has a slightly higher level of 
homeownership than the County. 
 
                                                                                             JANUARY 2014    7‐6

                                                                                                                                
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                                 TABLE 7‐5 Housing Tenure 
                                                               Camarillo                         Ventura County 
                                                        Units            Percent             Units           Percent 
           Owner Occupied                              17,059            69.62%            174,168           65.25% 
           Renter Occupied                              7,445            30.38%             92,752           34.75% 
           Total Occupied Units                        24,504            100.00%           266,920           100.00% 
           Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2010
 
C.           HOUSEHOLD INCOME 
 
Household  income  is  a  primary  factor  affecting  housing  needs  in  a  community.  Income  levels 
can  vary  considerably  among  households,  based  upon  tenure,  household  type,  location  of 
residence, and race/ethnicity, among others. According to the 2007‐2011 American Community 
Survey  (ACS),  the  median  household  income  in  Camarillo  was  $101,334,  about  17  percent 
higher than the Ventura County median income of $86,321 (TABLE 7‐6). 
 
                           TABLE 7‐6 Median Household Income – Ventura County 
                                                              and Cities 
                                                                       Median          Percent  of County 
                                      Jurisdiction               Household Income        Median Income 
                          Camarillo                                   $101,334                  117% 
                          Fillmore                                     $60,605                   70% 
                          Moorpark                                    $103,009                  119% 
                          Ojai                                         $63,750                   74% 
                          Oxnard                                       $60,191                  70% 
                          Port Hueneme                                 $52,244                   61% 
                          Santa Paula                                  $53,359                   62% 
                          Simi Valley                                  $89,452                  104% 
                          Thousand Oaks                               $100,373                  116% 
                          Ventura                                      $66,226                   77% 
                          Ventura County                               $86,321                  100% 
                          California                                   $70,231                   81% 
                          Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011. 
To  facilitate  the  analysis  of  income  distribution  among  households  in  communities,  the  State 
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) groups households into categories 
by  income.  Income  categories  are  determined  as  a  percentage  of  the  Area  Median  Income 
(AMI), which is then adjusted for household size: 
 
      Extremely Low Income‐ less than 30 percent of the AMI 
      Very Low Income‐ between 31 and 50 percent of the AMI 
      Low Income‐ between 51 and 80 percent of the AMI 
                                                                                                           JANUARY 2014    7‐7

                                                                                                            
                  7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
   
            Moderate Income‐ between 81 and 120 percent of the AMI 
            Above Moderate Income‐ greater than 120 percent of the AMI 
   
  Collectively,  extremely  low,  very  low,  and  low  income  households  are  referred  to  as  lower 
  income households (up to 80 percent AMI). 
   
  The  2010  Census  does  not  contain  information  on  the  number  of  households  by  income 
  category.    However,  this  analysis  was  tabulated  by  the  Southern  California  Association  of 
  Governments (SCAG) using the 2005‐2009 ACS (TABLE 7‐7).  As shown, between 2005 and 2009, 
  approximately 36 percent of the City’s households earned lower incomes, while approximately 
  64 percent had earned incomes of moderate or above. 
   
                                     TABLE 7‐7 Income Distribution 
                                                                                        Ventura County 
          Income Group        Number of Households            Percent of Total 
                                                                                           Percent 
 Extremely Low (30% or less)           2,370                       10.4%                    12.3% 
 Very Low (31 to 50%)                  2,438                       10.6%                    11.2% 
 Low (51 to 80%)                       3,409                       14.9%                    16.5% 
 Moderate (81 to 100%)                 4,367                       19.1%                    18.6% 
 Above Moderate (over 100%)           10,319                       45.1%                    41.4% 
 Total                                22,903                      100.0%                   100.0% 
Source: SCAG, 2005‐2009. 
   
  State  law  requires  quantification  and  analysis  of  existing  and  projected  housing  needs  of 
  extremely  low‐income  (ELI)  households.  Extremely  low‐income  households  are  defined  as 
  households with an income of not more than 30 percent of area median income. According to 
  the  SCAG  tabulation,  between  2005  and  2009,  approximately  2,370  extremely  low  income 
  households resided in Camarillo, representing 10 percent of the city’s total households (TABLE 
  7‐7). Households with extremely low income have a variety of housing situations and needs. 
   
  7.2.3           Housing Problems 
   
  The  SCAG  data  presented  earlier  estimating  the  number  of  households  at  each  income  level 
  does  not  provide  any  detail  on  the  specific  housing  needs  and  problems  faced  by  the  City’s 
  lower income households. The Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) developed 
  by the Census Bureau for HUD, however, does provide detailed information on housing needs 
  by income level for different types of households in Camarillo.   Detailed CHAS data based on 
  the 2005‐2009 ACS is displayed in TABLE 7‐8.  Housing problems considered by CHAS include: 
   
         Units with physical defects (lacking complete kitchen or bathroom);  
         Overcrowded conditions (housing units with more than one person per room);  
                                                                                     JANUARY 2014    7‐8

                                                                                                         
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
        Housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 30 percent of gross income; or 
        Severe housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 50 percent of gross income. 
 
Most lower and moderate income households cope with housing cost issues either by assuming 
a  cost  burden,  or  by  occupying  a  smaller  than  needed  or  substandard  unit.    Specifically, 
according to HUD, 68 percent of the City’s very low income households and 58 percent of low 
income  households  were  experiencing  one  or  more  housing  problems  (e.g.,  cost  burden, 
overcrowding,  or  substandard  housing  condition)  between  2005  and  2009.    The  types  of 
housing  problems  experienced  by  Camarillo  households  vary  according  to  household  income, 
type, and tenure.  Some highlights include: 
 
        In  general,  renter‐households  had  a  higher  level  of  housing  problems  (52  percent) 
         compared to owner‐households (37 percent). 
        Large  renter‐families  had  the  highest  level  of  housing  problems  regardless  of  income 
         level (67 percent).   
        Approximately  71  percent  of  extremely  low  income  (households  earning  less  than  30 
         percent of the AMI) and 68 percent of very low‐income households (households earning 
         between 31 and 50 percent of the AMI) had housing problems. 
        100 percent of extremely low income large family renters and homeowners spent more 
         than 50 percent of their income on housing. 
 
                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐9

                                                                                                                                                
                7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
             TABLE 7‐8 Housing Assistance Needs of Lower Income Households (2005‐2009) 
                                                          Renters                                         Owners 
  Households by Income,                                                                                                                 Total 
Type, & Housing Problem                           Small           Large         Total                      Large         Total      Households 
                                   Elderly                                                  Elderly 
                                                 Families       Families       Renters                   Families      Owners 
Extremely Low Income 
                                     350           370              10           850          750            15          1,095          1,945 
(<30% Ami) 
Any Housing Problem                  59%           84%            100%           71%          68%          100%           71%            71% 
Cost Burden >30%                     59%           81%            100%           70%          68%          100%           71%            71% 
Cost Burden > 50%                    50%           69%            100%           59%          46%          100%           56%            57% 
Very Low Income 
                                     420           415              70          1,185         860            35          1,125          2,310 
(31‐50% Ami) 
Any Housing Problem                  75%           94%             86%           87%          43%           71%           48%            68% 
Cost Burden >30%                     75%           93%             86%           86%          43%           71%           48%            68% 
Cost Burden > 50%                    46%           71%             14%           59%          27%           43%           33%            47% 
Low Income 
                                     185           615             175          1,270        1,285          215          2,190          3,460 
(51‐80% Ami) 
Any Housing Problem                  78%           71%             74%           74%          29%          100%           50%            58% 
Cost Burden >30%                     76%           71%             46%           69%          24%           88%           45%            54% 
Cost Burden > 50%                    24%           11%             20%           13%           9%           47%           27%            22% 
Moderate & Above 
                                     300          1,645            215          2,945        3,055         1,420        12,280         15,225 
Income (>80% Ami) 
Any Housing Problem                  20%           20%             53%           23%          15%           43%           31%            29% 
Cost Burden >30%                     17%           14%             28%           16%          15%           37%           30%            27% 
Cost Burden > 50%                     0%            0%              0%            0%           2%           10%            6%            5% 
Total Households                    1,255         3,045            470          6,250        5,950         1,685        16,690         22,940 
Any Housing Problem                  58%           48%             67%           52%          29%           51%           37%            41% 
Cost Burden >30%                     56%           44%             45%           47%          27%           45%           36%            39% 
Cost Burden > 50%                    33%           20%             12%           22%          13%           16%           14%            16% 
Note:  Data presented in this table are based on special tabulations from the American Community Survey (ACS) data.  Due to the small sample 
       size, the margins of errors can be significant.  Interpretations of these data should focus on the proportion of households in need of 
       assistance rather than on precise numbers.  
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2005‐2009.
 
A.               OVERCROWDING 
 
Overcrowding is often closely related to household income and the cost of housing. The State 
Housing  and  Community  Development  Department  (HCD)  considers  a  household  to  be 
overcrowded  when  there  is  more  than  one  person  per  room,  excluding  bathrooms  and 
kitchens.    Severe  overcrowding  occurs  when  there  are  more  than  1.5  occupants  per  room. 
TABLE 7‐9 summarizes the incidence of overcrowding in Camarillo.  In 2011, overcrowding was 
more  prevalent  among  the  City’s  renter‐households  than  owner‐households.  Approximately 
seven  percent  of  the  City’s  renter‐households  were  overcrowded  compared  to  less  than  two 
percent of owner‐households. 
 
                                                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐10

                                                                                                                      
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                                 TABLE 7‐9 Overcrowding 
                                                                 Camarillo                  Ventura County 
                    Household Type                    Households            Percent   Households       Percent 
       Owner Occupied                                   16,811              100.0%     174,310         100.0% 
         ‐  Overcrowded                                   226                1.3%        4,570           2.6% 
         ‐  Severely Overcrowded                           21                0.1%        1,438           0.8% 
       Renter‐Occupied                                   6,644              100.00%     90,672         100.0% 
         ‐  Overcrowded                                   340                5.1%        7,454           8.2% 
         ‐  Severely Overcrowded                           93                1.4%       3,487           3.9% 
       Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011.
 
B.            HOUSING COST BURDEN (OVERPAYMENT) 
 
Housing cost burden, also known as overpayment, is defined as a housing cost that exceeds 30 
percent of a household’s gross income.  A severe cost burden is a housing cost that exceeds 50 
percent of a household’s gross income.   Housing cost burden is particularly problematic for low 
and  moderate  income  households  in  that  it  leaves  little  of  the  household  income  to  pay  for 
other  living  expenses.  Housing  overpayment  occurs  when  housing  costs  increase  faster  than 
income. As in most urban communities in California, it is not uncommon in Camarillo to overpay 
for housing. However, to the extent that overpayment is often disproportionately concentrated 
among  the  most  vulnerable  members  of  the  community,  maintaining  a  reasonable  level  of 
housing cost burden is an important contributor to quality of life. 
 
According  to  2005‐2009  CHAS  data  (TABLE  7‐8  on  page  7‐10),  an  estimated  36  percent  of 
owner‐households and 47 percent of renter‐households were spending more than 30 percent 
of  their  gross  household  income  on  housing.    Because  housing  cost  burden  tends  to 
concentrate among the most vulnerable people, reducing cost burden is an important housing 
goal for the City of Camarillo. 
 
As  market  rents  were  generally  affordable  to  moderate  income  households,  renters  in  this 
income  group  were  not  as  impacted  by  cost  burden.    Among  the  different  household  types, 
large family households (regardless of tenure) and lower income small family renters were the 
most impacted by cost burden. 
 
Although homeowners enjoy income and property tax deductions and other benefits that help 
to  compensate  for  high  housing  costs,  lower‐income  homeowners  may  need  to  defer 
maintenance or repairs due to limited funds, which can lead to deterioration. For lower‐income 
renters,  severe  cost  burden  can  require  families  to  double  up,  resulting  in  overcrowding  and 
related problems. 
 
                                                                                                JANUARY 2014    7‐11

                                                                                                                               
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
7.2.4         Employment 
 
Employment  is  an  important  factor  affecting  housing  needs  within  a  community.  Wages  vary 
widely by employment sector and affect the type and size of housing residents can afford. 
 
A.            CURRENT EMPLOYMENT 
 
TABLE  7‐10  shows  that  the  City  had  a  workforce  of  33,049  persons,  or  65  percent  of  the 
working‐age  population,  as  reported  by  the  2007‐2011  ACS.  The  table  also  shows  that  the 
characteristics  of  the  City’s  labor  force  are  similar  to  those  of  Ventura  County.  About  three 
percent of Camarillo residents worked from home and just over one‐third were not in the labor 
force. 
 
In  2011,  approximately  43  percent  of  the  City’s  working  residents  were  employed  in 
management, business, science, and arts occupations (TABLE 7‐11). A much smaller percentage 
of  workers  (13.1  percent)  were  employed  in  service  related  occupations  such  as  waiters, 
waitresses  and  beauticians.  Blue  collar  occupations  such  as  machine  operators,  assemblers, 
transportation,  handlers  and  laborers  constituted  14.7  percent  of  the  workforce.  Persons 
working  in  farming,  fishing  and  forestry  made  up  one  percent  of  the  workforce  and 
approximately one percent of the City's employed residents were actively serving in the armed 
forces in 2011.  
 
                            TABLE 7‐10 Labor Force – Camarillo vs. Ventura County 
                                                                   Camarillo                         Ventura County 
                                                          Persons           Percent             Persons          Percent 
      In labor force                                       33,049             65.0%             423,711           67.2% 
        ‐  Work at home                                     1,064             3.2%               19,889            4.7% 
      Not in labor force                                   17,779             35.0%             207,174           32.8% 
        ‐  With Social Security income                      7,639             15.0%              68,262           10.8% 
      Total population age 16+                             50,828                ‐‐             630,885              ‐‐ 
      Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011.
 
                                TABLE 7‐11 Employment by Occupation – Camarillo 
                                                                                         Jobs              Percent 
            Management, Business, Science, and Arts                                     13,015              43.3% 
            Service                                                                      3,939              13.1% 
            Sales And Office                                                             8,701              28.9% 
            Natural Resources, Construction, and Maintenance                             2,120               7.1% 
            Production, Transportation, and Material Moving                              2,296               7.6% 
            Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011.
 
                                                                                                         JANUARY 2014    7‐12

                                                                                                                        
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
  
 B.               PROJECTED JOB GROWTH 
  
 Future  housing  needs  are  affected  by  the  number  and  type  of  new  jobs  created  during  the 
 planning  period.    The  California  Economic  Development  Department  (EDD),  in  TABLE  7‐12, 
 projects  job  growth  by  occupation  for  the  Oxnard‐Thousand  Oaks‐Ventura  MSA  along  with 
 median  hourly  wages.  Total  employment  in  Ventura  County  is  expected  to  grow  by  eight 
 percent between 2008 and 2018. This growth is expected to add 26,500 new jobs and bring the 
 total number of jobs in Ventura County to approximately 371,000 by 2018. 
  
 Generally, residents that are employed in well‐paying occupations have less difficulty obtaining 
 adequate  housing  than  residents  in  low  paying  occupations.  TABLE  7‐12  illustrates,  however, 
 that  growth  in  low‐wage  service  jobs  (such  as  health  care  support,  food  preparation  and 
 serving, cleaning and maintenance, sales, office/administrative support, and farmworkers) will 
 outpace growth in high‐earning occupations. 
  
                          TABLE 7‐12 Projected Job Growth by Occupation, 2008‐2018 
                         Oxnard/Thousand Oaks‐Ventura Metropolitan Statistical Area 
                                                                      Annual Average                            Median 
                                                                       Employment         Employment Change     Hourly 
                       Occupational Title                           2008          2018   Numerical    Percent   Wage* 
Total, All Occupations                                            344,900       371,400   26,500       7.7%     $17.55  
Management Occupations                                             25,340        26,110     770        3.0%     $48.71  
Business and Financial Operations Occupations                      15,950        17,580    1,630       10.2%    $30.88  
Computer and Mathematical Occupations                               8,240         9,260    1,020       12.4%    $37.56  
Architecture and Engineering Occupations                            8,150         8,630     480        5.9%     $40.68  
Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations                      5,220         5,950     730        14.0%    $33.21  
Community and Social Services Occupations                           3,880         4,140     260        6.7%     $22.49  
Legal Occupations                                                   2,170         2,230      60        2.8%     $45.05  
Education, Training, and Library Occupations                       17,890        18,700     810        4.5%     $25.10  
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media Occupations          4,780         5,130     350        7.3%     $23.60  
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical Occupations                 12,330        14,410    2,080       16.9%    $35.12  
Healthcare Support Occupations                                      7,060         8,630    1,570       22.2%    $13.87  
Protective Service Occupations                                      5,480         5,690     210        3.8%     $19.49  
Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations                   25,820        29,430    3,610       14.0%     $9.33  
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maint. Occ.                      11,680        12,260     580        5.0%     $11.55  
Personal Care and Service Occupations                              10,850        12,580    1,730       15.9%    $11.11  
Sales and Related Occupations                                      37,200        40,000    2,800       7.5%     $12.41  
Office and Administrative Support Occupations                      53,920        56,060    2,140       4.0%     $16.42  
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry Occupations                         20,750        22,200    1,450       7.0%      $9.27  
Construction and Extraction Occupations                            17,930        19,030    1,100       6.1%     $21.60  
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations                  10,870        11,500     630        6.0%     $22.05  
Production Occupations                                             21,760        22,330     570        2.6%     $14.36  
Transportation and Material Moving Occupations                     17,830        18,540     710        4.0%     $12.31  
Source: California Employment Development Department, March 2009 Benchmark
*2010 wages 
                                                                                                  JANUARY 2014    7‐13

                                                                                                              
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
A.          JOBS‐HOUSING BALANCE 
 
A regional balance of jobs to housing helps to ensure that the demand for housing is reasonably 
related to supply. When the number of jobs significantly exceeds the housing supply, the rental 
and  for‐sale  housing  markets  can  become  competitive,  requiring  households  to  pay  a  larger 
percentage  of  their  income  for  housing.  In  addition,  a  tight  housing  market  can  result  in 
overcrowding and longer commute times as workers seek more affordable housing in outlying 
areas. The current jobs‐housing objective within the SCAG region is one new housing unit for 
every 1.5 jobs. 
 
According  to  the  2007‐2011  ACS,  85  percent  of  employed  Camarillo  residents  worked  in 
Ventura  County,  and  approximately  36  percent  of  all  workers  were  employed  within  the  city 
limits (TABLE 7‐13).  According to SCAG Regional Transportation Plan/Sustainable Communities 
Strategy Growth Forecast (adopted April 2012), the City of Camarillo is projected to add 3,100 
households and 5,600 jobs between 2008 and 2020, equivalent to 1.8 jobs per household. 
 
                              TABLE 7‐13 Job Location for Camarillo Residents 
                                                                     Persons        Percent 
               Work in Ventura County                                25,459          85.4% 
                  ‐Work in City of Residence                         10,716          35.9% 
                  ‐Work Outside City of Residence                    19,104          64.1% 
               Work in Another California County                      4,204          14.1% 
               Work Outside California                                 157           0.5% 
               Total Workers Age 16+                                 29,820            ‐‐ 
               Source:  American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011. 
 
7.2.5       Housing Stock Characteristics 
 
This section presents an evaluation of the characteristics of the community’s housing stock and 
helps in identifying and prioritizing needs. The factors evaluated include the number and type 
of  housing  units,  recent  growth  trends,  age  and  condition,  tenure,  vacancy,  housing  costs, 
affordability,  and  assisted  affordable  units  at‐risk  of  loss  due  to  conversion  to  market‐rate.  A 
housing  unit  is  defined as  a  house, apartment, mobile  home,  or  group of  rooms,  occupied  as 
separate living quarters, or if vacant, intended for occupancy as separate living quarters. 
 
                                                                                       JANUARY 2014    7‐14

                                                                                                                                             
                7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
A.              HOUSING TYPE AND GROWTH TRENDS 
 
As  of  2011,  the  housing  stock  in  Camarillo  was  comprised  mostly  of  single‐family  detached 
homes,  which  made  up  about  61  percent  of  all  units.  Multi‐family  units  comprised  about  17 
percent  of  the  City’s  dwelling  units.  About  18  percent  of  housing  units  were  single‐family 
attached  units,  while  mobile  homes  comprised  the  remaining  four  percent  of  Camarillo’s 
housing stock. TABLE 7‐14 provides a breakdown of the City’s housing stock by type, along with 
growth  trends,  for  the  2000‐2011  period.  Between  2000  and  2011,  single‐family  detached 
homes represented over 85 percent of all new units in the City.  
 
                                                   TABLE 7‐14 Housing by Type 
                                                    2000                               2011                               Growth 
          Structure Type                    Units           Percent            Units           Percent             Units           Percent 
Camarillo 
Single‐family detached                     12,856            58.6%            14,990            61.4%              2,134             16.6% 
Single‐family attached                      4,495            20.5%             4,274            17.5%              ‐221              ‐4.9% 
Multi‐family 2‐4 units                       826              3.8%              999              4.1%               173              20.9% 
Multi‐family 5+ units                       2,712            12.4%             3,199            13.1%               487              18.0% 
Mobile homes                                1,057            4.8%               945              3.9%              ‐113             ‐10.7% 
Total units                                21,947           100.0%            24,407           100.0%              2,460            11.2% 
Ventura County 
Single‐family detached                    160,532            63.8%           181,117            64.1%             20,585             12.8% 
Single‐family attached                     27,324            10.9%            31,019            10.2%              3,695             13.5% 
Multi‐family 2‐4 units                     16,408             6.5%            15,354             6.2%             ‐1,054             ‐6.4% 
Multi‐family 5+ units                      35,285            14.0%            41,798            14.9%              6,513             18.5% 
Mobile homes                               12,162             4.8%            11,470             4.5%              ‐692              ‐5.7% 
Total units                               251,711           100.0%           280,758           100.0%             29,047            11.5% 
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000; American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011.
Note: The City has not lost any mobile home units between 2000 and 2011. The recorded decrease in units is likely due to the use of ACS, 
which is based on a small sample size.  The 2010 Census no longer provides detailed counts of housing units by type. 
 
B.              HOUSING AGE AND CONDITIONS 
 
Housing  age  is  often  an  important  indicator  of  housing  condition.    In  many  communities, 
housing  that  was  constructed  more  than  50  years  earlier  requires  careful  monitoring  for 
maintenance.    In  addition,  housing  units  built  prior  to  1978,  before  stringent  limits  on  the 
amount  of  lead  in  paint  were  imposed,  may  have  interior  or  exterior  building  components 
coated  with  lead‐based  paint.  Housing  units  built  before  1970  are  the  most  likely  to  need 
rehabilitation  and  to  have  lead‐based  paint  in  deteriorated  condition.  Lead‐based  paint 
becomes hazardous to children under age six and to pregnant women when it peels off walls or 
is pulverized by windows and doors opening and closing. 
  
                                                                                                                 JANUARY 2014    7‐15

                                                                                                                         
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
TABLE 7‐15 shows the age distribution of the housing stock in Camarillo compared to Ventura 
County as a whole, as reported in the 2007‐2011 ACS. 
 
                                    TABLE 7‐15 Age of Housing Stock by Tenure 
                                                               Camarillo                     Ventura County 
                       Year Built                       Units           Percent           Units         Percent 
         Owner Occupied                                16,811            100.0%         174,310         100.0% 
             1990 or later                              4,711             28.0%         39,328           22.6% 
             1980‐89                                    3,039             18.1%         32,347           18.6% 
             1970‐79                                    5,250             31.2%         39,466           22.6% 
             1960‐69                                    3,016             17.9%         37,752           21.7% 
             1950‐59                                     618              3.7%           16,867           9.7% 
             1940‐49                                     112              0.7%            4,034           2.3% 
             1939 or earlier                              65              0.4%            4,516           2.6% 
         Renter Occupied                                6,644            100.0%         90,672          100.0% 
             1990 or later                              1,701             25.6%         18,255           20.1% 
             1980‐89                                    1,152             17.3%         11,858           13.1% 
             1970‐79                                    2,155             32.4%         21,429           23.6% 
             1960‐69                                    1,215             18.3%         19,543           21.6% 
             1950‐59                                     293              4.4%           10,974          12.1% 
             1940‐49                                      58              0.9%            3,929           4.3% 
             1939 or earlier                              70              1.1%            4,684           5.2% 
         Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011.
 
This table shows that about 23 percent of owner‐occupied units and 25 percent of rental units 
in Camarillo were constructed prior to 1970. These findings suggest that there may be a greater 
need  for  maintenance  and  rehabilitation,  including  remediation  of  lead‐based  paint,  for 
approximately  one‐quarter  of  the  city’s  housing  stock.  The  City  estimates  that  there  are  10 
housing units in need of substantial rehabilitation. 
 
TABLE 7‐16 identifies the number of owner‐occupied and renter‐occupied housing units lacking 
complete kitchen or plumbing facilities in the City and the County as a whole. This table shows 
that  less  than  one  percent  of  owner‐occupied  and  renter‐occupied  units  lacked  complete 
plumbing.  Less  than  one  percent  owner‐occupied  units  and  four  percent  of  renter‐occupied 
units lacked complete kitchens. The lack of complete kitchen or plumbing facilities is often an 
indicator  of  serious  problems,  and  housing  units  may  need  rehabilitation  even  though  they 
have complete kitchens and plumbing facilities. The City’s residential rehabilitation program is 
available to assist low‐income home owners in correcting their housing problems. 
 
The  goal  of  the  City’s  Code  Compliance  program  is  to  address  housing  concerns  before  they 
become serious problems. The City is monitored on a biannual basis and in the interim, daily 
                                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐16

                                                                                                                       
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
calls  from  citizens  regarding  code  violations  are  addressed.  The  proactive  Code  Compliance 
program  has  helped  to  reduce  structural  deterioration  by  identifying  problems  and  informing 
residents of programs to assist with improvements. 
 
                              TABLE 7‐16 Kitchen and Plumbing Facilities by Tenure 
                                                                        Camarillo              Ventura County 
                                                                 Units           Percent    Units         Percent 
      Owner Occupied                                            16,811            100.0%  174,310         100.0% 
        Complete kitchen facilities                             16,790             99.9%  173,876          99.8% 
        Lacking complete kitchen facilities                        21              0.1%      434           0.2% 
      Renter Occupied                                            6,644            100.0%   90,672         100.0% 
        Complete kitchen facilities                              6,356            95.7%    88,876          98.0% 
        Lacking complete kitchen facilities                       288              4.3%     1,796          2.0% 
      Owner Occupied                                            16,811            100.0%  174,310         100.0% 
        Complete plumbing facilities                            16,781             99.8%  173,814          99.7% 
        Lacking complete plumbing facilities                       30              0.2%      496           0.3% 
      Renter Occupied                                            6,644            100.0%   90,672         100.0% 
        Complete plumbing facilities                             6,604            99.4%    90,198          99.5% 
        Lacking complete plumbing facilities                       40              0.6%      474           0.5% 
      Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011.
 
C.             VACANCY 
 
Housing vacancy rates, as reported in the 2007‐2011 ACS, are shown in TABLE 7‐17. The table 
shows  that  vacancy  rates  in  the  City  were  relatively  low,  with  just  4.1  percent  of  rental  units 
and 1.6 percent of for‐sale units available for rent or sale, respectively. Vacancy rates for the 
County were similar to the City’s. Rental vacancy rates in the two‐percent range indicate nearly 
full occupancy, and contribute to upward pressures on rents. 
 
                                                                                                 JANUARY 2014    7‐17

                                                                                                                            
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                                TABLE 7‐17 Housing Vacancy 
                                                                     Camarillo                    Ventura County 
                                                             Units            Percent          Units          Percent 
      Total housing units                                   24,407            100.0%         280,758          100.0% 
        Occupied units                                      23,455             96.1%         264,982           94.4% 
        ‐  Owner occupied                                   16,811             68.9%         174,310           62.1% 
        ‐  Renter occupied                                   6,644             27.2%          90,672           32.3% 
      Vacant units                                            952               3.9%          15,776           5.6% 
        ‐  For rent1                                          274               4.1%           3,742           4.1% 
        ‐  For sale2                                          262               1.6%           2,323           1.3% 
        ‐  Rented or sold, not occupied                       107               0.4%           1,669           0.6% 
        ‐  For seasonal or occasional                          68               0.3%           3,597           1.3% 
        ‐  For migrant workers                                  0               0.0%             47            0.0% 
        ‐  Other vacant                                       241               1.0%           4,398           1.6% 
      Notes:   
      1  Estimated percent of all rental units 
      2  Estimated percent of all for‐sale units 
      Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011. 
 
D.           HOUSING COSTS AND AFFORDABILITY 
 
FOR‐SALE HOUSING 
According to DataQuick, a company that collects real estate data, the median home sales price 
in Ventura County was $360,000 in 2012 (FIGURE 7‐2).  Camarillo’s median home sales price of 
$377,000 is slightly more than the County median and comparable to neighboring jurisdictions. 
                                   FIGURE 7‐2 Median Home Sales Price (2012) 
                $500,000
                $450,000
                $400,000
                                                     Ventura County:  $360,000
                $350,000
                $300,000
                $250,000
                                                                                         $470,500
                                           $435,000
                $200,000       $377,000                                       $360,000               $357,000
                $150,000                             $285,000
                                                                   $236,000
                $100,000
                 $50,000
                        $0
                              Camarillo Moorpark      Oxnard         Santa   Simi Valley Thousand  Ventura
                                                                     Paula                 Oaks
               Source: DQnews, 2013. 
                                                                                                      JANUARY 2014    7‐18

                                                                                                                                      
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
 
RENTAL HOUSING 
TABLE 7‐18 summarizes current (2013) market rate rents for apartments in Camarillo, based on 
a survey of rental listings on Craigslist.org.3 The table shows that the rents in the City ranged 
from  $825  for  a  studio  to  $7,250  for  a  five  bedroom  unit.    The  average  rent  for  all  surveyed 
units in Camarillo was $1,722 per month.  
 
                                TABLE 7‐18 Median and Average Rent by Number of 
                                                  Bedrooms (Jan to Mar 2013) 
                            Number of          Number      Median          Average 
                                                                                             Rent Range 
                             Bedrooms           Listed       Rent            Rent 
                          Studio                   7        $1,095          $1,039           $825‐$1,095 
                          1‐bedroom              109        $1,250          $1,337           $895‐$1,970 
                          2‐bedroom              172        $1,740          $1,651          $1,079‐$2,145 
                          3‐bedroom               56        $2,200          $2,152          $1,000‐$3,000 
                          4‐bedroom +             32        $2,588          $2,806          $2,100‐$7,250 
                          Totals                 376        $1,665          $1,722           $825‐$7,250 
                          Source: www.craigslist.org, accessed March 25, 2013. 
 
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY BY HOUSEHOLD INCOME 
Housing  affordability  is  dependent  upon  income  and  housing  costs.    Using  set  income 
guidelines,  current  housing  affordability  can  be  estimated.    According  to  the  HCD  income 
guidelines  for  2013,  the  Area  Median  Income  (AMI)  in  Ventura  County  was  $89,300  (with 
adjustments for household size).  Assuming that the potential homebuyer has sufficient credit 
and  a  minimum  downpayment  (10  percent)4  and  spends  no  greater  than  30  to  35  percent  of 
the household income on housing expenses (i.e., mortgage, taxes and insurance), the maximum 
affordable home price and rental price can be determined.  The maximum affordable home and 
rental prices for residents of Ventura County are shown in the following table.  Households in 
the lower end of each category can afford less by comparison than those at the upper end.  
 
When market rents (TABLE 7‐19) are compared to the amount households can afford to pay for 
housing, it is clear that extremely low and very low income households will have a difficult time 
finding  housing  in  the  city  without  incurring  a  housing  cost  burden.  Based  on  the  rents 
presented in an earlier table, extremely low, very low, and low income households are not able 
to rent or purchase homes in Camarillo without overpaying for housing.  Median and moderate 
income  households  may  be  able  to  afford  some  of  the  city’s  smaller  apartments  and 
3
     Most rental listings are posted online instead of in newspapers.  Craigslist is one of the most popular sites for rental listings 
     and typically includes listings of large apartment complexes as well as small operations and individual homes. 
4
     Many  home  mortgage  loans  today  are  obtained  through  FHA  programs,  which  require  a  downpayment  of  only  three 
     percent.
                                                                                                        JANUARY 2014    7‐19

                                                                                                                                      
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
condominiums/townhomes.  However, single‐family homes are beyond the financial means of 
many median income households. 
                            TABLE 7‐19 Maximum Affordable Housing Costs (2013) 
                                              Affordable Housing 
                                                                       Utilities, Taxes and Insurance         Affordable Price 
                                                     Cost 
             Annual Income Limits 
                                                           Owner‐                  Owner‐       Taxes/ 
                                               Rent                   Rent                                  Rent            Sale 
                                                             ship                    ship     Insurance 
    Extremely Low Income (0‐30% AMI) 
    1‐Person (studio)            $18,800      $470          $470      $173          $201         $94       $297           $40,729 
    2‐Person (1 bedroom)         $21,450      $536          $536      $202          $232        $107       $334           $45,849 
    3‐Person (2 bedroom)         $24,150      $604          $604      $234          $275        $121       $370           $48,409 
    4 Person (3 bedroom)         $26,800      $670          $670      $268          $332        $134       $402           $47,478 
    5 Person (4 bedroom)         $28,950      $724          $724      $308          $383        $145       $416           $45,616 
    Very Low Income (30‐50% AMI) 
    1‐Person                     $31,300      $783          $783      $173          $201        $157       $610           $98,912 
    2‐Person                     $35,750      $894          $894      $202          $232        $179       $692          $112,411 
    3‐Person                     $40,200     $1,005        $1,005     $234          $275        $201       $771          $123,117 
    4 Person                     $44,650     $1,116        $1,116     $268          $332        $223       $848          $130,564 
    5 Person                     $48,250     $1,206        $1,206     $308          $383        $241       $898          $135,452 
    Low Income (50‐80% AMI) 
    1‐Person                     $49,850     $1,246        $1,246     $173          $201        $249      $1,073         $185,257 
    2‐Person                     $57,000     $1,425        $1,425     $202          $232        $285      $1,223         $211,323 
    3‐Person                     $64,100     $1,603        $1,603     $234          $275        $321      $1,369         $234,364 
    4 Person                     $71,200     $1,780        $1,780     $268          $332        $356      $1,512         $254,146 
    5 Person                     $76,900     $1,923        $1,923     $308          $383        $385      $1,615         $268,809 
    Median Income (80‐100% AMI) 
    1‐Person                     $62,500     $1,563        $1,823     $173          $201        $365      $1,390         $292,625 
    2‐Person                     $71,450     $1,786        $2,084     $202          $232        $417      $1,584         $334,013 
    3‐Person                     $80,350     $2,009        $2,344     $234          $275        $469      $1,775         $372,337 
    4 Person                     $89,300     $2,233        $2,605     $268          $332        $521      $1,965         $407,674 
    5 Person                     $96,450     $2,411        $2,813     $308          $383        $563      $2,103         $434,632 
    Moderate Income (100‐120% AMI) 
    1‐Person                     $75,000     $1,875        $2,188     $173          $201        $438      $1,702         $360,506 
    2‐Person                     $85,700     $2,143        $2,500     $202          $232        $500      $1,941         $411,397 
    3‐Person                     $96,450     $2,411        $2,813     $234          $275        $563      $2,177         $459,767 
    4 Person                    $107,150     $2,679        $3,125     $268          $332        $625      $2,411         $504,608 
    5 Person                    $115,700     $2,893        $3,375     $308          $383        $675      $2,585         $539,169 
    Sources: HCD, 2013; and Veronica Tam and Associates, 2013.
    Assumptions: 2013 HCD income limits; 30.0% gross household income as affordable housing cost; 20.0% of monthly affordable cost 
    for taxes and insurance; 10.0% downpayment; and 4.0% interest  rate for a 30‐year fixed‐rate mortgage loan.  Utilities based on 
    Ventura County Utility Allowance, 2012. 
 
                                                                                                          JANUARY 2014    7‐20

                                                                                                               
                7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
Extremely Low Income Households. Extremely low income households earn 30 percent or less 
of the AMI. Based on financing criteria noted earlier, the maximum affordable home price for 
an  extremely  low  income  household  ranges  from  $40,729  to  $45,616  based  on  2013  income 
limits.  Homeownership is out of reach for all extremely low income households.  Similarly, after 
deductions for utilities, an extremely low income household can afford to pay $297 to $416 in 
rent  per  month,  depending  on  the  household  size.  In  practical  terms,  this  means  that  even  a 
five‐person  extremely  low  income  household  cannot  afford  an  average  priced  one‐bedroom 
without severe overpayment or overcrowding. 
   
Very Low Income Households. Very low income households earn 30 to 50 percent or less of the 
AMI.    Based  on  the  2013  income  limits,  the  maximum  affordable  home  price  for  a  very  low 
income household ranges from $98,912 for a household of one person to $135,452 for a five‐
person  household.  Based  on  the  sales  data  presented  in  FIGURE  7‐2,  very  low  income 
households cannot afford to purchase homes in the City. As illustrated in TABLE 7‐19, a very low 
income household can afford to pay $610 to $898 in monthly rent, after deductions for utilities 
and depending on household size. Very low income households also cannot afford market rate 
rental housing in Camarillo. 
 
Low  Income  Households.  Low  income  households  earn  50  percent  to  80  percent  of  the  AMI. 
The maximum affordable home price for a low income household ranges from $185,257 for a 
one‐person  household  to  $268,809  for  a  five‐person  household.  Based  on  the  sales  data 
presented  in  FIGURE  7‐2,  low  income  households  cannot  afford  a  single‐family  home.  
However, some low income households may be able to afford some of the City’s smaller rental 
units. 
 
Median Income Households. Median income households earn 80 percent to 100 percent of the 
AMI.  The  maximum  affordable  home  price  for  a  median  income  household  ranges  from 
$292,625 for a one‐person household to $434,632 for a five‐person household. Some median 
income  households  are  able  to  afford  the  City’s  smaller  homes.  These  households  are  also 
generally able to afford market rate rents.  Larger households, however, may still have difficulty 
finding affordable adequately sized rental units. 
 
Moderate Income Households. Moderate income households earn 100 percent to 120 percent 
of  the  AMI.  The  maximum  affordable  home  price  for  a  moderate  income  household  ranges 
from  $360,506  for  a  one‐person  household  to  $539,169  for  a  five‐person  household.  Most 
moderate  income  households  can  afford  homes  in  the  City  and  are  generally  able  to  afford 
rents  in  the  City.    Larger  households,  nevertheless,  may  still  have  difficulty  finding  affordable 
adequately sized rental units. 
 
                                                                                       JANUARY 2014    7‐21

                                                                                                                                    
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
  
 7.2.6           Persons with Special Needs 
  
 Certain  groups  have  greater  difficulty  finding  decent,  affordable  housing  due  to  special 
 circumstances.  Such  circumstances  may  be  related  to  one’s  employment  and  income,  family 
 characteristics,  disability,  or  other  conditions.  As  a  result,  some  Camarillo  residents  may 
 experience a higher prevalence of overpayment, overcrowding, or other housing problems. 
  
 “Special  needs”  households  in  the  City  include  persons  with  disabilities,  seniors,  large 
 households, single‐parent households, people living in poverty, farmworkers, and the homeless. 
 TABLE 7‐20 summarizes the special needs groups within the City. 
  
                                      TABLE 7‐20 Special Needs Groups in Camarillo 
                                                                        Renters                       Owners           % of Total 
                                        # of Persons or 
     Special Needs Group                                                                                             Households or 
                                          Households            Number          Percent      Number        Percent      Persons 
                           1
Persons with Disabilities                    7,084                  ‐‐             ‐‐             ‐‐           ‐‐        11.0% 
Households with Seniors                      8,103                  ‐‐             ‐‐             ‐‐           ‐‐        33.1% 
Senior Headed Households                     7,277                1,486          20.4%          5,791       79.6%        29.7% 
Seniors Living Alone                         3,231                1,014          31.4%          2,217       68.6%        13.2% 
Large Households                             2,848                 927           32.5%          1,921       67.5%        11.6% 
Single Parent Households                     1,684                  ‐‐             ‐‐             ‐‐           ‐‐         6.9% 
Female Headed Households 
                                             1,161                  ‐‐             ‐‐             ‐‐           ‐‐         4.6% 
w/ Children 
People Living in Poverty2                    3,595                  ‐‐             ‐‐             ‐‐           ‐‐         5.6% 
         2                                                          ‐‐             ‐‐             ‐‐           ‐‐ 
Military                                       414                                                                        0.8% 
               2
Farmworkers                                    330                  ‐‐             ‐‐             ‐‐           ‐‐         0.5% 
            3
Homeless                                        30                  ‐‐             ‐‐             ‐‐           ‐‐        <1.0% 
Notes: 
1.  2010 Census data not available. Estimate is from the ACS, 2009‐2011. 
2.  2010 Census data not available. Estimate is from the ACS, 2007‐2011. 
3.  2010 Census data not available. Estimate is from the County of Ventura 2012 Homeless Count. 
Sources:  
1. Bureau of the Census, 2010. 
2. American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011. 
3. American Community Survey (ACS), 2009‐2011. 
4. County of Ventura 2012 Homeless Count 
  
 A.              PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (INCLUDING DEVELOPMENTAL 
                 DISABILITIES) 
  
 Physical, mental, and/or developmental disabilities may prevent a person from working, restrict 
 one’s mobility, or make it difficult to care for oneself.  Thus, disabled persons often have special 
 housing needs related to limited earning capacity, a lack of accessible and affordable housing, 
 and  higher  health  costs  associated  with  a  disability.  Some  residents  in  Camarillo  have 
                                                                                                             JANUARY 2014    7‐22

                                                                                                                               
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
disabilities that prevent them from working, restrict their mobility, or make it difficult to care 
for themselves. An additional segment of residents suffers from disabilities that require living in 
an  institutional  setting.  Because  of  these  conditions,  persons  with  disabilities  have  special 
housing needs. 
 
The  2010  Census  did  not  collect  information  on  disability.    However,  according  to  the  2009‐
2011 ACS data, approximately 11 percent of Camarillo residents had a disability.  The ACS also 
estimated the number of disabilities by type and person’s age for residents with one or more 
disabilities. Among the disabilities tallied, ambulatory difficulties were the most prevalent (48 
percent), while independent living (37 percent) and cognitive (35 percent) difficulties were also 
common (TABLE 7‐21).  
                          TABLE 7‐21 Persons with Disabilities by Age – Camarillo 
                                                                              % of Disabilities Tallied 
                           Disability Type                                    Age 18 to 
                                                            Age 5 to 17                       Age 65+      Total 
                                                                                 64 
               With a hearing difficulty                        6.6%           23.7%           40.6%       31.2% 
               With a vision difficulty                       19.1%            18.3%           18.2%       18.3% 
               With a cognitive difficulty                    77.6%            36.8%           25.5%       34.9% 
               With an ambulatory difficulty                  10.0%            40.1%           59.7%       47.7% 
               With a self‐care difficulty                    10.0%            17.6%           19.4%       17.8% 
               With an independent living difficulty              ‐‐           38.7%           45.9%       38.6% 
               Total Persons with Disabilities                  740            2,431           3,859      7,030* 
               * Persons under 5 years of age are not included in this table.
               Source: Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2009‐2011. 
The  living  arrangement  of  persons  with  disabilities  depends  on  the  severity  of  the  disabilities 
and the available resources. Many persons live at home in an independent arrangement or with 
other family members. To maintain independent living, persons living with disabilities may need 
assistance.  Four factors – affordability, design, location, and discrimination – significantly limit 
the  supply  of  housing  available  to  households  of  persons  with  disabilities.    The  most  obvious 
housing need for persons with disabilities is housing that is adapted to their needs.  State and 
federal  legislation  mandate  that  a  percentage  of  units  in  new  or  substantially  rehabilitated 
multi‐family  apartment  complexes  be  made  accessible  to  individuals  with  limited  physical 
mobility.    Most  single‐family  homes,  however,  are  inaccessible  to  people  with  mobility  and 
sensory  limitations.    Housing  may  not  be  adaptable  with  widened  doorways  and  hallways, 
access  ramps,  larger  bathrooms,  lowered  countertops,  and  other  features  necessary  for 
accessibility.  Location of housing is also an important factor for many persons with disabilities, 
as they often rely upon public transportation to travel to necessary services and shops. 
 
                                                                                                         JANUARY 2014    7‐23

                                                                                                             
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
PERSONS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES 
A recent change in State law requires that the Housing Element discuss the housing needs of 
persons  with  developmental  disabilities.    As  defined  in  Section  4512  of  the  Welfare  and 
Institutions  Code,  developmental  disability  means  “a  disability  that  originates  before  an 
individual  attains  age  18  years,  continues,  or  can  be  expected  to  continue,  indefinitely,  and 
constitutes  a  substantial  disability  for  that  individual.  As  defined  by  the  Director  of 
Developmental Services, in consultation with the Superintendent of Public Instruction, this term 
shall  include  mental  retardation,  cerebral  palsy,  epilepsy,  and  autism.  This  term  shall  also 
include  disabling  conditions  found  to  be  closely  related  to  mental  retardation  or  to  require 
treatment similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall not include 
other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.” 
 
The Census does not record developmental disabilities.  According to the U.S. Administration on 
Developmental Disabilities, an accepted estimate of the percentage of the population that can 
be defined as developmentally disabled is 1.5 percent. This equates to 978 persons in the City 
of Camarillo with developmental disabilities, based on the 2010 Census population. 
 
According  to  the  State’s  Department  of  Developmental  Services,  as  of  November  2012, 
approximately  361  Camarillo  residents  with  developmental  disabilities  were  being  assisted  at 
the  Tri‐Counties  Regional  Center.    Most  of  these  individuals  were  residing  in  a  private  home 
with  their  parent  or  guardian  and  296  of  these  persons  with  developmental  disabilities  were 
under the age of 18. 
 
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional 
housing  environment.  More  severely  disabled  individuals  require  a  group  living  environment 
where  supervision  is  provided.  The  most  severely  affected  individuals  may  require  an 
institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because 
developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the 
developmentally  disabled  is  the  transition  from  the  person’s  living  situation  as  a  child  to  an 
appropriate level of independence as an adult. 
 
Resources 
Housing opportunities for people with handicaps can be maximized through housing assistance 
programs and providing universal design features such as widened doorways, ramps, lowered 
countertops, single‐level units and ground floor units. 
 
Under  State  and  Federal  laws,  local  governments  are  required  to  provide  “reasonable 
accommodation” to persons with disabilities when exercising planning and zoning powers.  In 
2011,  the  City  revised  the  Zoning  Code  to  include  standards  and  policies  to  reasonably 
accommodate the housing needs of persons with disabilities.  
                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐24

                                                                                                                    
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
In  addition,  community  care  facilities  provide  a  supportive  housing  environment  to  persons 
with  special  needs  in  a  group  situation.  According  to  Community  Care  Licensing  Division 
records, 33 licensed residential care facilities, including facilities for the elderly, are located in 
Camarillo.    They  range  in  size  from  six  beds  to  140  beds  and  have  a  total  of  739  beds. 
Residential care facilities that serve six or fewer persons are classified as a residential use and 
are  permitted  by‐right  in  all  residential  zones.  Facilities  serving  more  than  six  persons  are 
conditionally  permitted  in  the  R‐1,  R‐E,  RPD,  and  the  CPD  Zones.  There  is  no  spacing  or 
separation requirement on the location of residential care facilities. 
 
Camarillo residents with disabilities can also benefit from the services and programs offered by 
various City supported organizations, such as OASIS.  Curb‐to‐curb transportation services are 
available to residents through the Camarillo Area Transit (CAT) Dial‐A‐Ride program. 
 
B.              SENIORS 
 
In  2010,  there  were  7,277  senior‐headed  households  in  Camarillo  (TABLE  7‐22).  Of  these 
households, 445 (about six percent) were living below the poverty level in 2011.5 Many elderly 
persons  are  dependent  on  fixed  incomes,  and  a  substantial  percentage  are  disabled  or  live 
alone.  Thirteen  percent  of  total  households  in  the  City  are  comprised  of  seniors  living  alone. 
Elderly homeowners may also be physically unable to maintain their homes .  
 
Heads of households in this age group may have a greater level of need than other age groups.  
Many  seniors  have  fixed  incomes  and  experience  financial  difficulty  in  coping  with  rising 
housing and living costs.  Senior homeowners require help in meeting ongoing housing costs, 
especially utility and related costs, and often are forced to defer necessary repairs.   The high 
incidence of disabilities in the senior population can also present unique challenges and housing 
needs for this group. 
                              TABLE 7‐22 Elderly Household by Tenure – Camarillo 
                                                             Owners                    Renters 
                      Householder Age              Households        Percent  Households        Percent 
                Total households                     17,059          100.0%     7,445           100.0% 
                Under 65 years                       11,268           66.1%     5,959            80.0% 
                65 to 74 years                        2,611           15.3%      539             7.2% 
                75 to 84 years                        2,031           11.9%      499             6.7% 
                85 and over                           1,149           6.7%       448             6.0% 
                65+ living alone                      2,217           13.0%     1,014            13.6% 
                Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2010.
 
5
     U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011. 
                                                                                              JANUARY 2014    7‐25

                                                                                                           
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
Resources 
The housing needs of this group can be addressed through smaller units, second units on lots 
with  existing  homes,  shared  living  arrangements,  congregate  housing  and  housing  assistance 
programs. 
 
According to Community Care Licensing Division records, there are 30 licensed residential care 
facilities for the elderly located in Camarillo with a total capacity of 568 beds. Residential care 
facilities that serve six or fewer persons are classified as a residential use and are permitted by‐
right in all residential zones. Facilities serving more than six persons are conditionally permitted 
in the R‐1, R‐E, RPD, and the CPD Zones. There is no spacing or separation requirement on the 
location of residential care facilities. 
 
Senior residents can benefit from a number of City programs and services.  As a mechanism for 
seniors  to  voice  their  concerns,  the  Camarillo  Council  on  Aging  (CCOA)  serves  as  an  advisory 
body that meets monthly and allows senior residents to make formal recommendations to the 
City  Council  and  Area  Agency  on  Aging.    The  CCOA  supports  an  Annual  Seniors’  Expo  and 
provides  an  annual  Senior  Resource  Guide  to  residents.  The  Pleasant  Valley  Senior  Center 
receives support from the CCOA and provides an array of special events, recreation and leisure 
programs,  and  social  services  through  collaboration  with  various  community  organizations.  
Organizations funded by the City that can provide support to senior residents including OASIS, 
Long  Term  Care  Ombudsman,  Housing  Rights  Center,  FOOD  Share,  and  the  Camarillo  Health 
Care District—Senior Hot Meals. 
 
In  addition,  a  number  of  housing  developments  in  Camarillo  specifically  accommodate  senior 
residents, including: 
 
      Camarillo Mobile Home Park ‐ 110 spaces for seniors 
      Camarillo Springs Country Club Village ‐ 261 spaces for seniors 
      Casa Del Norte Mobile Home Community ‐ 134 spaces for seniors 
      Leisure Village ‐ 2,136 units 
      Mira Vista Village ‐ 305 apartments 
      Park Glen Senior Apartments ‐ 18 apartments 
      Ponderosa Village ‐ 90 apartments 
      Rancho Adolfo Estates ‐ 250 spaces for seniors 
 
                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐26

                                                                                                                    
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
C.           LARGE HOUSEHOLDS 
 
Household  size  is  an  indicator  of  need  for  large  units.  Large  households  are  defined  as  those 
with five or more members. A large household may be a large family (e.g., parents with children 
and/or extended family members), two or more families sharing the same housing unit, more 
than five unrelated individuals living together, or any of these combinations. Large households 
are  identified  as  a  group  with  special  housing  needs  based  on  the  limited  availability  of 
affordable, adequately sized housing units.  It is not uncommon for large households to have 
lower  incomes  or  to  consist  of  more  than  one  family.    To  save  on  housing  costs,  many lower 
income large households resort to residing in smaller units, frequently resulting in overcrowded 
living conditions.  Large households can also put a physical strain on the housing stock, resulting 
in more wear‐and‐tear on the dwelling unit.  
 
The  City's  average  household  size  has  dropped  from  2.73  persons  in  2000  to  2.64  persons  in 
2010. As shown in TABLE 7‐23, the majority of households (regardless of tenure) have only one 
or  two  members.  About  12  percent  of  renter  households  had  five  or  more  members,  while 
about 11 percent of owner households were considered large. This distribution indicates that 
the  City’s  overall  need  for  large  units  (with  four  or  more  bedrooms)  is  less  than  its  need  for 
smaller units. 
 
                              TABLE 7‐23 Household Size by Tenure – Camarillo 
                                                            Owners                   Renters 
                     Household Size               Households        Percent  Households       Percent 
                1 person                              3,634          21.3%     2,352           31.6% 
                2 persons                             6,114          35.8%     2,010           27.0% 
                3 persons                             2,787          16.3%     1,167           15.7% 
                4 persons                             2,603          15.3%      989            13.3% 
                5 persons                            1,199           7.0%       532            7.1% 
                6 persons                              432           2.5%       244            3.3% 
                7+ persons                             290           1.7%       151            2.0% 
                Total Households                     17,059         100.0%     7,445          100.0% 
                Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2010. 
 
Resources 
Lower  and  moderate  income  large  households  can  benefit  from  various  affordable  housing 
programs.  Section  8  Housing  Choice  Vouchers  can  help  relieve  overcrowding  for  very  low 
income households. Large households in the City can also benefit from programs and services 
offered by City supported organizations, which include the Housing Rights Center, FOOD Share, 
Area Housing Authority, Habitat for Humanity, and Community Action Partnership. 
 
                                                                                              JANUARY 2014    7‐27

                                                                                                                  
                7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
D.               SINGLE‐PARENT HOUSEHOLDS 
 
Single‐parent  households,  particularly  female‐headed  families  with  children,  often  require 
special  consideration  and  assistance  as  a  result  of  their  greater  need  for  affordable  housing, 
accessible day care, health care, and other supportive services. Because of their relatively lower 
incomes  and  higher  living  expenses,  single‐parent  households  usually  have  more  limited 
options for affordable, decent, and safe housing. As a result, single parents are considered to be 
among the groups most at‐risk to experiencing poverty.  
 
Of  the  24,504  households  in  the  City,  10  percent  (or  2,386  households)  were  female‐headed 
family households (TABLE 7‐24).  In 2010, 1,684 single‐parent families (with their own children 
under  18  years  of  age)  resided  in  the  City—making  up  seven  percent  of  all  Camarillo 
households.    Of  these  single‐parent  households,  approximately  69  percent  were  headed  by  a 
female (TABLE 7‐24).  While female‐headed households with children represent a small portion 
of the City’s households (five percent), a substantial share of these households (20 percent) are 
living below the poverty level.6 
 
                                  TABLE 7‐24 Household Type by Tenure – Camarillo 
                                                                      Owners                   Renters 
                         Household Type                     Households        Percent  Households       Percent 
      Married couple family                                    10,727          62.9%     2,838           38.1% 
      Male householder, no wife present                          628           3.7%       450            6.0% 
      Female householder, no husband present                    1,315          7.7%      1,071           14.4% 
      Non‐family households                                     4,389          25.7%     3,086           41.5% 
      Total Households                                         17,059         100.0%     7,445          100.0% 
      Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2010. 
 
Resources 
General  programs  and  policies  designed  to  preserve  and  promote  affordable  housing  will 
benefit single‐parent households. Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers, for example, benefit very 
low income households, including female‐headed families. 
 
Single‐parent  households  can  also  benefit  from childcare  and  after  school  programs  provided 
by organizations located in the City, such as the Boys & Girls Club.  In addition, the City supports 
a  number  of  organizations  that  provide  services  single‐parent  households  can  benefit  from, 
including  Interface  Children  Family  Services,  RAIN,  Housing  Rights  Center,  FOOD  Share,  and 
Community Action Partnership. 
 
6
   U.S. Bureau of the census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011. 
                                                                                           JANUARY 2014    7‐28

                                                                                                          
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
E.          RESIDENTS LIVING BELOW THE POVERTY LEVEL 
 
Families with incomes below the poverty level, typically those households with extremely low 
and very low incomes, have the greatest risk of becoming homeless and typically require special 
programs to assist them in meeting their rent and mortgage obligations so as to not become 
homeless.  The 2007‐2011 ACS found that approximately six percent of all Camarillo residents 
had  incomes  below  the  poverty  level.    These  households  need  assistance  with  housing 
subsidies, utility and other living expense subsidies, as well as other supportive services. 
 
Resources 
Households  living  in  poverty  can  benefit  from  single  room  occupancy  units  (SROs).  The 
Camarillo  Zoning  Code  does  not  currently  define  SROs  or  include  specific  provisions  for  their 
development. However, the City will amend the Zoning Code within two years of adoption of 
the Housing Element to facilitate the development of this housing type.  
 
The City also provides support to a number of agencies that assist households living in poverty.  
Organizations  providing  support  services  such  as  emergency  and  transitional  living 
arrangements, food distribution and meals, and a wide range of social services include Interface 
Children  Family  Services,  RAIN,  OASIS,  Saint  Vincent  de  Paul—Winter  Warming  Shelter,  Long 
Term Care Ombudsman, Housing Rights Center, FOOD Share, Senior Hot Meals, Area Housing 
Authority, Turning Point Foundation, Habitat for Humanity, and Community Action Partnership. 
 
F.          MILITARY HOUSEHOLDS 
 
The  military  population’s  influence  on  the  demand  for  housing  takes  two  forms:  (1)  existing 
military households trying to find housing; and (2) former military households trying to remain 
in  the  community.  Often,  the  housing  needs  of  military  personnel  are  affected  by  lower 
incomes  and  an  uncertain  length  of  residency.  In  the  Ventura  County  region,  military 
populations  are  associated  with  Naval  Base  Ventura  County  (NBVC).  As  of  November  2013, 
approximately  3,713  people  lived  on  the  base  at  both  Point  Mugu  and  Port  Hueneme.    This 
includes 762 single enlisted personnel living in barracks and families made up of 2,951 persons 
living in family units ranging in size from two to seven bedrooms. 
 
Under a recent proposal to establish facilities and functions to support the West Coast home 
basing and  maintaining of a fleet of Triton  Unmanned Aircraft Systems (Triton  UAS) at NBVC, 
the number of active duty personnel serving at the base could increase.  Up to 700 personnel 
would be stationed at NBVC Point Mugu to support the Triton UAS and gradually relocated to 
the  base  and  the  surrounding  areas  in  phases  (from  2014  to  2020).  Of  the  increase,  it  is 
estimated that each of the 700 personnel associated with the proposal would be accompanied 
by an average of 2.4 family members (up to an estimated total of 2,380 people). The additional 
                                                                                  JANUARY 2014    7‐29

                                                                                                       
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
personnel would have the choice to obtain non‐Navy housing off‐installation or Navy‐housing 
on‐installation or in the surrounding communities at Navy Public Private Venture Housing (i.e., 
Lincoln Military Housing). 
 
Dependent  on  various  factors,  such  as  marital  status  and  rank,  the  Department  of  Defense 
adjusts the monthly income of its personnel. Pay scale for active duty personnel is based on a 
pay grade system and cumulative years of service. For example, pay grades earned can be as 
low as $1,516 per month at level E‐1 ($1,413 for E‐1 with less than 4 months of service)9. Based 
on HUD income standards, most enlisted personnel are classified as very‐low and low income. 
 
Resources 
On‐base  housing  provided  by  NBVC  for  its  active  duty  personnel  includes  a  total  of  2,156 
barrack slots for single enlisted personnel. A total of 1,633 housing units for military personnel 
with families is available on‐base, including, 380 two‐bedroom units, 878 three‐bedroom units, 
371  four‐bedroom  units,  three  five‐bedroom  units,  and  one  seven‐bedroom  unit.  Family 
housing units on the base is in high demand, with an estimated waiting period of approximately 
zero to six months, although based on unit type and size the waiting period varies. For two to 
three‐bedroom  units  the  waiting  period  ranges  from  three  to  six  months,  for  four‐bedroom 
units  the  waiting  period  ranges  from  zero  to  two  months,  and  for  three  and  four‐bedroom 
officer units the waiting period can be as long as one year. 
 
Off‐base Navy housing in Ventura County is offered by Lincoln Military Housing, with over 1,221 
homes within the local communities available to serve active duty personnel at NBVC. One of 
Lincoln  Military  Housing’s  developments,  Catalina  Heights,  is  located  in  Camarillo.  The 
development has a total of 315 newly constructed units, with a mix of 3 and 4 bedroom town 
homes for personnel ranked E1 to E6 and 3 and four bedroom detached homes for personnel 
ranked E‐7 to O7. 
 
All active duty personnel are eligible to receive a Basic Housing Allowance (BAH), if they are in 
non‐government  quarters.  The  BAH  is  a  U.S.  based  allowance  prescribed  by  geographic  duty 
location, pay grade, and dependency status. It provides uniformed Service members equitable 
housing compensation based on housing costs in local civilian housing market within the United 
States when government quarters are not provided. 
 
                                                                                 JANUARY 2014    7‐30

                                                                                                                              
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
G.             FARM WORKERS 
 
Unlike most areas of the Southern California metropolitan area, agriculture is still a significant 
component of the economy in Ventura County, with a total value of over $1 billion per year.7 
There is strong public sentiment for retaining agricultural production, as reflected in the SOAR 
(Save Our Agricultural Resources) initiatives that have been approved by voters. 
 
According to the Ventura County Workforce Investment Board, over the past two decades the 
number  of  farmworkers  in  the  region  has  continued  to  increase  –  there  were  5,000  more 
agricultural jobs in Ventura County in 2003 than there were in 1983. Agricultural employment 
in  the  County  remained  fairly  static  (in  the  range  of  16,000  to  18,000  jobs)  until  2000,  when 
lemon orchards on the Oxnard Plain gave way to higher value row‐crop development, mainly in 
berries  and  nurseries.  This  more  intense  level  of  agriculture  required  greater  numbers  of 
production  workers,  an  average  of  22,069  employees  in  2005.  This  figure  was  projected  to 
continue rising to 25,678 in 2010. 
 
In  spite  of  the  increase  in  agriculture  sector  jobs,  wages  have  not  increased  correspondingly. 
Adjusted for inflation, the average annual agricultural worker salary peaked in 1998 at $21,447 
and declined to $18,499 in 2005. 
 
The  2007‐2011  ACS  reported  that  about  18,000  persons  were  employed  in  agricultural 
occupations  in  Ventura  County.  About  two  percent  of  the  County’s  farmworkers  live  in 
Camarillo  (TABLE  7‐25).  As  of  2013,  the  City  has  approximately  1,811  acres  of  agriculturally 
designated land. 
 
                                        TABLE 7‐25 Agricultural Employment 
                                                                       Percent of              Ventura  
                                                   Camarillo          County Total              County 
                       Workers                        330                 1.8%                  17,990 
                       Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007‐2011.
 
Resources 
Under California Health and Safety Code 17021.5, farmworker housing up to 12 units or 36 beds 
must  be  considered  an  agricultural  use  and  permitted  in  any  zone  that  permits  agricultural 
uses. In 2012, the City amended its Zoning Code to identify farmworker housing as a permitted 
use in the A‐E zone. 
 
7
     Workforce Investment Board of Ventura County, The Future of Ventura County Agriculture:  Issues and Opportunities for 
     Workers and Growers, 2006 
                                                                                                        JANUARY 2014    7‐31

                                                                                                          
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
H.            HOMELESS PERSONS 
 
State  law  (Section  65583(1)  (6))  mandates  that  municipalities  address  the  special  needs  of 
homeless persons within their jurisdictional boundaries.  “Homelessness” as defined by the U.S. 
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), describes an individual (not imprisoned 
or otherwise detained) who: 
 
     Lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence; and  
     Has a primary nighttime residence that is: 
     A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary living 
         accommodations  (including  welfare  hotels,  congregate  shelters,  and  transitional 
         housing for the mentally ill); 
     An  institution  that  provides  a  temporary  residence  for  individuals  intended  to  be 
         institutionalized; or 
     A  public  or  private  place  not  designed  for,  or  ordinarily  used  as,  a  regular  sleeping 
         accommodation for human beings. 
 
This  definition  does  not  include  persons  living  in  substandard  housing,  (unless  it  has  been 
officially  condemned);  persons  living  in  overcrowded  housing  (example,  doubled  up  with 
others),  persons  being  discharged  from  mental  health  facilities  (unless  the  person  was 
homeless when entering and is considered to be homeless at discharge), or persons who may 
be at risk of homelessness (example, living temporarily with family or friends). 
 
Homelessness  is  a  continuing  problem  throughout  California  and  urban  areas  nationwide. 
Camarillo is fortunate, as studies by government agencies and homeless advocacy groups have 
shown that homelessness is not pervasive in the community. A homeless count conducted by 
Ventura  County  Homeless  and  Housing  Coalition  in  January  2012  indicated  that  on  any  given 
day there may be up to 30 homeless persons in Camarillo (TABLE 7‐26). These include families 
that  might  be  displaced  through  evictions,  women  and  children  displaced  through  abusive 
family  life,  persons  with  substance  abuse  problems,  or  persons  passing  through  Camarillo  on 
Highway 101. Approximately 43 percent of Camarillo’s homeless population was comprised of 
children  (persons  under  age  18).  By  contrast,  children  comprised  only  11  percent  of  the 
County’s homeless population. It should be noted, however, that none of the homeless children 
in the City were unaccompanied youth.    
 
                                                                                  JANUARY 2014    7‐32

                                                                                                                                 
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                               TABLE 7‐26 Homeless Profile 
                                                                    Camarillo                          Ventura County 
                                                          Persons             Percent            Persons          Percent 
      Total Homeless                                          30              100.0%               1,936          100.0% 
      Age: Children (under 18)                                13               43.3%                214            11.1% 
      Age: Youth (18‐24)                                       0                0.0%                136             7.0% 
      Age: Adults (25‐61)                                     17               56.7%               1,487           76.8% 
      Age: Seniors (62+)                                       0               0.0%                  99            5.1% 
            1
      Male                                                     7               41.0%               1,206           70.0% 
      Female1                                                 10               59.0%                517            30.0% 
               2
      Families                                                 6               20.0%                115            5.9% 
                             3
      Race and Ethnicity  
      ‐  White                                                 8               62.0%                955            59.2% 
      ‐  Black/African American                                0                0.0%                 82            5.1% 
      ‐  American Indian/Alaskan                               0                0.0%                 57            3.5% 
      ‐  Asian or Pacific Islander                             0                0.0%                 43             2.7% 
      ‐  Other                                                 0                0.0%                 49            3.0% 
      ‐  Hispanic/Latino                                       5               38.0%                426            26.4% 
      Note: 
      1.  Gender estimates based on responses from a limited sample:  Camarillo‐17; Ventura County‐1,723. 
      2.  Combined 2‐parent and 1‐parent families 
      3.  Race/Ethnicity estimates based on responses from a limited sample: Camarillo‐13; Ventura County‐1,612. 
      Source: County of Ventura 2012 Homeless Count 
 
Although there can be many potential causes of homelessness, the most common, as indicated 
by the findings of the 2012 County of Ventura Homeless Survey, were: 
 
     Substance  Abuse  and  Alcohol.    Among  survey  respondents  26  percent  indicated  that 
        they had a drug or alcohol problem.   
 
     Domestic  Violence.    According  to  survey  findings  22  percent  of  women  and  men  had 
        been  a  victim  of  domestic  violence;  specifically,  among  women,  52  percent  indicated 
        they had been victims. 
 
Mental  Illness.    Among  survey  respondents  38  percent  felt  that  they  had  a  mental  health 
problem,  were  taking  medications  for  mental  health  issues,  and/or  had  been  hospitalized  for 
mental health issues.  
 
Needs of the Homeless Population 
       Shelter  and  service  needs  of  the  homeless  population  are  significantly  different 
        depending  on  the  population  subgroup.  The  City’s  and  County’s  Continuum  of  Care 
                                                                                                           JANUARY 2014    7‐33

                                                                                                            
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
           approach  to  homelessness  involves  focusing  new  and  existing  tools  and  resources  on 
           the following three sub‐populations of homeless persons and those at risk of becoming 
           homeless8.  
 
          Chronic  Homeless  Persons.    Chronic  homeless  persons,  according  to  the  U.S. 
           Department  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development  (HUD),  are  individuals  who  are 
           homeless for one year or more, or four times in three years, and have a disability which 
           is often mental illness and/or substance abuse. They are often the most visible and the 
           hardest to reach of all homeless persons. The 2012 County of Ventura Homeless Survey 
           found  that  about  56  percent  or  1,084  of  the  approximately  1,936  persons  who  are 
           homeless in the County on a given day are chronically homeless. 
 
          Episodic Homeless Persons. Episodic homeless persons are individuals or families who 
           are homeless for a short period of time – days, weeks, or months – not a year or more. 
 
          Persons  At  Risk  of  Becoming  Homeless.  Persons  at  risk  of  becoming  homeless  have 
           limited  income  and  often  have  to  choose  between  paying  their  rent  or  mortgage  and 
           other  daily  living  costs  which  often  put  them  at  risk  of  becoming  homeless.  It  is 
           estimated that residents of households with an annual income of less than $25,000 are 
           seriously  at‐risk  of  becoming  homeless  in  Ventura  County.  This  translates  to  an 
           estimated 6,000 County residents that are at‐risk of becoming homeless. 
 
Resources 
The Ventura County Local Emergency Shelter Strategy (2011) identifies 115 year‐round shelter 
beds  and  229  winter  shelter  beds  in  Ventura  County.  In  addition,  Ventura  County  has  345 
transitional shelter beds. None of these emergency shelters are located in Camarillo; however, 
85 of the County’s 345 transitional housing beds (approximately 25 percent) are located in the 
RAIN facility adjacent to the City of Camarillo. 
 
Various  emergency  shelter,  winter  (seasonal)  shelter,  and  transitional  and  permanent 
supportive  housing  options  are  available  to  residents  throughout  Ventura  County.    The  City 
supports the Saint Vincent de Paul—Winter Warming shelter to provide emergency housing for 
men,  women,  and  families  during  the  winter  months.    Another  City  supported  program,  the 
RAIN Transitional Living Center, serves as a transitional shelter and additionally offers various 
social  services  such  as  job  search  assistance,  enforced  savings  program,  transportation,  case 
management,  self‐sufficiency  training,  and  substance  abuse  recovery  support/counseling.  
Additional  organizations  supported  by  the  City  offering  a  wide  range  of  services  beneficial  to 
homeless  and  potentially  homeless  persons  include  Interface,  Housing  Rights  Center,  FOOD 
8
   Source: 10‐Year Strategy to End Homelessness for Ventura County, June 2007 
                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐34

                                                                                                             
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
Share,  Senior  Hot  Meals,  Area  Housing  Authority,  Turning  Point  Foundation,  Habitat  for 
Humanity, and Community Action Partnership. 
 
7.2.7       Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion 
 
A.          INTRODUCTION 
 
Existing  housing  that  receives  governmental  assistance  is  often  a  significant  source  of 
affordable housing in many communities. State law requires the City to identify, analyze, and 
propose programs to preserve existing multi‐family rental units that are currently restricted to 
low income housing use and that will become unrestricted and possibly be lost as low income 
housing (i.e., “units at risk” or “at‐risk units”).  State law requires the following: 
 
     An inventory of restricted low income housing projects in the City and their potential for 
        conversion; 
     An analysis of the costs of preserving and/or replacing the units at risk and a comparison 
        of these costs; 
     An analysis of the organizational and financial resources available for preserving and/or 
        replacing the units “at risk”; and 
     Programs for preserving the at‐risk units. 
 
The  following  discussion  satisfies  the  first  three  requirements  of  State  law  listed  above 
pertaining  to  the  potential  conversion  of  assisted  housing  units  into  market  rate  housing 
between October 15, 2013, and October 15, 2023.  The Housing Plan  chapter of this Housing 
Element includes a program for preserving the at‐risk units, which meets the final requirement 
of State law. 
 
B.          INVENTORY OF ASSISTED UNITS 
 
TABLE  7‐27  provides  a  list  of  developments  within  the  City  of  Camarillo  that  participate  in  a 
federal, state or local program that provided some form of assistance, either through financial 
subsidy or a control measure. 
 
Most  of  the  City’s  affordable  housing  projects  are  not  at  risk  during  the  2013‐2023  at‐risk 
housing  analysis  period.  Only  two  assisted  developments  have  restrictions  that  could  expire 
during this time: Ponderosa Village Senior Apartments and Corte Madera apartments.  
 
                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐35

                                                                                                                                
                   7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
    
                           TABLE 7‐27 Assisted Housing Developments – Camarillo
       Project       Year   Units                                         Program                                        Expires 
                                                            Not At‐Risk 
                                   6‐unit mixed‐use project with 1 unit restricted for low‐income tenant for 20 years 
Ventura Blvd.        2005    1     City waived or reduced development standards to make the development                   2025 
                                   affordable. 
                                   Tax Credits and Multifamily Housing Revenue Bonds. 100 percent for 60 percent 
Park Glenn           1998   150                                                                                           2028 
                                   of median. (30 years)
                                   City acquired site with CDBG funds and assisted with permits and off‐site 
                                   improvements. 100 percent L/M income seniors (55 years). Multifamily Housing 
Park Glenn Seniors   2000    18                                                                                        2030/2055
                                   Revenue Bonds. 40 percent of units to be occupied by L/M income seniors (30 
                                   years) 
Heritage House       1998    22    Multifamily Housing Revenue bonds. 22 units for very low‐income (35 years)             2033 
Cedarbrook Walk      2003    34    Condos assisted with CDBG funds, restricted to low‐income owners for 30 years.         2033 
                                   9 of 87 total units restricted for moderate‐income homeowners for 30 years. City 
Pardee/Mulberry                    reduced development standards and exempted units from the Residential 
                     2004    9                                                                                            2034 
Place                              Development Evaluation Board requirements to make the development 
                                   affordable. 
Courtyards at                      6 of 35 total units restricted for low‐income owners for 30 years. City waived or 
                     2006     6                                                                                           2036 
Camarillo Springs                  reduced development standards to make the development affordable. 
                                   10 of 120 ownership units restricted to very‐low‐income buyers for 30 years. City 
Tesoro Walk          2006    10                                                                                           2036 
                                   waived or reduced development standards to make the development affordable.
                                   37 of 249 apartment units restricted to low‐income renters for 30 years. City 
Avalon Bay           2006    37                                                                                           2036 
                                   waived or reduced development standards to make the development affordable.
Wickford/Village at                26 of 138 total units restricted to low‐income owners for 30 years. City waived or 
                     2006    26                                                                                           2036 
the Park                           reduced development standards to make the development affordable. 
                                   34 low‐income renter units restricted for 30 years. City waived or reduced 
Courtyards/Village 
                     2008    34    development standards to make the development affordable. Tax credit financing         2038 
at the Park 
                                   was also used.
                                   7 low‐income units in a 24‐unit ownership project assisted with CDC funds. 
Mission Walk         2003    7                                                                                            2048 
                                   Restricted for 45 years.
                                   City acquired site and paid for permits and off‐site public improvements with 
Casa Velasquez       1994    13    CDBG funds. 100 percent low and very low income. After 55 years, ownership             2049 
                                   reverts to the City.
                                   CDBG and Tax Credits.  City acquired site and paid for permits and off‐site 
Casa de Sueno        2000    10                                                                                           2055 
                                   improvements with CDBG funds. 100% low and very low income. 
                                   In 2006, the City assisted the Area Housing Authority in the acquisition of Mira 
                                   Vista Village, permanently preserving all 305 units as affordable housing to low‐ 
Mira Vista Village   1990   305    and very low‐income seniors. The City provided CDBG and redevelopment               Permanent
                                   housing set‐aside funds and supported the tax credit application for the purchase 
                                   of Mira Vista Village. 
                                   CDBG and public housing authority funds were used to build the apartments. 100 
Ellis Terrace        1988    27                                                                                        Permanent
                                   percent very low‐income. (Owned by Area Housing Authority)
Raemere Street                     Duplex rehabilitated and owned by the Area Housing Authority for very low‐ 
                     1991    2                                                                                         Permanent
Apartments                         income renters. Property purchased and rehabilitated with CDBG funds. 
Habitat for                        SFD houses assisted with CDBG funds. Habitat For Humanity units are required to 
                     1996    2                                                                                         Permanent
Humanity                           be resold to very low income persons.
Bradford                           Apartments constructed and owned by the Area Housing Authority for low‐
                     2004    27                                                                                        Permanent
Apartments                         income renters
                                   City acquired site with CDBG funds and used both CDC and CDBG funds to assist 
Meadowbrook 
                     2008    13    the development of 13 apartments. Tax credit financing was also used in building    Permanent
Apartments 
                                   the apartments.13 VL rental units owned by the Area Housing Authority. 
Subtotal                    753                                                      
                                                                                                      JANUARY 2014    7‐36

                                                                                                                                      
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
   
                                  TABLE 7‐27 Assisted Housing Developments – Camarillo
       Project           Year      Units                                        Program                                        Expires 
                                                                   At‐Risk 
Ponderosa Village                         Section 221(D) (4) mortgage financing for 90 very‐low‐income senior units, with
                         1980       90                                                                                        10/31/14 
Senior Apartments                         Section 8 
                                          20 percent (32 of 160 rental units) are set aside for lower‐income. City waived or 
Corte Madera             2000       32                                                                                          2020 
                                          reduced development standards to make the development affordable 
Subtotal                           122     
Total                              875                                                      
Source: City of Camarillo, 2013. 
   
  C.               UNITS AT RISK 
   
  PONDEROSA VILLAGE 
  Ponderosa Village was constructed in 1979 with a 221 (D) (4) market rate mortgage. The loan 
  was to be paid over a 40‐year period. The financing required that at least one of the tenants of 
  the unit is 62 years of age or older. 
   
  The use restrictions for Ponderosa Village are a result of the Section 8 new construction opt‐out 
  contract  that  is  attached  to  the  property.  This  Section  8  contract  was  executed  when  the 
  market rate mortgage was issued in 1979. The purpose of the Section 8 contract is to ensure 
  that  the  project’s  90  1‐bedroom  units  remain  available  as  senior  housing  for  the  life  of  the 
  contract. HUD pays the owner the difference between the rent paid by the tenant and the fair 
  market rent. Fair market rents are determined and reviewed on a yearly basis by the Ventura 
  County  Area  Housing  Authority  and  HUD.  The  Section  8  contract  for  Ponderosa  Village  is 
  currently due to expire in 2014.  
   
  Ponderosa  Village  also  has  an  additional  use  restriction  attached  to  the  deed.  The  City  of 
  Camarillo entered into an agreement with the owner of Ponderosa Village prior to the project’s 
  construction.  This  agreement  provides  an  exception  to  the  City’s  Parking  Ordinance  and  only 
  half the number of parking spaces was provided. Should the project ever convert to a use other 
  than  senior  housing,  parking  would  need  to  be  provided  in  compliance  with  the  parking 
  ordinance. The owner of the property would also have the option of  reducing the number of 
  dwelling  units  to  meet  the  parking  requirement.  This  agreement  runs  in  perpetuity  with  the 
  land and is binding upon all future owners of the property. 
   
  If  the  current  or  future  owner  of  Ponderosa  Village  wishes  to  convert  the  units  to  another 
  housing type, it could prove to be prohibitively expensive for the owner to provide the amount 
  of parking spaces required for a development of this size and type, or to reduce the number of 
  dwelling  units  to  correspond  with  the  City’s  parking  ordinance.  As  long  as  the  development 
  provides housing for seniors the reduced parking standard will apply. 
                                                                                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐37

                                                                                                              
                7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
 
Given the various requirements that will need to be met in order for the affordable units at this 
project to convert to market‐rate, it is unlikely that the owner of Ponderosa Village will decide 
to pursue this course of action in the near future. Given the current and projected state of the 
real  estate  market,  and  the  relative  costs  associated  with  adhering  to  the  terms  of  the 
agreement  with  the  City,  the  factors  associated  with  opting  out  of  the  Section  8  contract 
mitigate against conversion.  
 
CORTE MADERA 
Affordable  units  at  the  Corte  Madera  apartments  were  constructed  in  2000,  under  an 
agreement with the City that waived and reduced development standards in order to make 20 
percent of the units (32 units) affordable to lower incomes.  The affordability of the 32 units is 
set to expire in 2020. 
  
D.            PRESERVATION COST ANALYSIS 
 
The  majority  of  the  City’s  affordable  housing  units  are  deed  restricted  as  permanent  or  long‐
term affordable housing.  Only a small portion of Camarillo’s affordable units are considered to 
be at risk under Housing Element law.  To preserve the existing affordable housing stock, the 
City must either preserve the existing assisted units or facilitate the development of new units.  
Depending  on  the  circumstances  of  the  at‐risk  projects,  different  options  may  be  used  to 
preserve or replace the units.  Preservation options typically include: 1) transfer of projects to 
non‐profit  ownership;  2)  provision  of  rental  assistance  to  tenants;  and  3)  extension  of 
affordability covenants. 
 
Of  Camarillo’s  two  at‐risk  projects,  affordability  covenants  are  only  at  risk  for  one—Corte 
Madera.    For  Ponderosa  Village,  only  the  property’s  rent  subsidy  contract  (Section  8)  is  in 
danger of expiring.  Therefore, the extension of affordability covenants on these projects, while 
a typical option explored by other communities, may not necessarily be an appropriate option 
in  this  instance.    In  terms  of  replacement,  the  most  direct  option  is  the  development  of  new 
assisted multi‐family housing units.  Given the cost of land, however, the replacement option is 
the most expensive option.  These options are described below. 
 
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP 
Typically, transferring ownership of an at‐risk project to non‐profit housing providers is one of 
the least costly ways to ensure that the at‐risk units remain affordable for the long term.  By 
transferring  property  ownership  to  a  non‐profit  organization,  low‐income  restrictions  can  be 
secured  indefinitely  and  the  project  would  become  available  for  a  greater  range  of 
governmental assistance.  
 
                                                                                        JANUARY 2014    7‐38

                                                                                                                                
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
Ponderosa Village and Corte Madera are owned by for‐profit entities.  One possible option for 
preservation is to encourage the acquisition of these properties by nonprofit housing providers. 
Current market value for the at‐risk units is estimated on the basis of the units’ potential annual 
income, and operating and maintenance expenses.  As indicated in TABLE 7‐28, the estimated 
market  value  of  the  at‐risk  units  at  Ponderosa  Village  Senior  Apartments  and  Corte  Madera 
Apartments  is  $16.2  million.   This  estimate  is  provided  for  the  purpose  of  comparison  and 
understanding  the  magnitude  of  costs  involved  and  does  not  represent  the  precise  market 
value  of  this  project.   The  actual  market  value  at  time  of  sale  would  depend  on  market  and 
property conditions, lease‐out/turnover rates, among other factors. 
 
                           TABLE 7‐28 Market Value of At‐Risk Housing Units
                                     Unit Information                                   Total 
                         1‐Bedroom Units                                                              90 
                         2‐Bedroom Units                                                              32 
                         Annual Operating Cost                                                 $397,260  
                         Gross Annual Income                                                  $1,691,851  
                         Net Annual Income                                                    $1,294,591  
                         Market Value                                                        $16,182,390  
                         Market value for at‐risk units is estimated with the following assumptions:
                         1. Average market rent based on Fair Market Rents (FY 2013) established by 
                              HUD (One‐bedroom unit = $1,116, and Two‐bedroom unit = $1,499). 
                         2. Average size is assumed square feet for a two‐bedroom apartment. 
                         3. Annual income is calculated on a vacancy rate = 5%. 
                         4. Annual operating expenses per square foot = $4.50. 
                         5. Market value = Annual net project income*multiplication factor. 
                         6. Multiplication factor for a building in good condition is 12.5. 
 
RENTAL ASSISTANCE 
Rental subsidies can be used to maintain affordability of the 122 at‐risk affordable units.  These 
rent subsidies could be structured to mirror the federal Section 8 program.  Under Section 8, 
HUD  pays  the  difference  between what  tenants  can  pay (defined as  30  percent  of  household 
income)  and  what  HUD  estimates  as  fair  market  rent  (FMR)  on  the  unit.    In  the  Oxnard‐
Thousand  Oaks‐Ventura,  CA  MSA,  the  2013  FMR  was  $1,116  for  a  one‐bedroom  unit  and 
$1,499 for a two‐bedroom unit.  As indicated in TABLE 7‐29, based on the amount very low‐ and 
low‐income households can afford to pay in monthly rent, the total cost of subsidizing the rents 
of  all  122  at‐risk  units  is  estimated  at  around  $70,190  per  month  or  $842,285  annually.  
Providing this level of subsidies for at least 55 years would require approximately $97 million, 
assuming an average inflation rate of 2.5 percent.   
 
                                                                                                          JANUARY 2014    7‐39

                                                                                                                                              
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                         TABLE 7‐29 Rental Subsidies Required 
                                                              Household
  Unit Size/Household        Number of        Fair Market                          Affordable          Monthly per           Total Monthly 
                                                                Annual 
           Size                 Units            Rent1                           Housing Cost4        Unit Subsidy5              Subsidy 
                                                                Income 
                                                     Very Low Income (50% AMI)2 
1 Bedroom/2 person 
                                  90            $1,116          $35,750               $579                  $537                 $48,312 
household 
                                                        Low Income (80% AMI)3 
2 Bedroom/3 person 
                                  32            $1,499          $64,100               $815                  $684                 $21,878 
household 
Total Monthly                                                                                                                        $70,190 
                                 122 
Total Annual Subsidy                                                                                                                $842,285 
Notes: 
1. Fair Market Rent (FMR) is determined by HUD. These calculations use the 2013 HUD FMR for the Oxnard‐Thousand Oaks‐Ventura, CA 
     MSA. 
2. Rents are restricted to 50% AMI in these buildings, which puts residents in the Very Low Income Category, set by the California 
     Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). 
3. Rents are restricted to 80% AMI in these buildings, which puts residents in the Low Income Category, set by the California Department of 
     Housing and Community Development (HCD). 
4. The affordable housing cost is calculated based on 30% of the AMI, minus  utilities for rentals 
5. The monthly subsidy covers the gap between the FMR and the affordable housing cost  
Source: Veronica Tam and Associates, 2013 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF REPLACEMENT UNITS 
The  construction  of  new  low‐income  housing  units  as  a  means  of  replacing  currently  at‐risk 
units  is  an  option  for  Camarillo.    The  cost  of  developing  housing  depends  upon  a  variety  of 
factors  including  the  density  and  size  of  the  units  (i.e.,  square  footage  and  number  of 
bedrooms),  location,  land  costs  and  type  of  construction.    Assuming  an  average  construction 
cost  of  $90,461  per  one‐bedroom  unit  (for  a  620‐square‐foot  unit)  and  $148,094  per  two‐
bedroom  unit  (for  a  1,015‐square‐foot  unit),  it  would  cost  approximately  $12.8  million  to 
construct 122 affordable replacement units, excluding land costs and other soft costs (such as 
architecture  and  engineering).    Including  land  costs,  the  total  costs  to  develop  replacement 
units would be significantly higher. 
 
                                                                                                              JANUARY 2014    7‐40

                                                                                                                                      
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                TABLE 7‐30 Estimated New Construction Costs 
                                                     (A)              (B)               (C)                (D) 
                                                                  Estimated 
                          Unit Size                                                Estimated           Estimated 
                                                                   Average 
                                                 Total Units                          Gross         Gross Building 
                                                                   Unit Size 
                                                                                  Building Size           Costs 
                                                                    (sq. ft.) 
                   1‐Bedroom                         90               620              66,960         $8,141,499 
                   2‐Bedroom                         20              1,015             38,976         $4,738,994 
                   Total                            122                ‐‐             105,936        $12,880,493 
                   Average Per Unit Cost:                                                              $105,578 
                   (C) = (A) x (B) x 1.20 (i.e. 20% inflation to account for hallways and other common areas). 
                   (D) = (C) x $97.27 (per square foot construction costs) x 1.25 (i.e. 25% inflation to account for 
                   parking and landscaping costs). 
                   Source: International Code Council Building Valuation Data, 2013.
 
E.           RESOURCES AND PROGRAMS FOR PRESERVATION 
 
According  to  §65583(a)  (8)  (C),  the  Housing  Element  should  identify  public  and  private 
nonprofit  corporations  which  have  legal  and  managerial  capacity  to  acquire  and  manage 
assisted  housing  developments.  Inclusion  on  this  list  should  be  based  on  a  corporation’s 
expression of interest in acquiring and managing such projects. 
 
Within  Ventura  County,  the  Area  Housing  Authority,  Habitat  for  Humanity,  and  the  Cabrillo 
Economic  Development  Corporation  have  expressed  interest  in  and  have  the  resources  to 
manage,  take  over,  or  develop  affordable  housing  in  the  City.  Currently,  the  Ventura  County 
Area  Housing  Authority  owns  and  manages  over  350  units  of  low‐income  public  housing 
projects  in  the  City  of  Camarillo,  including  Mira  Vista  Village,  Bradford  apartments, 
Meadowbrook  apartments,  Ellis  Terrace  and  Raemere  Street  apartments.  The  Cabrillo 
Economic Development Corporation, a notable nonprofit housing developer in the region, also 
has a significant interest in providing affordable homes and is currently involved in a number of 
affordable  housing  projects  throughout  Ventura  County.  These  include  23  units  in  the  City  of 
Camarillo at the Casa Velasquez and Casa de Sueno apartments. 
 
Since  1983,  Habitat  for  Humanity  of  Ventura  County,  an  independent  Habitat  affiliate  and 
locally  managed  501(c)(3),   has  repaired  more  than  500  homes  and  built  more  than  54  new 
homes for families in need. Habitat homes are purchased by low‐income families at affordable 
prices,  thanks  to  volunteer  labor,  the  support  of  community  organizations,  donation  of  land, 
and Habitat’s no‐profit,  no‐interest mortgages.  The City is currently working with Habitat for 
Humanity in providing housing rehabilitation assistance to low income households using CDBG 
funds.  
 
Funds  for  the  preservation  of  affordable  housing  can  be  applied  for  at  the  federal,  state  and 
local level. In the past, the City of Camarillo has assisted in the acquisition of affordable housing 
                                                                                                                JANUARY 2014    7‐41

                                                                                                            
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
projects by issuing tax‐exempt Multi‐Housing Revenue Bonds, pursuant to the provisions of the 
California Health and Safety Code. These bonds were issued to finance the cost of acquiring and 
developing the project known as Hacienda de Camarillo III and the purchase and renovation of 
the Park Glenn apartments. Similar financing could possibly be obtained with the assistance of 
the State for the purposes of acquiring and preserving any at‐risk apartments.  However, with 
the  dissolution  of  redevelopment,  the  City  will  not  be  able  to  issue  additional  bonds  for 
affordable housing activities. 
 
For the past 15 years, the City of Camarillo has received Community Development Block Grant 
(CDBG)  funds  from  HUD.  However,  in  recent  years,  there  have  been  substantial  annual 
reductions  in  the  amount  of  CDBG  funds  allocated  to  the  City.  As  a  result,  Camarillo  can  no 
longer rely on these funds as a long‐term financing source for housing. Instead, these funds are 
now being utilized for housing rehabilitation and assistance activities. 
 
Low‐income  housing  tax  credits  (LIHTC)  may  also  be  a  potential  resource.  LIHTC  funds  were 
used to assist in the construction of the Courtyard and the Meadowbrook apartments. The City 
may also pursue working with the Area Housing Authority to use its ability as a public housing 
entity to obtain bond financing to acquire properties. 
                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐42

                                                                                                                                
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
7.3              RESOURCES AND OPPORTUNITIES 
 
This section of the Housing Element provides an overview of resources available to the City.  
 
7.3.1            Land Resources 
 
A.               REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION (RHNA) 
 
State  Housing  Element  law  requires  that  a  local  jurisdiction  accommodate  a  share  of  the 
region’s  projected  housing  needs  for  the  planning  period.    This  share,  called  the  Regional 
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA), is important, because State law mandates that jurisdictions 
provide  sufficient  land  to  accommodate  a  variety  of  housing  opportunities  for  all  economic 
segments  of  the  community.    Compliance  with  this  requirement  is  measured  by  the 
jurisdiction’s  ability  to  identify  adequate  sites  to  accommodate  the  RHNA.    The  Southern 
California Association  of  Governments  (SCAG), as  the regional  planning  agency, is  responsible 
for allocating the RHNA to individual jurisdictions within the region.   
 
The RHNA is distributed by income category.  For the fifth cycle Housing Element update, the 
City of Camarillo is allocated a RHNA of 2,224 units as follows: 
 
       Extremely Low Income (up to 30 percent of AMI): 266 units9 (10 percent) 
       Very Low Income (31 to 50 percent of AMI): 273 units (11 percent) 
       Low Income (51 to 80 percent of AMI): 366 units (16 percent) 
       Moderate Income (81 to 120 percent of AMI): 411 units (18 percent) 
       Above Moderate Income (more than 120 percent of AMI): 908 units (41 percent) 
 
While  the  fifth  cycle  Housing  Element  covers  a  planning  period  of  October  15,  2013  through 
October 15, 2021, the RHNA for this Housing Element does not commence until January 1, 2014 
and covers through October 31, 2021.  Housing units constructed or permitted prior to January 
1, 2014 do not receive credits for RHNA for this Housing Element cycle. 
 
9
      The City has a RHNA allocation of 539 very low income units (inclusive of extremely low income units).  Pursuant to new 
      State law (AB 2634), the City must project the number of extremely low income housing needs based on Census income 
      distribution or assume 50 percent of the very low income units as extremely low. For the purposes of the Housing Element 
      the City’s RHNA of 539 very low income units was split into 266 extremely low and 273 very low income units, according to 
      income distribution from CHAS data.  For purposes of identifying adequate sites for the RHNA, though, State law does not 
      mandate the separate accounting for the extremely low income category. 
                                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐43

                                                                                                            
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
B.           RESIDENTIAL SITES INVENTORY 
 
Section  65583(a)(3)  of  the  Government  Code  requires  Housing  Elements  to  contain  an 
“inventory of land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having 
potential for redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and public facilities 
and  services  to  these  sites.”  An  analysis  of  available  vacant  and  underutilized  land  has  been 
prepared for the City and is described in detail in Appendix B. The results of this  analysis are 
summarized in TABLE 7‐35 on page 55. The table shows that the City’s vacant and underutilized 
sites  inventory  exceeds  Camarillo’s  2014‐2021  RHNA  in  all  income  categories,  except  the 
moderate  income  category.  Since  the  surplus  of  lower‐income  sites  exceeds  the  moderate 
shortfall, the intent of the RHNA is satisfied. 
 
SPRINGVILLE SPECIFIC PLAN 
The Springville Specific Plan area is located north of the Ventura Freeway on the south side of 
West  Ponderosa  Drive  in  the  western  portion  of  the  City.  The  planning  area  encompasses 
approximately  173  acres  and  has  historically  been  used  for  agriculture.  The  majority  of  the 
project  site  is  designated  as  Prime  Farmland  and  as  Farmland  of  Statewide  Importance. 
Development  on  the  site  has  been  limited  to  one  farmhouse  with  associated  outbuildings,  a 
retention basin, and agriculture.  
 
The City adopted the Springville Specific Plan in 2008 and  future housing development in the 
planning area will include a mixture of lower income housing, as defined in Sections 50093 and 
50079.5  of  the  Health  and  Safety  Code,  at  a  minimum  of  20  percent  of  total  residential 
development.  In  exchange  for  this  provision,  the  City  will  consider  modifications  to  the  RPD 
requirements in lieu of the alternative density bonus. 
 
Upon  buildout,  the  Springville  Specific  Plan  will  allow  for  the  development  of  1,350  housing 
units.  As of March 2013, no housing units in the Specific Plan area have been constructed or 
are  under  construction.  Applications  are  currently  being  processed  for  about  one‐half  of  the 
planning area.  One project has already been approved and mass grading for the site began in 
May 2013. The following table summarizes the remaining residential capacity in the Springville 
Specific Plan that will be available for the 2014‐2021 RHNA planning period. 
 
                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐44

                                                                                                                                                  
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                  TABLE 7‐31 Remaining Residential Capacity in the Springville Specific Plan 
                                                                                                         Remaining Capacity 
                                                                  Anticipated 
            Land Use                 Acreage          Density                                                           Market 
                                                                      Units              Low          Moderate                            Total 
                                                                                                                         Rate 
                                        14.5                            90                18               0              72               90 
Low‐Medium Density                       6.1            10.0            55                11              46               0               57* 
                                         8.2                            55 
                                                                                          15               0              60               75* 
                                         5.9                            63 
                                         2.5                            30 
                                                                                          16               0              68               84* 
                                         2.5                            30 
Medium Density                           6.1            18.0           102                20              82               0               102 
                                         7.0                           110                22              88               0               110 
                                        11.5                           135                32               0              131             163* 
                                        11.8                           150                33               0              132             165* 
Mixed Use/Commercial                    12.3            25.0            25                10               0              40               50* 
                                                                           #
                                        15.0                          375                  0               0               0                 0 
High Density                                            30.0 
                                         2.0                            40                40               0               0                40 
Senior Housing                           3.0            30.0            90                90               0               0                90 
Total                                   108.4             ‐‐         1,350               307              216             503            1,026 
Sources:  
       1. Springville Specific Plan, 2008. 
       2. City of Camarillo, 2013. 
* Residential capacity and affordability of units based on pending application.  
#
   Specific Plan approved for 375 units but this project was approved for 384 units. This project could begin construction prior to 2014 and is 
therefore not included in the estimates of remaining capacity available for the 2014‐2021 RHNA. 
Note: For sub‐areas that do not have applications pending, residential capacity and affordability is calculated based on the acreages and 
allowable densities specified in the Springville Specific Plan.
 
CAMARILLO COMMONS SPECIFIC PLAN 
The Camarillo Commons Specific Plan area, established with the adoption of the Plan in 2007, 
encompasses  55  acres  and  is  located  in  the  heart  of  the  City.  The  planning  area  is  within 
walking distance of the historic Camarillo Old Town. The vision for the Plan Area is to establish 
an  environment  that  encourages  pedestrian  activity  by  offering  and  encouraging  mixed  use 
development.  In  2008,  the  City  amended  the  Municipal  Code  to  establish  the  Camarillo 
Commons  Mixed  Use  (CCM)  zone.  This  zone  includes  uses  such  as  art  studios  and  galleries, 
auditoriums,  bakery  shops  (including  outside  dining  tables)  dance  halls  and  dance  studios, 
greeting  card  stores,  grocery  stores,  offices,  live/work  units,  residential  units  above  the  first 
floor of a mixed use building, and stand‐alone residential units. All buildings in this zone must 
be a minimum of two stories and may be up to four stories in height.  
 
                                                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐45

                                                                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
The  table  and  discussion  that  follows  summarizes  the  residential  capacity  of  six  opportunity 
areas  in  the  Camarillo  Commons  Specific  Plan  that  have  been  identified  as  having  the  most 
potential for redevelopment based on the following factors: 
 
      Low existing Floor Area Ratio (FAR); 
      Older building stock; 
      Good street, utilities and infrastructure access; and 
      High net increase in potential building intensity and mixture of uses. 
 
Based  on  the  allowable  density  of  the  parcels  identified,  all  634  housing  units  expected  in 
Camarillo Commons are allocated toward the City’s lower‐income RHNA. 
 
               TABLE 7‐32 Residential Capacity in the Camarillo Commons Specific Plan 
                           Area                     Zoning  Acreage  Density  Net Realistic Development Capacity 
   Area A: Mobil Avenue/Pickwick Drive               CCM      9.45    20.0                    146 
   Area B: Pickwick Drive NE                         CCM      4.38    25.0                     87 
   Area C: Pickwick Drive SE                         CCM      3.35    20.0                     52 
   Area D: Ponderosa Center                          CCM     11.70    20.0                    186 
   Area E: Arneill/Daily Drive Frontage              CCM      2.43    20.0                     35 
   Area F: Bowling Alley                             CCM      3.35    30.0                     80 
   Area G: Raemere Street Residential Neighborhood   CCM      8.12    18.0                     48 
   Total                                                     42.78                            634 
Area A: Mobil Avenue and Pickwick Drive area 
Of all the opportunity areas in the Camarillo Commons Specific Plan, Area A has the lowest near 
term redevelopment potential due to the following factors: 
 
          1. Standard existing FAR 
          2. Newer building stock 
          3. Multiple ownership of individual office condominiums 
          4. Post office, fire station, church, office buildings, and high quality building conditions 
          5. Commercial  and  office  centers  that  are  in  good  condition  and  have  higher  lease 
               rates; and 
          6. More moderate net increase in potential building intensity and mix of uses. 
 
However, a significant portion of Area A is utilized inefficiently for surface parking at present. 
Within  the  Housing  Element  planning  period,  it  is  feasible  that  the  site  will  be  proposed  for 
redevelopment into a mixed use project with a residential component. 
 
                                                                                          JANUARY 2014    7‐46

                                                                                                             
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                             Overview of Area A 
                                     
 
Area B: Pickwick Dive NE 
This five‐acre site consists of six existing parcels and is currently developed with approximately 
57,000 square feet of commercial retail and office space. It is bounded by Pickwick Drive to the 
south,  Arneill  Road  to  the  east,  Mobil  Avenue  to  the  west,  and  Ponderosa  drive  to  the  north 
and has very good access to streets and utilities. The Camarillo Drain runs along the northern 
border  of  the  site  parallel  with  Ponderosa  Drive.  The  Specific  Plan  proposes  both  commercial 
and  residential  formats  with  mixed‐use  development  (residential  over  retail)  fronting  Arneill 
Road,  Ponderosa  drive,  and  Pickwick  Drive  and  residential  uses  located  internally  within  the 
Area. A sizable portion of Area B is currently undeveloped and a majority of the available land is 
being  inefficiently  utilized  for  surface  parking,  making  the  site  a  prime  location  for 
redevelopment. 
 
                                             Overview of Area B 
                                     
 
Area C: Pickwick Drive SE 
This  2.5‐acre  site  consists  of  three  parcels  and  is  currently  developed  with  approximately 
20,000 square feet of commercial retail and office space. The site is bordered by Pickwick Drive 
to  the  north,  the  City  Fire  Station  to  the  west,  Arneill  Road  to  the  east  and  the  Ponderosa 
Center  to  the  south.  The  Specific  Plan  suggests  a  mix  of  stand‐alone  commercial  and  office 
                                                                                       JANUARY 2014    7‐47

                                                                                                              
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
space for this opportunity area with mixed–use retail, office and residential uses occupying the 
majority  of  the  site.  Currently,  a  significant  portion  of  Area  C  is  being  utilized  for  surface 
parking.  This  inefficient  use  of  the  available  land,  combined  with  the  small  scale  character  of 
the  retail  establishments  now  occupying  the  site,  makes  Area  C  a  practical  choice  for 
redevelopment. A mixed use project, proposed by LLS, LLC, that includes 32 dwelling units has 
already  been  approved  on  an  adjacent  parcel,  further  demonstrating  the  site’s  potential  for 
redevelopment. 
 
                                             Overview of Area C 
                                     
 
Area D: Barry Street/Aldea Drive 
This 10.5‐acre site consists of two parcels and is developed with approximately 128,000 square 
feet of commercial retail and office space. It is one of the largest opportunity areas identified in 
the Specific Plan area and is bounded by Barry Street to the south, Arneill Road to the east, and 
the  bowling  alley  to  the  west.  For  this  site,  the  Plan  suggests  a  mix  of  both  stand‐alone 
residential  in  various  densities  from  town  houses  to  apartments,  stand‐alone  commercial, 
live/work lofts and mixed use retail, office and residential occupying the Arneill Road frontage 
area. A small plaza and a performing arts facility are also part of the suggested land uses for this 
area.  A majority of this site is currently being inefficiently utilized for surface parking, making 
Area D a prime location for redevelopment. 
 
                                                                                     JANUARY 2014    7‐48

                                                                                                        
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                        Overview of Area D 
                                   
 
Area E: Arneill/Daily Drive Frontage 
This site has the most constraints that make it a likelier candidate for mid‐term redevelopment 
due to the following factors: 
 
        1. Fast food pad on a high volume, major intersection; 
        2. Newer building stock including a new gas station; 
        3. More moderate increase in potential building intensity. 
 
A significant portion of Area E is currently being inefficiently utilized for surface parking. Within 
the  Housing  Element  planning  period,  it  is  feasible  that  this  site  will  be  proposed  for 
redevelopment into a mixed use project with a residential component. 
 
                                        Overview of Area E 
                                                                                                      
 
Area F: Bowling Alley 
This 3.5‐acre site consists of one parcel and is developed with approximately 24,000 square feet 
of a single use commercial recreation facility (bowling alley). This site is landlocked with access 
via an easement along Barry Street, located interior to the Plan Area. The Specific Plan suggests 
a  mix  of  standalone  medium  and  high  density  residential  townhouses,  condominiums,  and 
                                                                                 JANUARY 2014    7‐49

                                                                                                            
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
apartments  for  this  opportunity  area.  A  majority  of  this  site  is  currently  being  inefficiently 
utilized for surface parking, making Area F a prime location for redevelopment. 
 
 
                                          Overview of Area F 
 
Area G: Raemere Street Residential Neighborhood 
This  8.12‐acre  site  consists  of  48  aging  duplexes  and  one  triplex.  The  neighborhood  was 
originally developed in 1957 and many of the housing units are overcrowded. The duplex units 
are  primarily  two‐bedroom,  one‐bathroom  homes  with  an  attached  one‐car  garage.  Only  a 
portion  of  these  residences  (approximately  15  properties)  are  currently  owner‐occupied.  As 
part  of  the  Camarillo  Commons  Specific  Plan,  the  City  encourages  the  reuse  and  residential 
intensification  of  the  Raemere  Street  neighborhood.  In  2009,  the  City  retained  Mainstreet 
Architects  and  Planners  to  develop  conceptual  site  plans  for  the  redevelopment  of  the 
neighborhood’s existing duplexes. The study proposed a prototype three‐unit housing product 
(triplexes) but also call for the combining of lots to produce additional housing opportunities. 
Based on the conceptual site plans, Area G will be able to accommodate 147 new housing units 
to replace the existing 99 units for a total net capacity of 48 units. 
 
                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐50

                                                                                                         
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                           Overview of Area G 
                                                          
 
Estimating Residential Capacity 
The  estimated  residential  capacity  for  the  Camarillo  Commons  Specific  Plan  is  based  on  an 
economic  analysis  of  the  Camarillo  Commons  Strategic  Plan  that  was  prepared  by  Economics 
Research Associates. The analysis evaluated the market demand for higher density residential 
and  mixed  use  commercial/residential  developments,  as  encompassed  by  the  Camarillo 
Commons Strategic Plan.  
 
The City’s vision for the Camarillo Commons area is a group of new real estate product types to 
replace the 1960s existing framework. The vision concept is about three times the current scale 
of  development  which  presently  occupies  the  Camarillo  Commons  area,  largely  due  to  the 
introduction  of  residential  units  at  medium  to  high  density.  Though  the  CCM  zone  permits  a 
greater  number  of  residential  units,  the  Plan  was  cautious  in  projecting  potential  build  out 
                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐51

                                                                                                                                           
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
based in the Camarillo Commons area. It is vital that the City require simultaneous housing and 
commercial  floor  space  development  in  order  to  sustain  mixed  use  construction  and  market 
viability.  
 
In some areas of Camarillo Commons, a horizontal mix (stand‐alone residential and stand‐alone 
commercial next to each other on a given site) of uses is called for; and in other areas, a vertical 
mix of uses (residential or offices above retail within the same building) is appropriate. Vertical 
mixed  use  developments  are  allowed  at  a  density  of  30  units  per  acre,  while  stand‐alone 
residential is allowed at 25 units per acre. The City has conservatively estimated that 634 new 
housing  units  can  be  accommodated  in  the  seven  opportunity  areas  within  the  Specific  Plan 
area.  This  estimate  assumes  residential  projects  will  achieve  an  average  of  80  percent  of  the 
maximum  density  allowed,  in  order  to  account  for  internal  circulation,  landscaping,  and 
parking/setback requirements. Several of the City’s recently approved residential projects have 
achieved 80 percent or more of the maximum density allowed, including:10 
 
         AMLI Apartments (within the Springville Specific Plan): 85 percent of maximum density 
         Fairfield Realty project: 88 percent of maximum density  
         Hiji Mixed Use project: over 170 percent of maximum density  
         Hiji TFR project: over 133 percent of maximum density  
 
This conservative estimate of 634 dwelling units represents only a portion of the actual capacity 
that exists within Camarillo Commons; the proposed horizontal and vertical mix in the planning 
area has the potential to accommodate up to 1,650 units.  
PROPOSED PROJECTS 
The City has a number of applications for residential projects pending. In total, these proposed 
projects  will  add  723  housing  units  to  the  City.  The  largest  of  these  projects  is  a  proposed 
development  by  Fairfield  Residential  and  Hiji  Investment  Company.  This  project,  Village 
Gateway,  consists  of  four  properties  located  at  the  former  3M/Imation  facility  at  300  South 
Lewis  Road.    The  current  General  Plan  land  use  designation  for  two  of  the  properties  is 
Industrial  and  the  underlying  zoning  is  M‐1  (Light  Manufacturing).  The  remaining  two  parcels 
are  designated  General  Commercial  and  are  zoned  CPD  (Commercial  Planned  Development). 
Fairfield  and  Hiji  are  requesting  approval  from  the  City  to  change  the  land  use,  zoning,  and 
specific  plan  designations  of  the  four  parcels  to  permit  the  development  of  multi‐family 
apartment  units.  This  request  will  change  the  preferred  land  use  for  all  four  properties  to 
residential and the zoning to RPD‐30U. Approval of this General Plan amendment is anticipated 
in  September  2013.  A  fifth  parcel,  adjacent  to  the  large  parcel  owned  by  Fairfield,  is  also 
10
      It should be noted that not all of the projects identified are located within the Camarillo Commons Specific Plan area. The 
      projects  listed  are  only  intended  to  demonstrate  the  City’s  ability  to  accommodate  development  at  80  percent  of  the 
      maximum allowable density. 
                                                                                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐52

                                                                                                             
                7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
included  as  part  of  the  requested  General  Plan  Amendment.  This  parcel,  owned  by  Rexford 
Industrial,  is  currently  developed  with  one  structure  used  for  the  packaging,  storage,  and 
distribution of magnetic media and data recording products. While Rexford is seeking to have 
the land use designation for its property amended, the zoning for the parcel will remain M‐1 at 
least for the near future. This property is expected to convert to residential uses eventually, but 
no  timetable  for  this  conversion  has  been  discussed.  Therefore,  this  parcel  is  not  included  as 
part of the sites inventory for the 2013‐2021 Housing Element.  
 
The  remaining  proposed  projects  are  expected  to  contribute  approximately  166  market‐rate 
units  to  the  City  within  the  2014‐2021  RHNA  planning  period.  TABLE  7‐33  summarizes  the 
residential capacity of these proposed projects. 
 
                             TABLE 7‐33 Residential Capacity of Proposed Projects 
                                                                       Residential Capacity 
                Project                  Application Number  Very                       Market 
                                                                     Low       Mod                  Total 
                                                             Low                          Rate 
    Mammana                           T‐5724                      0       0         0          9         9 
    Standard Pacific Easton Crossing  T‐5367/RPD‐155              0       0         0         77        77 
    Hiji MU                           T‐5753/CUP‐307              0       0         0         36        36 
    LLS, LLC                          CPD‐219                     0       0         0         32        32 
    Hiji/TFR                          CUP‐337                     0       0         0         12        12 
    Village Gateway (Fairfield)       RPD‐186, 187, 189         24        0         0        533      557 
    Total                                                       24        0         0        699      723 
 
OPPORTUNITY AREAS 
A  handful  of  opportunity  areas  within  the  City  have  been  previously  identified  as  having 
potential  for  residential  development.  The  residential  capacity  of  these  opportunity  areas  is 
summarized in TABLE 7‐34 and discussed in more detail below. 
 
Cedar Oak Mixed Use 
In  April  2010,  Camarillo’s  Community  Development  Commission  (CDC)  completed  the 
acquisition of a blighted 0.59 acre site located on Ventura Boulevard between Cedar Drive and 
Oak Street in Camarillo Old Town. The City acquired the site after private efforts to redevelop 
the property fell short and the downturn in the economy made the availability of construction 
financing difficult. Additionally, the site was becoming a nuisance with increased complaints of 
illegal  dumping,  vandalism,  and  graffiti.  The  CDC  contracted  with  Mainstreet  Architects  and 
Planners  to  develop  schematic  site  and  building  designs  for  the  subject  parcel.  The  design 
proposes a mixed‐use development with 22 apartment units over approximately 6,000 square 
feet  of  leasable,  ground‐floor  commercial  space.  The  courtyard  design  includes  studio,  one‐, 
                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐53

                                                                                                           
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
and  two‐bedroom  units  ranging  in  size  from  500  to  1,050  square  feet.  The  City  is  currently 
seeking a qualified developer to complete the CDC’s vision for the site. 
 
Barry Street/Mathis Apartments 
This opportunity area is currently vacant. The General Plan designates the site for Low‐Medium 
density  residential  land  uses  (up  to  10  units  to  the  acre)  and  the  parcel  is  zoned  RPD 
(Residential  Planned  Development).  The  property  is  located  on  Barry  Street,  which  is  a  low‐
income  area.  A  duplex  has  been  approved  for  the  site  but  the  project  is  not  yet  under 
construction. 
 
Villa Palazzo  
The  existing  8‐acre,  124‐unit  apartment  project  has  the  potential  for  redevelopment  with 
approximately  240  units  at  30  dwellings  to  the  acre.  The General  Plan  designates  the  site  for 
High density residential land uses (up to 30 units to the acre) and is zoned RPD ‐15 (Residential 
Planned Development, 15 units to the acre). No formal application for the reuse of the property 
has been submitted but the site remains an opportunity area.  
 
Second Residential Units 
The Zoning Code allows second units in single‐family residential districts, pursuant to state law. 
A total of four second unit permits have been issued between 2008 and 2012 for an average of 
about one unit per year. It is anticipated that second unit development will continue at a similar 
pace  during  the  2014‐2021  RHNA  planning  period,  which  would  result  in  the  development  of 
eight second units. Based on affordability categories, these units are expected to be affordable 
to moderate income households.  
 
                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐54

                                                                                                                            
                7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                 TABLE 7‐34 Residential Capacity of Opportunity Areas 
                                                                           Remaining Capacity 
               Project                     Acreage       Density                                            Existing Use 
                                                                  Lower     Mod       Upper    Total 
 Cedar Oak MU                                0.59          37       22        0         0       22      Vacant 
 Village at the Park                         1.94          25       49        0         0       49      Vacant  
 McGauly                                     16.20         1.5       0        0         18      18      No Entitlement 
 La Marina                                   3.28           1        0        0          2       2      Vacant 
 Barry St./Mathias Apartments                0.18          18        0        2          0       2      Vacant 
 Spanish Hills                               17.71          1        0        0         13      13      Vacant 
 Villa Palazzo                               8.00          30      116*       0         0      116*     124 unit apartment 
 Village Square, LLC                          3.12          5        0        0         12      12      Vacant 
 Western Pacific Housing                     16.65          5        0        0         66      66      Vacant 
 Keshmeshian Project                         54.00         2.5       0        0         56      56      Vacant 
 Second Units                                 n/a         n/a        0        8          0       8      n/a 
 Total                                      121.67                  187      10        167      364 
 * Indicates net unit capacity. 
 
COMPARISON OF SITES INVENTORY AND RHNA 
The City can realistically accommodate 2,747 housing units through its specific plans, proposed 
projects  and  opportunity  areas.  This  capacity  is  more  than  adequate  for  accommodating  the 
City’s 2014‐2021 RHNA of 2,224 units (TABLE 7‐35).  While the City does have a shortfall of sites 
for its moderate income RHNA, the surplus of sites for lower income units more than makes up 
for this deficit. 
 
                                             TABLE 7‐35 Land Inventory Summary  
                                                                             Income Category 
                                                                    VL/L     Mod       Above     Total 
                         RHNA                                        905       411       908     2,224 
                         Residential Sites Inventory 
                         Springville Specific Plan                   307       216       503     1,026 
                         Camarillo Commons Specific Plan             586        48         0       634 
                         Proposed Projects                            24        0        699       723 
                         Opportunity Areas                           187        10       167       364 
                         Subtotal                                   1,104      274      1,369    2,747 
                         Surplus (Deficit)                          +199      ‐137      +461     +523 
                         Source: City of Camarillo, 2013
 
There  are  currently  no  known  service  limitations  or  environmental  constraints  that  would 
preclude the level of development described in the RHNA, although developers will be required 
to  pay  fees  or  construct  public  improvements  prior  to  or  concurrent  with  development. 
Developers may also be required to provide for environmental mitigation in conjunction with 
development. 
                                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐55

                                                                                                               
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
 
7.3.2        Financial and Administrative Resources 
 
A.           STATE AND FEDERAL RESOURCES 
 
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM (CDBG) 
Federal  funding  for  housing  programs  is  available  through  the  Department  of  Housing  and 
Urban  Development  (HUD).  As  an  Entitlement  City,  Camarillo  participates  in  the  Community 
Development Block Grant (CDBG) program. The City does not currently participate in other HUD 
programs such as HOME, Emergency Shelter Grant (ESG) or Housing Opportunities for Persons 
with  AIDS  (HOPWA).    The  City  anticipates  receiving  approximately  $280,000  in  CDBG  funds 
annually.    The  use  of  these  funds  is  described  in  detail  in  the  FY  2010‐  FY  2014  Consolidated 
Plan. In the past, the City has used CDBG funds for the following activities: 
 
     Housing Rehabilitation 
     Fair Housing 
     Emergency shelter, transitional and supportive housing assistance 
 
HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHERS (SECTION 8 RENTAL ASSISTANCE) 
The  City  maintains  membership  in  the  Area  Housing  Authority  of  the  County  of  Ventura 
(AHACV),  which  administers  the  Housing  Choice  Vouchers  (Section  8  Rental  Assistance) 
Program. The Housing Choice Vouchers (HCV) assists families, elderly and disabled households 
by paying the difference between 30 percent of an eligible household's income and the actual 
cost of renting a unit. 
 
As of December 2012, 453 households were receiving HCV assistance through AHACV.  Among 
the households assisted are 172 families, 125 elderly households, and 156 disabled households.  
The  waiting  list  for  assistance  is  closed  and  AHACV  has  not  accepted  applications  since  Fall 
2009.  There are currently 121 households from Camarillo on the waiting list. 
 
LOW‐INCOME HOUSING TAX CREDIT PROGRAM 
The  Low‐Income  Housing  Tax  Credit  Program  was  created  by  the  Tax  Reform  Act  of  1986  to 
provide  an  alternate  method  of  funding  low‐  and  moderate‐income  housing.  Each  state 
receives  a  tax  credit  based  upon  population  toward  funding  housing  that  meets  program 
guidelines.  The  tax  credits  are  then  used  to  leverage  private  capital  into  new  construction  or 
acquisition and rehabilitation of affordable housing. Limitations on projects funded under the 
Tax Credit programs include minimum requirements that a certain percentage of units remain 
rent‐restricted, based upon median income. 
 
                                                                                         JANUARY 2014    7‐56

                                                                                                          
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
B.           LOCAL NON‐PROFIT HOUSING AGENCIES 
 
There  are  a  number  of  non‐profit  housing  corporations  that  are  active  in  Ventura  County.  In 
2006, the City assisted the Area Housing Authority’s non‐profit “Just People” in purchasing the 
305‐unit Mira Vista Village apartments. The Housing Authority completed the 34‐unit Courtyard 
apartments  in  the  Village  at  the  Park  neighborhood  in  2008.  The  City  also  partnered  with 
Cabrillo  Economic  Development  Corporation  in  building  the  Casa  de  Sueno  and  the  Casa 
Velasquez  apartments.  In  addition,  Habitat  for  Humanity  of  Ventura  County  has  successfully 
completed two projects for which the City donated the land and waived the development fees.  
Currently, the City is also working with Habitat for Humanity to rehabilitate housing for lower 
income households. 
 
C.           ENERGY CONSERVATION OPPORTUNITIES 
 
State law requires all new construction to comply with "energy budget" standards that establish 
maximum  allowable  energy  use  from  depletable  sources.  These  requirements  apply  to  such 
design components as structural insulation, air infiltration and leakage control, setback features 
on thermostats, water heating system insulation (tanks and pipes) and swimming pool covers if 
a pool is equipped with a fossil fuel or electric heater. State law also requires that a tentative 
tract  map  provide  for  future  passive  or  natural  heating  or  cooling  opportunities  in  the 
subdivision, including designing the lot sizes and configurations to permit orienting structures 
so as to take advantage of a southern exposure, shade or prevailing breezes. 
 
In  addition  to  the  energy  and  water  conservation  measures  required  of  residential 
development by the California State Subdivision Map Act and the California Building Code, the 
City  encourages  conservation  by  awarding  points  under  the  Residential  Development  Control 
System for the following features: 
 
     Automatic sprinkler controls. 
     Sprinkler controls equipped with automatic rain shut off control. 
     Use of drought resistant, low water use plant materials. 
     Sensor devices used to regulate sprinkler activity. 
     Drip irrigation system employed where most appropriate. 
     Landscaping of at least one model home with low water use plants and materials with 
        literature and signs pointing out landscape design purpose. 
     Other significant water conservation features as approved by the Board and/or the City 
        Council. 
     Solar water heating system installed to serve all dwelling units. 
     Effective solar space heating system installed to serve all dwelling units. 
     Heat pumps installed in all units. 
                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐57

                                                                                                         
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
      Units pre‐plumbed for solar water heating system. 
      Features capable of conserving 10  percent or more of a building's total annual energy 
       use. 
      Solar access plan prepared. 
      Units  sited  to  maximize  effectiveness  of  passive  solar  features  considering  sun  angles, 
       wind direction, natural ventilation and shading devices. 
      Renewable energy power generation features. 
      Landscaping plan designed to consider solar energy benefits. 
      Pool equipment with solar water heating or deed restriction requiring pool solar water 
       heating for future installation. 
      Hot water pipes insulated. 
      Forced air units and water heaters equipped with automatic timers. 
      Southern orientation windows shaded with eave projections, louvers, shutters, trellis or 
       similar shading devices. 
      Exterior lights utilize high intensity, low voltage discharge lamps. 
      Other significant energy conservation features as approved by the Board and/or the City 
       Council.
                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐58

                                                                                                                         
                7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
7.4               CONSTRAINTS 
 
7.4.1             Governmental Constraints 
 
A.                LAND USE PLANS AND REGULATIONS 
 
GENERAL PLAN 
Each  city  and  county  in  California  must  prepare  a  comprehensive,  long‐term  General  Plan  to 
guide its future. The land use element of the General Plan establishes the basic land uses and 
density of development within the various areas of the city. Under state law, the General Plan 
elements must be internally consistent and a city’s zoning must be consistent with the General 
Plan.  Thus,  the  land  use  plan  must  provide  suitable  locations  and  densities  to  implement  the 
policies of the Housing Element. 
 
The Camarillo General Plan Land Use Element provides for six residential land use designations, 
as  shown  in  TABLE  7‐36.  The  Table  does  not  address  the  Commercial  land  use  category  that 
includes mixed use commercial developments that could add over 500 residential units. 
 
                    TABLE 7‐36 Residential Land Use Categories – Camarillo General Plan 
                                  Maximum                                                                    Maximum 
        Designation                 Density1                         Description                  Acreage2     DU’s3 
 Rural Density                         2.5        Single family on rural lots.                     1,827       4,568 
 Low Density                            5         Single‐family detached in subdivision. 5 du/ac   2,191      10,955 
                                                  permitted with clustering. 
 Low‐Medium Density                    10         Single‐family in clusters, townhouses, and        942        9,420 
                                                  duplex type units. 
 Medium Density                        18         Garden, two‐story, or studio apartments.          128        2,304 
 High Density                          30         Two‐ and three‐story apartments                   221        6,630 
 Mobile Home                            7         Mobile homes                                      127         889 
 Total                                                                                             5,436      34,766 
 Notes: 
   1.  Density expressed in dwelling units per gross acre 
   2.  Total acreage including both developed and vacant land 
   3.  Assumes build‐out at the maximum allowable density 
 Source: City of Camarillo General Plan, 2003 
 
The City of Camarillo General Plan is not considered a constraint to the goals and policies of the 
Housing Element. The City’s zoning is consistent with the General Plan, and adequate sites with 
appropriate  densities  have  been  identified  to  permit  construction  of  the  2,224  housing  units 
allocated by SCAG for the 2014‐2021 RHNA planning period. 
 
                                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐59

                                                                                                              
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT EVALUATION BOARD 
An estimated 3,053 dwelling units within a wide range of densities could be constructed in the 
City under the General Plan during the 2014‐2021 RHNA planning period, as shown in TABLE 7‐
35. The timing of construction, however, is affected by the allocation of the residential units by 
the Residential Development Evaluation Board (RDEB). 
 
The  RDEB  is  the  result  of  an  initiative  adopted  as  Measure  A  at  a  special  election  on  June 2, 
1981  (Title  20  of  the  Municipal  Code  for  the  City  of  Camarillo).  The  measure  to  control  the 
quality, distribution and rate of growth within the City in order to preserve its character, create 
a balance of housing types and provide for needed public facilities and services in an efficient 
manner. The measure prohibits the issuance of building permits for residential projects (except 
certain  exempt  projects)  until  and  unless  a  Development  Allotment  has  been  obtained.  A 
Development Allotment is basically a right to proceed, subject to all applicable requirements to 
construct  a  residential  unit,  including  issuance  of  a  building  permit.  The  Development 
Allotment, once issued, requires construction to commence within two years from the date of 
the award, unless a time extension is granted for the underlying permit. 
 
Residential  projects  other  than  those  in  specific  exempt  categories  are  evaluated  by  the 
Residential Development Evaluation Board (i.e., the Planning Commission).  Evaluation criteria 
address  the  availability  of  public  facilities  and  services,  the  quality  of  design  and  the 
contribution  made  to  the  public  welfare.  The  projects  are  then  awarded  points  and  ranked 
according to total points given. The City Council considers the recommendations of the Board 
and  grants  development  allotments  from  the  ranking  list.    Certain  categories  of  projects  are 
exempt from the requirement for an allotment, including projects involving four or fewer units 
and subsidized low income housing or senior citizen housing, among others. 
 
The  City  Council  may  award  Development  Allotments  for  400  residential  dwelling  units  each 
year (plus or minus up to 10 percent at the Council’s discretion), unless certain adjustments are 
made as specified in Title 20. To be eligible to receive allotments, projects must have received 
prior  approval  under  an  appropriate  tentative  tract  map,  residential  planned  development 
permit,  conditional  use  permits,  or  mobile  home  planned  development  permit.  All  eligible 
projects for which a Development Allotment application has been filed will be considered for 
award of Development Allotments.   
 
Development Allotment applications are processed concurrently with the development permits 
(subdivision,  conditional  use  permits,  and  residential  planned  developments  permits)  and  do 
not extend the processing time for development permits, though the schedule is established by 
the Development Allotment review process. The City Council may allocate more than 400 units 
in any given year if a substantial need can be shown to do so. The extra dwelling units would 
reduce  the  number  that  can  be  allocated  in  future  years.  For  example,  if  440  dwellings  are 
allocated one year, the following year no more than 360 units may be allocated. In more than 
                                                                                      JANUARY 2014    7‐60

                                                                                                            
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
30 years that the City has implemented the allocation process, no more than 400 development 
allotments have been awarded in a single year. 
 
Once allocated by the City Council, the development allocation is valid as long as the project is 
active.  If  the  project  expires  and  is  reinstated,  the  development  allocation  can  be  reinstated. 
The intent is that the allocation remains with the land, even though the development permits 
may expire according to time limits set by state and City regulations. 
 
Development  applications  are  evaluated  on  a  variety  of  criteria,  including  project  design, 
architecture and infrastructure improvements necessary to serve the project. Applications are 
reviewed  by  the  City,  school  districts,  water  companies,  sewer  districts  among  others,  to 
determine  if  the  development  location  is  adequate  and  the  timing  is  appropriate.  Based  on 
their review, points are assigned to the project. The formula gives preference to in‐fill projects 
over step‐out development proposals. 
 
In regard to project design, projects are reviewed for compliance with minimum development 
standards, as well as for compatibility with other developments in the neighborhood. 
 
Development Allotment applications may be submitted between August 1st and December 31st. 
There are no exceptions to this requirement. The City Council holds a public hearing to award 
the  Development  Allotments,  with  the  concurrent  approval  of  development  entitlements, 
normally during August following the December application deadline.  Because this timeline is 
set  and  well  publicized,  developers  are  able  to  plan  their  project  schedule  according  to  this 
timeline.  Projects that are exempt from the RDEB requirements may be submitted at any time.  
 
The following residential projects are exempt from the RDEB requirements: 
 
     Projects of not more than four residential dwellings, limited to only one such project per 
         developer per calendar year; 
     Fourplexes or lesser‐numbered multiple dwellings on a single existing lot; 
     Single‐family residential units on a single existing lot; 
     Rehabilitation  or  remodeling  of  an  existing  dwelling,  or  conversion  of  apartments  to 
         condominiums, so long as no additional dwelling units are created;  
     Those specific units which are formally dedicated for occupancy by low‐income persons 
         or  senior  citizens  within  a  project  which  is  funded  or  subsidized  as  a  low‐income  or 
         senior citizen project pursuant to the provisions of applicable federal, state or local laws 
         or programs;  
     For the purposes of the RDEB, a project is funded or subsidized pursuant to applicable 
         federal, state or local laws or programs if it receives a loan, grant or continuing financial 
         subsidy for the purpose of developing low‐income or senior citizen housing. A project is 
         funded  or  subsidized  pursuant  to  applicable  local  laws  or  programs  if  it  receives 
                                                                                     JANUARY 2014    7‐61

                                                                                                              
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
        incentives with respect to City programs and standards which are not normally provided 
        to  residential  developments  in  the  City  and  which  are  sufficient  to  serve  as  an 
        inducement to the development of low‐income or senior citizen housing, as determined 
        by the City; and 
       Model home complexes. 
 
Measure  A  has  been  implemented  for  over  30  years  and  has  served  to  encourage  the 
development of affordable housing. In regard to its overall impact on housing production and 
the cost of housing, it has resulted in a greater supply of affordable housing than might have 
been created without the program. This positive impact on the supply of affordable housing is 
due, in part, to the exemption for low‐income and senior housing, which serves to encourage 
and facilitate these uses. 
 
Because of the exemption for low income and senior housing with subsidies, Measure A is not 
considered  a  constraint  on  the  City's  ability  to  provide  for  the  additional  2,224  housing  units 
established  in  the  RHNA  for  this  planning  period.    The  number  of  Development  Allotment 
applications varies from year to year, but the annual average of Allotments is adequate for the 
RHNA allocation to 2021.   
 
ZONING DESIGNATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
The City regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential development through the 
Municipal Code. Zoning regulations serve to implement the General Plan and are designed to 
protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of residents. The Municipal Code 
also helps to preserve the character and integrity of existing neighborhoods. The Municipal Code 
sets forth residential development standards for each zone district. 
 
The seven zones that allow residential subdivisions or attached units as a permitted use are as 
follows: 
 
     R‐E         Rural Exclusive 
     R‐1         Single‐Family Residential 
     RPD         Residential Planned Development 
     MHPD  Mobile Home Park Development 
     COT         Camarillo Old Town 
     CCM         Camarillo Commons  
     CMU  Village Commercial Mixed‐Use 
 
A  summary  of  the  development  standards  for  the  seven  major  zones  permitting  residential 
development is provided in TABLE 7‐37. These development standards continue to be viewed 
                                                                                      JANUARY 2014    7‐62

                                                                                                                                         
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
as  necessary  to  protect  the  public health,  safety  and  welfare  and maintain  the  quality  of  life, 
and are not considered constraints on the development of housing. 
 
                           TABLE 7‐37 Residential and Mixed Use Development Standards 
                   Development                                                        Zoning Designations 
                      Standard                        R‐E            R‐1         RPD          MHPD          COT          CCM    CMU 
  Maximum Density (DU/Acre)                             4             7         Varies           7         Varies       Varies  Varies 
                                                                               up to 30 
  Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)                        10,000a        7,000a       Varies        4,000        Varies       Varies  Varies 
  Minimum Front Yard (ft.)                             20            20           20            10            0           15      0 
  Minimum Side Yard (ft.)                              10             5            5             5            0           0b      0 
                                                                                                                c
  Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)                              20            20           20             5           10            0     10c 
  Maximum Building Height (ft.)                        35            25          25d            25e          35f          45     35f 
  Source: Camarillo Zoning Code 
  Notes: 
  a.       Minimum but may be higher depending on subzone 
  b.   No interior side yard required; side yard adjacent to a public road equal to the front yard setback requirement 
  c.   Plus 10 additional feet for each 10 feet of bldg height in excess of 25 feet not to exceed 50 feet 
  d.   Buildings over 25 feet may be permitted subject to a RPD permit  
  e.   Buildings over 25 feet may be permitted subject to a CUP 
  f.       Buildings over 35  feet may be permitted subject to a CUP
 
Densities range from the lower‐density rural residential single‐family zones with a maximum of 
four units per acre to a maximum of 30 units per acre in the RPD Zone. Density bonuses would 
permit up to 35 percent more units than permitted by the underlying zone. 
 
In  the  Agricultural  Exclusive  (A‐E)  and  Open  Space  (O‐S)  zones,  residential  development 
(primarily individual single‐family homes on existing rural lots) is also a permitted use, at very 
low densities not to exceed 2.5 dwelling units per acre. 
 
While  development  standards  are  necessary  to  preserve  the  quality  and  character  of 
development, modifications may be approved when an alternate standard would better serve 
community  interests.  For  example,  height  increases  were  approved  in  exchange  for  an 
affordable  housing  commitment  in  the  Tesoro  Walk,  Mission  Walk,  Wickford  and  Brookshire 
projects.  In  addition,  the  City  approved  the  Springville  Specific  Plan  with  “neo‐traditional” 
community  design  principles  in  2008.  Modifications  to  typical  standards  were  approved  to 
create  a  compact  community  designed  to  encourage  bicycling  and  walking  for  short  trips  by 
providing  destinations  close  to  work  and  home.  Modifications  included  smaller  front  yards, 
front  porches,  increased  housing  density  with  smaller  and  narrower  lots,  high‐quality 
architecture,  centrally  located  gathering  areas,  nearby  (i.e.,  within  5  minutes  or  ¼  mile) 
shopping and recreational areas, garages that are out of view from public street fronts, alleys, 
and narrower, interconnected tree‐lined streets with wider sidewalks. 
 
                                                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐63

                                                                                                          
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
The  COT  (Camarillo  Old  Town),  CMU  (Village  Commercial  Mixed  Use)  and  CCM  (Camarillo 
Commons  Mixed  Use)  zones  provide  for  a  horizontal  and  vertical  mixed‐use  commercial  and 
residential  development  with  varying  densities  depending  on  lot  size  and  shape.  These  zones 
allow  multifamily  residential  development  through  a  conditional  use  permit  (CUP).    Because 
commercial development is the principal intended use at the street level, a CUP is required to 
address  potential  commercial/residential  conflicts  and  to  ensure  proper  location  of  the 
residential  units  above  the  ground  floor  or  in  adjoining  locations.  Other  residential 
requirements address entrance locations, parking, lighting, refuse storage, usable outdoor area, 
and recreation area. The parking requirements are the same as for other multifamily units.  The 
CUP  is  also  used  to  ensure  compliance  with  applicable  Specific  and  Strategic  Plans.  The  CUP 
requirements are reasonable within a mixed‐use context and do not constrain the development 
of  residential  units.    A  Planned  Development  permit,  with  findings  and  conditions,  is  also 
required  for  development  of  residential  and  mixed‐use  projects  in  these  districts  and  is 
processed concurrently with the Development Allotment. 
 
Density  up  to  30  units  per  acre  is  allowed  in  some  subzones  of  the  Residential  Planned 
Development  District  (RPD).    In  the  RPD  district,  multi‐family  housing  development,  including 
single‐family  attached  units,  is  permitted  with  a  Residential  Planned  Development  Permit, 
approved  with  findings  and  conditions  by  the  Planning  Commission.    The  application  is 
processed  concurrently  with  the  Development  Allotment.  As  shown  in  Table  7‐38,  the  City’s 
Zoning Code provides for a variety of housing types, including special needs housing discussed 
in Section IV. A.d.  
 
                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐64

                                                                                                                              
                    7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
      
                              TABLE 7‐38 Permitted Residential Development by Zone 
  Housing Type Permitted        O‐S             A‐E  R‐E    R‐1     RPD  MHPD       CMU       CCM    COT      CPD     M‐1    M‐2 
                                                             Residential Uses 
Single‐Family Detached            P               P   P      P       P         P                                                
Single‐Family Attached                                              RPD                                                         
Multi‐Family                                                        RPD             C/PD      C/PD   C/PD                       
High‐Density                                                        RPD             C/PD      C/PD   C/PD                       
Manufactured Housing              P               P   P      P       P         P                                                
Mobile Home                                                  P                 C                                                
Mobile Home Park                                      C                        C                                                
Second Units                                          P      P       P                                                          
                                                          Special Needs Housing 
Farmworker Housing                                P                                                                             
Emergency Shelters                                                                                     C       C       P       C 
Care Facility (6 or fewer)                            P      P       P                                                          
Care Facility (7+)                                    C      C      RPD                                        C                
Assisted Living                                       C      C      RPD                                        C                
Source: Camarillo Zoning Code                       
P = Permitted;  C = Conditional Use Permit;  RPD = Residential Planned Development  Permit;  PD=Planned Development  Permit 
      
     Lower‐income  housing  (including  very  low  and  extremely  low)  can  be  accommodated  in  all 
     zones  permitting  residential  use  in  Camarillo.  These  include  second  residential  units  and 
     farmworker  housing  that  can  be  developed  in  the  Rural  Exclusive  Zone,  as  well  as  the 
     commercial/residential mixed‐use developments that are permitted in the Camarillo Old Town 
     (COT), Village Commercial Mixed Use (CMU) and the Camarillo Commons (CCM) Zones. Housing 
     for farmworkers can also be built in the Open Space (O‐S) and Agricultural Exclusive (A‐E) Zones 
     as  well  as  any  residential  district.  The  R‐1  Zone  is  for  single‐family  residences,  although  the 
     Municipal Code permits second residential units as a tool in facilitating affordable housing. 
      
     The Residential Planned Development (RPD) Zone is the most flexible residential zone category 
     and permits varying densities up to 30 dwelling units per acre. The RPD Zone permits detached 
     single‐family  residences  as  well  as  multi‐story  apartment  structures.  This  zone  specifically 
     encourages the use of innovative approaches in residential design. The Planning Commission, in 
     reviewing RPD projects, can modify development standards, including building setbacks, height, 
     and  parking  requirements.  For  a  development  greater  than  four  units  per  acre  in  density, 
     flexibility is permitted in lot area, lot dimensions, setbacks, separation between buildings and 
     building  height.  Using  the  RPD  Zone  and  permit  process,  the  City  is  often  able  to  reduce  or 
     modify  development  standards  to  improve  housing  affordability.  A  Residential  Planned 
     Development Permit is required for multi‐family residential projects in the RPD zone.  Projects 
                                                                                                      JANUARY 2014    7‐65

                                                                                                       
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
meeting the minimum development standards will be approved, provided all of the findings can 
be made. Projects which require modifications to the development standards to accommodate 
innovative  design  are  approved  as  appropriate  based  on  the  specific  merits  of  the  project. 
Recent  examples,  of  innovative  projects,  include  the  Avalon  Bay  apartments  and  the  Tesoro 
Walk  townhouse  development  where  the  City  waived  the  recreational  vehicle  parking, 
increased  building  height,  permitted  tandem  parking,  and  made  adjustments  to  building 
separation as an incentive for affordable units. 
 
The Camarillo Old Town (COT) Zone, adopted in 1998, permits residences in the Camarillo Old 
Town area. This area is the first part of the Camarillo Corridor redevelopment project and the 
City’s Community Development Commission actively pursued the reuse of the area with a mix 
of commercial and residential uses, many of which by nature of their location, would cater to 
low‐  and  moderate‐income  persons.  The  Commission  assisted  the  development  of  a  24‐unit 
development  that  included  seven  low‐income  and  seventeen  moderate‐income  ownership 
units. Additionally, a mixed‐use building was developed on Ventura Boulevard. The building had 
4,650 square feet of commercial space on the lower floor with five two‐bedroom apartments 
on the second floor. Projects meeting the minimum development standards will be approved 
provided  all  of  the  findings  can  be  made.  Projects  which  require  modifications  to  the 
development standards to accommodate innovative design are approved as appropriate based 
on the specific merits of the project. 
 
The  Camarillo  Commons  (CCM)  Zone,  adopted  in  2007,  permits  multifamily  and  mixed  use 
residential  in  the  Camarillo  Commons  Strategic  Plan  area  and  the  Community  Development 
Commission  actively  pursued  the  reuse  of  the  existing  commercial  area  with  a  mix  of 
commercial and residential land uses, many of which by the nature of the location would cater 
to low‐ and moderate‐income persons. The primary purpose of the CCM zone is to provide for a 
combination  of  commercial,  office,  vertical  and  horizontal  mixing  of  residential  units  and 
compatible related development to promote  pedestrian use and enjoyment of the mixed‐use 
area. Projects meeting the minimum development standards will be approved, provided all of 
the findings can be made. Projects which require modifications to the development standards 
to accommodate innovative design are approved as appropriate based on the specific merits of 
the project. 
 
The  Village  Commercial  Mixed  Use  (CMU)  Zone,  adopted  in  2005,  permits  multifamily  and 
mixed‐use residential development. The primary purpose of the CCM zone is to provide for a 
combination  of  commercial,  office,  upper‐story  residential  uses  and  compatible  related 
development to promote pedestrian use and enjoyment of the mixed‐use area. The Village at 
the Park includes the first use of the CMU Zone with four three‐story mixed‐use buildings that 
have  13,500  square  feet  of  ground  floor  commercial  space  and  13  two‐bedroom  apartments 
units  above  the  commercial  space.  A  conditional  use  permit  is  required  to  establish 
development  criteria  regarding  building  design,  and  ensure  commercial/residential 
                                                                                JANUARY 2014    7‐66

                                                                                                                
                7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
compatibility.  Projects  meeting  the  minimum  development  standards  will  be  approved, 
provided  all  of  the  findings  can  be  made.  Projects  which  require  modifications  to  the 
development standards to accommodate innovative design are approved as appropriate based 
on the specific merits of the project. 
 
No minimum unit sizes are required in any zone, thereby permitting a wide range of unit types. 
  
SPECIAL NEEDS HOUSING 
Persons with special needs include those in residential care facilities, persons with disabilities, 
farmworkers,  persons  needing  emergency  shelter  or  transitional  living  arrangements,  and 
single room occupancy units. Many of these groups also fall under the category of extremely‐
low‐income households. The City’s provisions for these housing types are discussed below. 
 
Extremely  low‐income  households.  Many  of  the  persons  and  households  discussed  in  this 
section under the topic of special needs fall within the extremely low‐income category, which is 
defined as 30 percent or less of area median income, or up to $26,200 per year for a 4‐person 
household in Ventura County (2013). As discussed in Chapter 7‐2, approximately ten percent of 
the residents of Camarillo live with extremely low incomes. Residents in this income range are 
at high risk of overpaying for housing.  
 
A  variety  of  City  policies  and  programs  described  in  the  Housing  Plan  address  the  needs  of 
extremely low‐income households, including those in need of residential care facilities, persons 
with  disabilities,  and  farmworkers.  However,  it  must  be  recognized  than  the  development  of 
new  housing  for  the  lowest  income  groups  typically  requires  large  public  subsidies,  and  the 
level of need is greater than can be met due to funding limitations, especially during times of 
declining public revenues. 
 
Residential  Care  Facilities.    Residential  care  facilities  (i.e.,  “rest  homes”)  refer  to  any  family 
home, group home, or rehabilitation facility that provides non‐medical care to persons in need 
of personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training essential for daily 
living. Residential care facilities that serve six or fewer persons are classified as a residential use 
and are permitted by‐right in all residential zones. Facilities serving more than six persons are 
conditionally  permitted  in  the  R‐1,  R‐E,  RPD,  and  the  CPD  Zones.  There  is  no  spacing  or 
separation requirement on the location of residential care facilities. These requirements do not 
pose a significant constraint on the establishment of such facilities. 
 
Housing  for  Persons  with  Disabilities.    In  some  circumstances,  persons  with  disabilities  may 
require  modifications  to  zoning  or  building  standards  in  order  to  accommodate  special  needs 
such as wheelchair access. The City’s building codes require that new residential construction 
comply  with  the  federal  American  with  Disabilities  Act  (ADA).  ADA  provisions  include 
requirements for a minimum percentage of units in new developments to be fully accessible to 
                                                                                       JANUARY 2014    7‐67

                                                                                                                
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
the physical disabled. Provisions of fully accessible units may also increase the overall project 
development costs.  
 
Compliance with building codes and the ADA may increase the cost of housing production and 
can also impact the viability of rehabilitation of older properties required to be brought up to 
current code standards. However, these regulations provide minimum standards that must be 
complied with in order to ensure the development of safe and accessible housing.
 
In  Camarillo,  building  or  zoning  modifications  to  accommodate  persons  with  disabilities  were 
typically  approved  over  the  counter  prior  to  2011.  Examples  include  widening  doorways, 
making  shower/bath  areas  wheelchair  accessible,  and  lowering  the  cabinets  in  kitchens  and 
bathrooms. 
 
A recent example was the use of CDBG rehabilitation funds to make a home accessible for the 
property owner. The improvements included a wheelchair ramp in the front yard, widening the 
door into the bedroom and bathroom, and making the shower wheelchair accessible. 
 
Requests  to  retrofit  buildings  to  provide  reasonable  accommodation  were  also  routinely 
approved.  For example, a wheelchair ramp in the front yard could be built without a building 
permit.  Widening  doorways  to  permit  wheelchair  access  has  required  a  building  permit,  as  it 
affects the structural integrity of the building.  
 
In  2011,  the  City  amended  the  Municipal  Code  with  a  new  chapter  (16.08)  concerning 
reasonable accommodation. It provides a standard process for requesting “relief from any land 
use, zoning or building standard, regulation, policy or procedure” found in Municipal Code Title 
16 (Building and Construction) and Title 19 (Zoning).   The new chapter applies to any individual 
with  a  disability  under  fair  housing  law,  a  representative  of  the  person,  or  a  developer  or 
provider of housing for individuals with disabilities.  An application may be filed at any time the 
accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing.    
 
Definition  of  “family”.    In  some  circumstances  the  manner  in  which  “family”  is  defined  in  a 
city’s  zoning  code  can  limit  persons  with  disabilities  from  residing  in  a  house.  
A  restrictive  definition  of  family  may  limit  the  number  of  persons  or  differentiate  between 
related and unrelated individuals who are living together. In use, a restrictive definition may be 
used illegally to limit the development and siting of group homes for people with disabilities but 
not  for  housing  families  (as  defined  by  the  Bureau  of  the  Census)  that  are  similar  in  size  or 
situation.  Camarillo  Municipal  Code  Section  19.04.310,  however,  was  amended  in  2010  to 
define a “Family” as a “Household,” that is “one or more persons living together in a dwelling 
unit with common access to, and common use of, all living, kitchen and eating areas within the 
dwelling  unit.”    Persons  are  not  distinguished  either  by  the  presence  of  a  disability  or  by  any 
relationship other than residency in the dwelling unit.  
                                                                                      JANUARY 2014    7‐68

                                                                                                             
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
 
Farmworker  Housing.    Housing  for  agricultural  employees  occurs  in  two  types  of  settings: 
housing  accommodations  located  on  farmland  that  is  exclusively  for  farmworkers  and 
traditional housing that is not restricted to farmworkers. 
 
The  state  Employee  Housing  Act11  regulates  farmworker  housing  and  generally  requires  that 
facilities with no more than 36 beds or 12 units be treated as an agricultural land use that is not 
subject to any conditional use permit not required of other agricultural uses in the same zone. 
 
As  indicated  in  TABLE  7‐38,  farmworker  housing  is  now  permitted  by  right  in  the  Agricultural 
Exclusive (A‐E) district. In addition, the City prepared a procedural guide that explains how to 
build farmworker housing.  
 
Although  no  housing  exclusively  for  farmworkers  has  been  built,  the  City  has  facilitated  the 
construction  of  traditional  permanent  housing  for  very  low‐income  families.  This  includes 
ownership units in the Tesoro Walk townhome development as well as the Meadowbrook and 
Courtyard apartments. These developments are examples of workforce housing developments 
for lower‐income persons such as farmworkers, factory workers, and retail clerks. 
 
While agricultural uses are permitted within the City’s O‐S and R‐E zones, these zones are not 
intended  for  commercial  agricultural  production.  The  R‐E  zone  is  intended  to  promote  and 
preserve large lot subdivisions and may support ancillary agricultural uses subject to limitations 
and conditions.   The O‐S zone is intended to preserve natural, environmental, and recreational 
resources.  In  2012,  the  City  amended  its  Zoning  Code  to  remove  farmworker  housing  as  a 
conditionally  permitted  use  in  the  O‐S  and  R‐E  zones,  making  a  finding  that  there  are  limited 
agricultural opportunities in these zones.  The same amendment made farmworker housing a 
permitted use in the A‐E zone, where agricultural production is the primary intended use.   
 
Emergency Shelters.  An “emergency shelter” (defined in Sec. 19.04.306 of the Municipal Code) 
is “a residential facility, other than a community care facility and other than temporary shelters 
provided  by  not‐for‐profit  entities  following  a  disaster,  operated  by  a  provider  that  provides 
temporary accommodations to persons or families with lower incomes.” The term “temporary 
accommodations”  mean  that  a  person  or  family  will  be  allowed  to  reside  at  the  shelter  for  a 
time  period  not  to  exceed  six  months.  A  “provider”  means  a  government  agency  or  private 
nonprofit organization that provides or contracts with recognized community organizations to 
provide  emergency  or  temporary  shelter,  and  may  also  provide  meals,  counseling  and  other 
services,  as  well  as  common  areas  for  residents  of  the  facility.  Such  a  facility  may  have 
individual  rooms,  but  is  not  developed  with  individual  dwelling  units,  with  the  exception  of  a 
manager’s unit. 
11
      California Health and Safety Code Sec. 17021.5 and 17021.6 
                                                                                     JANUARY 2014    7‐69

                                                                                                                 
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
 
Pursuant  to  recent  changes  in  State  law  (Senate  Bill  2),  jurisdictions  with  an  unmet  need  for 
emergency  shelters  are  now  required  to  identify  a  zone(s)  where  emergency  shelters  will  be 
allowed as a permitted use without a conditional use permit or other discretionary permit.  The 
identified  zone  must  have  sufficient  capacity  to  accommodate  the  shelter  need,  and  at  a 
minimum provide capacity for at least one year‐round shelter.  Permit processing, development 
and  management  standards  for  emergency  shelters  must  be  objective  and  facilitate  the 
development of, or conversion to, emergency shelters. 
 
As discussed in the homeless section of the Housing Element Needs Assessment (Chapter 7.2), 
the  homeless  count  by  the  Ventura  County  Homeless  and  Housing  Coalition  in  January  2012 
indicated that on any given day there may be up to 30 homeless persons in Camarillo. While the 
RAIN  transitional  housing  facility  is  located  on  the  outskirts  of  the  City,  there  currently  is  no 
emergency shelter to address the needs of homeless adults or families. The City does support 
the winter warming shelter that is located in the cities of Ventura and Oxnard (shelter is rotated 
between the cities during the winter). 
 
Pursuant  to  Senate  Bill  2,  Camarillo  conducted  a  staff  level  review  of  its  zoning  districts  and 
determined  the  M‐1  (Light  Manufacturing)  zone  is  most  conducive  to  provision  of  an 
emergency  homeless  shelter  by  right.    In  June  2010,  the  City  amended  Title  19  to  permit 
emergency shelters in the M‐1 district. Industrial uses in Camarillo are not heavy in nature, and 
pursuant  to  the  General  Plan,  consist  of  the  following  types  of  uses:  light  manufacturing, 
research  and  development,  warehousing,  business  parks  and  offices,  supporting  retail, 
restaurants, and similar types of uses.  Emergency shelters are also conditionally permitted in 
the  Camarillo  Old  Town  (COT),  Commercial  Planned  Development  (CPD),  and  General 
Manufacturing (M‐2) districts.  
 
The City currently has approximately 492 parcels zoned M‐1 with a total acreage of just  over 
1,150 acres. Most of these parcels are located south of Highway 101 and east of Highway 34. In 
choosing the M‐1 zone, the City considered the following factors: 
 
     There is a greater availability of Industrial land in the City and vacant industrial buildings 
        could more easily be converted for emergency shelter use. 
     Converting existing industrial buildings for emergency shelter use is most cost effective, 
        time effective and requires only a Categorical Exemption under CEQA in‐fill projects. 
     Industrial land is less expensive than residential and commercial land. 
     Locating emergency shelters in M‐1 Zones is compliant with State Law. 
 
A  review  of  potential  sites  with  the  Industrial  zoning  classification  identified  underutilized 
parcels  and  vacant  buildings,  providing  adequate  capacity  for  provision  of  an  emergency 
shelter. 
                                                                                         JANUARY 2014    7‐70

                                                                                                              
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
 
The  City’s  industrial  development  standards  for  homeless  facilities  are  the  same  as  for  any 
other  industrial  building  and  therefore  are  appropriate  to  facilitate  emergency  shelters.  In 
addition  to  application  of  M‐1  development  standards,  pursuant  Senate  Bill  2  the  City  also 
adopted specific written, objective standards to regulate certain aspects of emergency shelters 
to enhance compatibility (Section 19.30.232): 
 
        Maximum number of beds in a shelter is 40 
        Management plan required 
        Adequate exterior lighting 
        Common facilities (such as cooking, laundry) required 
        On‐site parking – one space per ten beds  
        Distance requirement of 300 feet from another emergency shelter 
 
Transitional  Housing.  The  City  amended  the  Zoning  Code  in  May  2013  to  define  “transitional 
housing” (as defined in Sec. 19.04.796 of the Municipal Code) as having “the meaning set forth 
in California Health & Safety Code section 50675.2.  Consistent with SB2, transitional housing 
will  be  permitted,  conditionally  permitted  or  prohibited  in  the  same  manner  as  other 
residential dwellings  of  the  same  type  in  the  same  zone  under  this code  and  applicable  state 
law.”  
 
Though permitted, no new transitional housing facilities have been built. However, as noted in 
Chapter  7.2,  there  are  currently  72  transitional  shelter  beds  in  the  RAIN  transitional  housing 
facility  that  is  located  on  the  outskirts  of  Camarillo,  representing  nearly  one  third  of  all 
transitional  beds  in  Ventura  County12.  The  RAIN  facility  operated  for  five  years  in  the  City  of 
Camarillo  until  the  new  facility  was  completed  at  the  present  location.  The  City  assisted  this 
organization by donating a commercial kitchen facility acquired from an IHOP restaurant. 
 
Supportive  Housing.    The  City  amended  the  Zoning  Code  in  May  2013  to  define  “supportive 
housing”  (as  defined  in Section  19.04.781  of  the  Municipal  Code)  as  having  the  “meaning  set 
forth  in  California  Health  &  Safety  Code  section  50675.14.    Consistent  with  SB  2,  supportive 
housing will be permitted, conditionally permitted or prohibited in the same manner as other 
residential dwellings  of  the  same  type  in  the  same  zone  under  this code  and  applicable  state 
law.”  The  amendment  recognizes  the  need  of  people  with  disabilities  or  experience  of 
homelessness to live in primarily residential neighborhoods while receiving assistance.  
 
Single Room Occupancy.  Single room occupancy (SRO) facilities are small studio‐type units that 
help  to  address  the  needs  of  extremely  low‐income  individuals.    The  Camarillo  Zoning  Code 
does not currently define SROs or include specific provisions for their development.  However, 
12
      Ventura County Local Emergency Shelter Strategy, 2007, p. 20 
                                                                                     JANUARY 2014    7‐71

                                                                                                                 
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
the City will amend the Zoning Code within two years of adoption of the Housing Element to 
facilitate the development of this housing type.  
 
OFF‐STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
The City’s parking requirements for residential zones vary by residential type, housing product, 
and parking needs. Two enclosed parking spaces are required for a single‐family residence and 
for  condominiums  and  townhouses.  Apartment  parking  requirements  are  based  on  the  unit 
size, with studio units requiring one parking space and one‐bedroom units requiring 1½ parking 
spaces.  Two‐bedroom  units  require  two  parking  spaces,  and  three‐bedroom  units  require  2½ 
spaces. Four‐bedroom apartments require three spaces. Guest and recreational vehicle parking 
spaces are also required for both apartments and condominiums at a rate of one space each 
per  five  units  for  guest  and  recreational  vehicles.  Mobile  home  parks  require  two  tandem 
parking  spaces  for  each  unit.  Parking  requirements  have  been  reduced  in  the  past  for 
affordable  and  senior  citizen  housing  projects,  including  the  Tesoro  Walk  townhomes  and 
Courtyard  apartments.  The  City  also  recently  amended  the  parking  requirements  in  the 
Camarillo Commons Specific Plan area to establish standards for parking structures and mixed‐
use development that promote a pedestrian friendly environment. 
 
                              TABLE 7‐39 Residential Parking Requirements 
                               Type of Unit                 Minimum Parking Space Required 
             Single Family Residence                                2 spaces in a garage  
                                                            plus 1 space for recreational vehicle 
             Mobile Home Park                                       2 spaces in a carport 
             Second Residential                                            1 space  
             Apartments 
               Studio                                                1 space in a garage1 
               1 Bedroom                                           1 ½ spaces in a garage1 
               2 Bedroom                                            2 spaces in a garage1 
               3 Bedroom                                           2 ½ spaces in a garage1 
               4 Bedroom                                            3 spaces in a garage1 
               Guest Parking                                        1 space per five units 
               Recreational Vehicle                                1 space per five units2 
                                                                                           JANUARY 2014    7‐72

                                                                                                                            
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                TABLE 7‐39 Residential Parking Requirements 
                                 Type of Unit                           Minimum Parking Space Required 
             Condominiums and Townhouses 
               All unit sizes                                                  2 spaces in a garage1 
               Guest Parking                                          1 space per five units where parking is 
                                                                            provided in front of garages  
                                                                    or 2 spaces per five units where parking is 
                                                                          not provided in front of garages 
                 Recreational Vehicle                                          1 space per five units2 
             Source: Camarillo Zoning Code 
             Notes: 
             1. Garage requirement may be modified or waived through RPD /CUP process for projects with 
                  affordable housing component.   
             2. Recreational vehicle requirement may be modified or waived through RPD/CUP projects with 
                  affordable housing components. 
 
The City’s parking requirements are designed generally for suburban development.  In 2010 the 
City revised its parking requirements for apartments and for condominiums and townhouses in 
the CCM and COT zones, reducing the maximum requirement for apartments to two spaces and 
eliminating the requirement for recreational vehicle spaces.   These revisions  promote higher‐
density mixed use developments in these zones. 
 
SECOND UNITS 
In response to state‐mandated requirements and local needs, the City of Camarillo allows the 
development  of  second  dwelling  units  by  right  (i.e.,  no  discretionary  approval  is  required). 
Either the main unit or the second unit must be occupied by the property owner, and each year 
the  owner  is  required  to  file  an  annual  report  listing  the  occupants  of  the  main  and  second 
residential dwelling unit in order to ensure compliance with this condition. One additional off‐
street parking space is required. The second unit, with not more than one bedroom, may not 
exceed 640 square feet in the R‐1 and RPD  zones or 700 square feet in the R‐E zone, nor be 
larger than fifty percent of the floor area of the main dwelling in any of the zones. 
 
Second units serve to augment resources for seniors and other segments of the population. The 
development  standards  are  reasonable  to  ensure  neighborhood  compatibility  and  do  not 
present an unreasonable constraint to development. 
 
DENSITY BONUS 
Under State law (Senate Bill 1818 of 2004), cities and counties must provide a density increase 
up  to  35  percent  over  the  otherwise  maximum  allowable  residential  density  under  the 
Municipal  Code  and  the  Land  Use  Element  of  the  General  Plan  (or  bonuses  of  equivalent 
financial value) when builders agree to construct housing developments with units affordable 
to low or moderate income households or senior citizen developments.  State law also requires 
                                                                                                      JANUARY 2014    7‐73

                                                                                                           
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
that local governments provide regulatory incentives and concessions to qualifying projects and 
a process for waiving or reducing development standards under certain circumstances.   
 
The  City  amended  the  Municipal  Code  (Chapter  19.49)  in  2011  to  implement  the  State  law 
provisions.  The  Planning  Commission  or  City  Council  grants  the  density  bonus  with  the 
incentives  or  concessions  at  the  time  an  entitlement  application  is  approved.  With  the  new 
ordinance,  Camarillo  also  maintains  its  discretion  to  grant  a  density  bonus  that  exceeds  the 
minimum bonus described in State law for a qualifying project and to grant a bonus to a project 
that does not qualify under the specific requirements of State law. 
 
MOBILE HOMES/MANUFACTURED HOUSING 
There  is  often  an  economy  of  scale  in  manufacturing  homes  in  a  plant  rather  than  on  site, 
thereby  reducing  cost.  Both  manufactured  housing  and  mobile  homes  provide  less  expensive 
alternatives  to  single‐family  construction.  State  law  precludes  local  governments  from 
prohibiting the installation of mobile homes on permanent foundations on single‐family lots. It 
also declares a mobile home park to be a permitted land use on any land planned and zoned for 
residential  use  and  prohibits  requiring  the  average  density  in  a  new  mobile  home  park  to  be 
less than that permitted by the Municipal Code. 
 
In  addition  to  the  City’s  Mobile  Home  Park  Development  Zone,  individual  mobile  homes  are 
permitted  in  the  R‐1  single‐family  residential  zone,  thereby  facilitating  the  construction  of 
housing  that  is  frequently  of  lower  cost  than  conventionally‐constructed  units.  Five  mobile 
home parks are located in Camarillo. Two of these parks were assisted by the City in converting 
from rental parks to resident ownership.  
 
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS 
In order to reduce the impacts of condominium conversions on residents of rental housing and 
to  maintain  a  supply  of  rental  housing  for  low‐  and  moderate‐income  persons,  the  City's 
Municipal  Code  includes  the  following  provisions  for  condominium  conversions  in  Chapter 
16.50: 
 
     a.  The  prohibition  of  rent  increases  for  two  years  from  the  filing  of  the  conversion 
         application. Thereafter, rent increases are limited to the increase in the Consumer Price 
         Index (CPI). 
     b.  The payment of moving expenses equal to two times the monthly rent. 
     c.  The  offering  of  a  lifetime  lease,  with  reasonable  annual  rent  increases,  to  tenant 
         households whose head of household or spouse is age 62 or older. 
     d.  The offering of a three‐year lease, with reasonable annual rent increases, to all tenant 
         households that meet the income limits of the HUD Section 8 program. 
                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐74

                                                                                                           
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
    e.  The  limitation  of  conversions  to  no  more  than  five  percent  of  the  City's  potentially 
         convertible  rental  stock  in  any  one  calendar  year.  Once  the  yearly  limit  has  been 
         reached, a project may be approved for conversion only if the City Council makes one or 
         more of the following findings: 
         (1)  The  developer  will  provide  for  a  significant  increase  in  housing  for  low‐  and 
              moderate‐income  households  or  senior  citizen  households  over  and  above  the 
              provisions of this chapter. 
         (2)  The developer will provide for the construction of new rental housing. 
         (3)  The  developer  will  donate  an  acceptable  site  or  an  acceptable  amount of  funds  to 
              the City for construction of new rental or senior citizen housing. 
         (4)  The  need  and  demand  for  low‐cost  homeownership  to  be  provided  for  by  this 
              project will outweigh the detriment caused by further reduction of the rental stock. 
As  a  result  of  these  requirements,  the  potential  impact  of  condominium  conversions  is  not  a 
significant constraint on the preservation of affordable rental housing. 
 
BUILDING CODES 
State  law  prohibits  the  imposition  of  building  standards  that  are  not  necessitated  by  local 
geographic,  climatic  or  topographic  conditions  and  requires  that  local  governments  making 
changes  or  modifications  in  building  standards  must  report  such  changes  to  the  California 
Department  of  Housing  and  Community  Development  and  file  an  expressed  finding  that  the 
change is needed. 
 
The  City's  building  codes  are  based  upon  the  California  Building,  Green  Building  Standards, 
Plumbing,  Mechanical  and  Electrical  Codes,  with  modifications  that  are  due  to  local  climatic, 
geologic,  and  topographic  conditions.    The  modifications  concern  fire‐retardant  roofing, 
swimming  pools,  wood  trusses,  and  issues  related  to  soils  and  seismic  events.    The  adopted 
codes are considered to be the minimum necessary to protect the public's health, safety and 
welfare.  The  City  has  imposed  no  additional  regulations  that  would  unnecessarily  add  to 
housing costs. 
 
B.            DEVELOPMENT PROCESSING PROCEDURES 
 
RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PROCESSING 
State  Planning  and  Zoning  Law  provides  permit  processing  requirements  for  residential 
development.  Within  the  framework  of  state  requirements,  the  City  has  structured  its 
development  review  process  in  order  to  minimize  the  time  required  to  obtain  permits  while 
ensuring that projects receive careful review. 
                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐75

                                                                                                              
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
 
Camarillo has prepared permit processing guidelines to assist residential builders in applying for 
development  permits  for  single‐family  residences,  multifamily  residential  developments,  and 
subdivisions. The guides are comprehensive in nature and address the steps and check points to 
be followed. 
 
Early consultation with City staff is encouraged to identify issues as soon as possible and reduce 
processing  time.  A  "pre‐submittal  conference”  is  strongly  encouraged  so  that  applicants  can 
become  acquainted  with  the  information  and  fees  required  by  each  department  and  agency. 
Site  and  architectural  plans  are  also  reviewed  for  consistency  with  City  standards.  This 
conference  allows  the  applicant  to  determine  the  feasibility  of  the  project  and  make 
adjustments during the preliminary planning stages to minimize costs. 
 
Simultaneous  processing  of  required  entitlements  (e.g.,  subdivisions,  conditional  use  permits 
and  residential  planned  developments  permits)  is  also  provided  as  a  means  of  expediting  the 
review process. 
 
Many residential uses are permitted “by right”, with no discretionary review or public hearing 
required.  Such  uses  include  single‐family  homes,  second  units,  farmworker  housing,  care 
facilities,  mobile  homes,  manufactured  housing,  and  emergency  shelters  (see  TABLE  7‐38 
above).   
 
These  procedures  help  to  ensure  that  the  development  review  process  meets  all  legal 
requirements without causing a significant unwarranted constraint to housing development. 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW 
Environmental  review  is  required  for  all  development  projects  under  the  California 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Most projects in Camarillo are either Categorically Exempt 
or require only an Initial Study and Negative Declaration. Developments that have the potential 
of  creating  significant  impacts  that  cannot  be  mitigated  require  the  preparation  of  an 
Environmental  Impact  Report.  Most  residential  projects  require  a  Negative  Declaration  and 
take  two  to  three  weeks  to  complete.  Categorically  Exempt  developments  such  as  second 
residential units require a minimal amount of time. As a result, state‐mandated environmental 
review does not pose a significant constraint to housing development. 
 
C.           DEVELOPMENT FEES AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
 
State  law  limits  fees  charged  for  development  permit  processing  to  the  reasonable  cost  of 
providing the service for which the fee is charged. Various fees and assessments are charged by 
the  City  and  other  public  agencies  to  cover  the  costs  of  processing  permit  applications  and 
providing  services  and  facilities  such  as  schools,  parks  and  infrastructure.  Almost  all  of  these 
                                                                                     JANUARY 2014    7‐76

                                                                                                                                    
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
fees  are  assessed  through  a  pro  rata  share  system,  based  on  the  magnitude  of  the  project's 
impact or on the extent of the benefit that will be derived. 
 
TABLE  7‐40  through  TABLE  7‐42  show  the  development  fees  associated  with  a  249‐unit 
apartment  project,  a  120‐unit  townhouse  project,  and  a  12‐lot  single‐family  subdivision, 
respectively. As can be seen from the tables, public works and school fees represent the largest 
development  fee.  Development  fees  are  estimated  at  approximately  $15,303,  $29,442,  and 
$42,887 per unit, respectively.   
 
The  City  periodically  evaluates  the  actual  cost  of  processing  the  development  permits  when 
revising its fee schedule. 
 
                        TABLE 7‐40 Summary of Apartment Development Fees ‐ 2013 
   Number of Units                                                                                                 249 
   Square Footage                                                                                               242,680 
   School Fees 
        Oxnard High School District                                                                            $310,630 
        Pleasant Valley School District                                                                        $465,946 
     Total School Fees                                                                                         $776,576 
   Pleasant Valley Recreation and Park District                                                                $384,000 
   City of Camarillo Public Works Fees                                                                        $2,083,833 
   Calleguas Municipal Water District Fee                                                                      $183,568 
   Building Permit Fee                                                                                         $280,000 
   Community Development Fees 
   General Plan Amendment                                                                                        $7,587 
   Zone Change                                                                                                   $7,757 
   Residential Planned Development                                                                              $21,699 
   Development Allocation                                                                                        $4,189 
   Environmental Review                                                                                          $4,388 
   State Fish and Game                                                                                           $2,151 
   Zone Clearance                                                                                                $2,010 
   Landscape Plan Check                                                                                          $1,498 
   Total Community Development Fees                                                                             $51,279 
   Total Fees                                                                                                 $3,810,535 
   Cost Per Square Foot                                                                                          $15.70 
   Cost Per Unit                                                                                                $15,303 
   Fees do not include possible cost for an environmental impact report or related consultant fees.
   Sources:    City of Camarillo Community Development, Public Works and Building & Safety Departments, County of Ventura, Public 
               Works Agency, 2013. 
 
                                                                                                          JANUARY 2014    7‐77

                                                                                                                                 
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                      TABLE 7‐41 Summary of Townhouse Development Fees ‐ 2013 
      Number of Units                                                                              120 
      Square Footage                                                                             166,884 
      School Fees 
           Oxnard High School                                                                   $213,612 
           Pleasant Valley                                                                      $320,417 
        Total School Fees                                                                       $534,029 
      Pleasant Valley Recreation and Park District                                              $701,250 
      City of Camarillo Public Works Fees                                                      $1,559,012 
      Calleguas Municipal Water District Fee                                                    $331,710 
      Building Permit Fee                                                                       $188,443 
      Community Development Fees 
      General Plan Amendment                                                                      $7,587 
      Zone Change                                                                                 $7,757 
      Subdivision Map                                                                            $57,188 
      Residential Planned Development                                                            $21,699 
      Development Allocation                                                                      $4,189 
      Environmental Review                                                                        $4,388 
      State Fish and Game                                                                         $2,969 
      Zone Clearance                                                                              $2,010 
      Landscape Plan Check                                                                        $1,498 
      Total Community Development Fees                                                          $109,285 
      Total Fees                                                                               $3,533,014 
      Cost Per Square Foot                                                                        $21.17 
      Cost Per Unit                                                                              $29,442 
      Fees do not include possible cost for an environmental impact report or related consultant fees.
      Sources:    City of Camarillo Community Development, Public Works and Building & Safety Departments, County of Ventura, 
                  Public Works Agency, 2013. 
 
                                                                                                           JANUARY 2014    7‐78

                                                                                                                                       
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                       TABLE 7‐42 Summary of Single‐Family Development Fees ‐ 2013 
       Number of Units                                                                               12 
       Square Footage                                                                              28,621 
       School Fees 
               Oxnard High School                                                                 $36,635 
               Pleasant Valley                                                                    $54,952 
         Total School Fees                                                                        $91,587 
       Pleasant Valley Recreation and Park District                                             $70,153.84 
       City of Camarillo Public Works Fees                                                       $205,569 
       Calleguas Municipal Water District Fee                                                     $22,350 
       Building Permit Fee                                                                        $50,000 
       Community Development Fees 
       Subdivision Map                                                                            $23,253 
       Development Allocation                                                                      $4,189 
       Environmental Review                                                                        $4,388 
       State Fish and Game                                                                         $2,151 
       Zone Clearance                                                                              $2,010 
       Landscape Plan Check                                                                        $1,498 
       Total Community Development Fees                                                           $37,489 
       Total Fees                                                                                $514,638 
       Cost Per Square Foot                                                                        $17.98 
       Cost Per Unit                                                                              $42,886 
       Fees do not include possible cost for an environmental impact report or related consultant fees.
       Sources:      City of Camarillo Community Development, Public Works and Building & Safety Departments, County of Ventura, 
                     Public Works Agency, 2013. 
 
A sampling of development processing fees from other jurisdictions in Ventura County shows 
how fees in Camarillo compare with those of other cities.   TABLE 7‐43 below summarizes the 
comparison: 
 
                             TABLE 7‐43 Comparison of Development Processing Fees 
                                                                    Neighborhing Jurisdictions 
          Application 
                                           Camarillo                 Oxnard                   Ventura            Thousand Oaks 
   General Plan Amendment                      $7,587                $10,167                   $10,055                 $7,835 
                                                                                                                       $7,835 
   Zone Change                                 $6,936                 $3,091                    $5,900 
                                                                                                                 ($3,705 with GPA) 
                                                                                                                       $3,155 
   Conditional Use 
                                               $5,038                 $4,082                    $4,655          ($1,010 for a single‐
   Permit/Special Use Permit 
                                                                                                                       family) 
   Variance                                    $4,898                 $1,875                    $5,780                 $5,105 
                                              $10,291                                           $6,500 
   Planned Development                    for 1‐25 units;                                   for 1‐15 units; 
                                                                      $3,623                                             NA 
   Permit                                     $14,466                                           $8,227 
                                          for 26‐75 units                                for 16 or more units 
   Source:  Cities of Camarillo, Oxnard, Ventura and Thousand Oaks, 2013
                                                                                                             JANUARY 2014    7‐79

                                                                                                              
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
After the passage of Proposition 13 in 1978 and its limitation on local governments’ property 
tax  revenues,  cities  and  counties  faced  increasing  difficulty  in  providing  public  services  and 
facilities to serve their residents. One of the main consequences of Proposition 13 has been the 
shift  in  funding  of  new  infrastructure  from  general  tax  revenues  to  development  impact  fees 
and  improvement  requirements  on  land  developers.  The  City  requires  developers  to  provide 
on‐site  and  off‐site  improvements  necessary  to  serve  their  projects.  Such  improvements  may 
include water, sewer and other utility extensions, street construction and traffic control device 
installation  that  are  reasonably  related  to  the  project.  Dedication  of  land  or  in‐lieu  fees  may 
also be required of a project for rights‐of‐way, transit facilities, recreational facilities and school 
sites, consistent with the Subdivision Map Act. 
 
City  road  standards  vary  by  design  speed  and  may  be  adjusted  through  a  specific  plan  or 
residential planned development permit. Public residential streets in Camarillo have a 60‐foot 
right of way with two 12‐foot travel lanes, parking on both sides of the street and two 10‐foot 
parkways improved with 5‐foot sidewalks. The road standard can be modified for hillside areas 
as well as mixed use‐neighborhoods. Within planned communities, private residential streets as 
narrow as 30 feet have been permitted. The City of Camarillo’s public road standards are typical 
for cities in Ventura County and do not act as a constraint for residential development. 
 
The  City’s  Capital  Improvement  Program  (CIP)  contains  a  schedule  of  public  improvements 
including  streets,  bridges,  overpasses  and  other  public  works  projects  to  facilitate  the 
continued  build‐out  of  the  City’s  General  Plan.  The  CIP  helps  to  ensure  that  construction  of 
public improvements is coordinated with private development. 
 
Although development fees and improvement requirements increase the cost of housing, cities 
have little choice in establishing such requirements due to the limitations on property taxes and 
other revenue sources needed to fund public improvements. 
 
D.            ARTICLE 34 
 
The  citizens  of  Camarillo  in  1984  granted  the  City  the  authority  to  develop,  construct  and 
acquire  low‐rent  housing  under  Article  34  of  the  California  Constitution.  The  measure 
authorizes two percent of existing housing units to be developed for low‐income housing (i.e., 
591 units based on the total of 25,987 units in the City at the beginning of 2013, according to 
the  California  Department  of  Finance).    While  there  are  affordable  housing  units  in  the  City, 
including housing owned and operated by the Area Housing Authority of the County of Ventura 
(AHACV)  with  financial  assistance  from  the  City,  the  City  of  Camarillo  does  not  operate  as  a 
developer  or  owner  of  any  affordable  housing  developments  and  the  AHACV  is  a  not  a  legal 
entity affiliated with the City.  Article 34 does not apply. 
 
                                                                                     JANUARY 2014    7‐80

                                                                                                            
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
7.4.2        Non‐Governmental Constraints 
 
A.           ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS 
 
Environmental  constraints  include  physical  features  such  as  steep  slopes,  fault  zones, 
floodplains,  sensitive  biological  habitat,  brushfire  potential  in  hillside  areas,  and  agricultural 
lands.  In  some  cases,  development  is  constrained  by  state  and  federal  laws  (e.g.,  FEMA 
floodplain regulations, the Clean Water Act and the Endangered Species Act, and the state Fish 
and Game Code and Alquist‐Priolo Act). The City’s land use plans have been designed to protect 
sensitive areas from development and also to protect public safety by avoiding development in 
hazardous areas. While these policies constrain residential development to some extent, they 
are necessary to support other public policies. The development assumptions contained in the 
land  inventory  (Appendix  B)  are  based  on  the  City’s  current  information  regarding 
environmental constraints that could affect development. 
 
B.           INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINTS 
 
WASTEWATER 
The City is served by two water reclamation plants. The Camarillo Sanitary District Plant, with a 
design capacity of 6.75 million gallons per day, is currently functioning at 55 percent of capacity 
and  treating  3.7  million  gallons  per  day.  Camrosa  Water  District  serves  the  area  easterly  of 
Calleguas Creek with a plant located adjacent to the California State University Channel Islands 
having  a  design  capacity  of  1.5  million  gallon  per  day.  The  treatment  plants  are  intended  to 
meet the projected population for the City’s General Plan. Expansion of these treatment plants 
may be required if unincorporated county area without sewer service is developed or if changes 
in  land  use  cause  increased  wastewater  flows.  Individual  sites  will  require  varying  degrees  of 
utility extensions in order to provide service. Some rural parcels will be served by private septic 
systems  until  trunk  lines  reach  the  area.  None  of  the  identified  land  inventory  sites  have 
wastewater  service  limitations  that  would  preclude  the  level  of  development  described  in 
TABLE 7‐35, Land Inventory Summary. 
 
WATER 
Water for City residents is supplied by the City of Camarillo, Camrosa Water District, and several 
private  mutual  water  companies  including  Crestview  Mutual  and  Pleasant  Valley  Mutual.  All 
systems  depend  to  some  degree  on  imported  water  from  approximately  20  turnouts  of 
Metropolitan Water District (MWD) through Calleguas Municipal Water District. In addition to 
this  imported  water  supply,  the  City  of  Camarillo,  Camrosa,  Crestview  and  Pleasant  Valley 
Mutual operate 11 wells. System storage capacity is over 35 million gallons. Water and sewer 
system extensions to individual projects are the responsibility of the developer with fees paid 
to  cover  major  capital  expenditures.    None  of  the  identified  land  inventory  sites  have  water 
                                                                                     JANUARY 2014    7‐81

                                                                                                            
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
service limitations that would preclude the level of development described in TABLE 7‐35, Land 
Inventory Summary. 
 
DRY UTILITIES 
Gas,  electricity,  and  telephone  services  are  provided  by  Southern  California  Gas  Company, 
Southern California Edison, and Verizon Communications (telephone) respectively. All systems 
are  adequate  and  are  upgraded  as  demand  increases.  Supplies  of  natural  resources,  such  as 
water and gas, currently appear adequate. 
 
STORM WATER DRAINAGE 
Storm  water  runoff  is  handled  by  a  flood  control  system  maintained  by  the  Ventura  County 
Watershed  Protection  District.  Surface  drainage  utilizes  streets  and  gutters  until  it  reaches 
catch  basins.  Individual  projects  are  required  to  extend  local  storm  drains  or  participate  in 
reimbursement  districts  to  defray  installation  costs  for  trunk  lines.  Downstream  capacity  is 
limited  due  to  lack  of  improvements  and  maintenance  by  the  County  Watershed  Protection 
District.  The  City  is  also  required  to  implement  the  current  Ventura  County  Municipal 
Stormwater National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit.  This is required 
to  address  water  quality  and  quantity  runoff  from  construction  activities  and  for  post‐
construction  runoff  from  all  types  of  development,  including  residential  projects.   All  projects 
must  meet  the  current  Permit  requirements  to  retain  95  percent  of  the  water  quality  storm 
using  infiltration,  reuse,  or  evapotranspiration  measures  or  retention  measures.  Such 
infrastructure  requirements  may  add  to  the  cost  of  development.   The  stormwater  quality 
permit requirements offer alternative compliance for low income housing projects. 
 
SCHOOLS AND PARKS 
The  school  districts  (Pleasant  Valley  Elementary  School  District,  Somis  School  District,  Mesa 
Union School District, and Oxnard Union High School District) charge school fees to help pay for 
buildings and facilities. Parks are developed and maintained by the Pleasant Valley Recreation 
and Park District using fees or land dedication that is required by the City’s Municipal Code Park 
Dedication Ordinance. The objective of the General Plan is to provide five acres of parkland for 
every 1,000 residents. The City has been unable to meet this objective due to lack of funds and 
land  area  for  recreation.  Actual  development  of  parks  occurs  after  the  construction  of 
dwellings. 
 
ROAD IMPROVEMENTS 
To  the  extent  possible,  the  City  requires  developers  to  provide  roads  and  bridges  or  pay 
development fees to defray the costs. Other funding sources are also required to support large 
capital improvements. The City requires dedication of land and improvement of internal streets 
and  bordering  streets  as  part  of  the  subdivision  process.  The  City  has  constructed  two  major 
                                                                                     JANUARY 2014    7‐82

                                                                                                            
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
cross‐town  links  including  Adolfo  Road  and  Upland  Road  to  provide  efficient  circulation  and 
alternate emergency routes. 
 
The  City  has  a  Capital  Improvement  Program  to  schedule  public  improvements  including 
streets, bridges, overpasses and other public works projects to allow for the continued build‐
out  of  the  City’s  General  Plan.  This  helps  to  ensure  the  progression  of  improvements  to  be 
timely  with  private  development.  Competing  state  and  federal  mandates  require  the 
implementation of congestion management improvements. 
 
C.           LAND COSTS 
 
Land  represents  one  of  the  most  significant  components  of  the  cost  of  new  housing.  Land 
values fluctuate with market conditions and increased after 2000. The downturn in the housing 
market  beginning  in  2007  reduced  land  values,  however.  Changes  in  land  prices  reflect  the 
cyclical  nature  of  the  residential  real  estate  market,  with  land  values  increasing  as  market 
demand for housing grows.  
 
According  to  a  land  valuation  survey  recently  conducted  by  a  developer  for  a  high  density 
residential  project  currently  in  development,  the  price  of  RPD‐30  zoned  land  in  the  City  is 
approximately  $400,000  per  acre.  After  deducting  the  fees  necessary  for  the  development  of 
this land, the City estimates this amount to be closer to $200,000 per acre.  Per‐unit land cost is 
directly  affected  by  density.  Higher  density  allows  the  cost  to  be  spread  across  more  units, 
reducing  the  price  per  unit  though  often  increasing  the  total  cost  of  a  site.  The  City  has 
approved several projects at densities in the range of 30 units per acre, helping to reduce per‐
unit land cost.   
 
D.           CONSTRUCTION COSTS 
 
Construction  cost  is  affected  by  the  price  of  materials,  labor,  development  standards  and 
general  market  conditions.  The  City  has  no  influence  over  materials  and  labor  costs,  and  the 
building  codes  and  development  standards  in  Camarillo  are  not  substantially  different  than 
most other cities in Ventura County and the state of California. 
 
E.           COST AND AVAILABILITY OF FINANCING 
 
The availability of mortgage financing affects a household’s ability to purchase a home. Home 
purchase  loans,  both  conventional  and  government‐backed,  are  summarized  in  TABLE  7‐43.  
Government‐backed  financing  includes  loans  backed  by  the  Federal  Housing  Administration 
(FHA), Veterans Administration (VA), and Rural Service Agency (RSA).  During the middle years 
of  the  past  decade,  housing  prices were especially  high  in relation  to  incomes,  and  mortgage 
lending  restrictions  were  substantially  loosened,  with  the  result  that  fewer  households  relied 
                                                                                      JANUARY 2014    7‐83

                                                                                                                                               
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
on  government‐backed  financing  for  home  purchases.    However,  more  recently,  with  the 
gradual recovery of the housing market, government‐backed financing has served a major share 
of homebuyers once again, though the total number of purchases has been comparatively low.  
A total of 1,028 households applied for loans in 2011 to purchase Camarillo housing units.  For 
government‐backed financing, there were 311 applications in 2011, 30 percent of the total. 
 
TABLE  7‐44  summarizes  the  disposition  of  loan  applications  for  home  purchase  loans  in 
Camarillo.  The rates of approval for conventional loans and government loans are comparable, 
though the rate for government‐backed loans in slightly higher. 
 
                                  TABLE 7‐44: Disposition of Home Purchase Loans 
                                                                                                                        % Withdrawn or 
       Loan Type                Total Applications               % Approved1                    % Denied2 
                                                                                                                           Incomplete 
Conventional                                         717                       75.2%                        9.3%                         15.5% 
Government‐Backed                                    311                       79.4%                       10.6%                         10.0% 
Totals                                            1,028                        76.5%                        9.7%                         13.8% 
Source:  Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HDMA) data, jumbo conforming loans, 2011
Notes:  
            
     1.      “% Approved” includes all applications approved by the lenders, regardless of whether they were accepted by the applicants. 
     2. “% Withdrawn or Incomplete” includes all applications withdrawn by the applicants or closed for incomplete information. 
 
The recent (2007) crisis in the mortgage industry affected the availability and cost of real estate 
loans,  although  the  long‐term  effects  are  unpredictable.  The  credit  “crunch”  resulted  when 
“sub‐prime” lenders made it possible for low‐income families or others who could not qualify 
for  standard  mortgages  to  become  home  owners  even  though  they  might  not  have  had  the 
credit history and income to support repayment of the loans.  
 
The  problem  typically  occurs  with  adjustable  rate  mortgages  (ARM’s)  after  the  initial  fixed 
interest  rate  period  expires  (often  three  years)  and  the  interest  rate  converts  to  market. 
Because ARM’s often offered “teaser” initial interest rates well below market for the first few 
years, monthly payments may increase by several hundred dollars when the loan converts to 
market  rate.  When  property  values  were  increasing,  as  was  the  case  from  2000  to  2006, 
homeowners  had  the  option  of  refinancing  to  a  new  loan  when  the  initial  rate  expired. 
However, with declining values, many homeowners owed more than the resale value of their 
homes, making refinancing impossible. As a result of these conditions, there was a significant 
rise in foreclosure rates.  
 
The numbers of foreclosures dropped throughout California from high levels during 2007 to a 
first quarter level during in 2013 that was the lowest first quarter since 2005.  For Camarillo, the 
number  of  Notices  of  Default  dropped  from  a  first  quarter  high  of  2,648  in  2007  to  a  first 
quarter total of 1,255 during 2012, a reduction of 52.6 percent.  Then during the following year, 
from the first quarter of 2012 to the first quarter of 2013, the total dropped from 1,255 to 411, 
a  further  reduction  of  67.3  percent.  With  stricter  standards  now,  the  number  of  foreclosures 
                                                                                                                JANUARY 2014    7‐84

                                                                                                                 
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
will probably remain low for the immediate future.  However, change in mortgage underwriting 
standards is likely to have greater impacts on low income families than on other segments of 
the community. 
 
Camarillo  is  similar  to  most  other  communities  with  regard  to  private  sector  home  financing 
programs.  In  addition,  Camarillo  participates  in  a  Mortgage  Credit  Certificate  program  that 
offers  homebuyers  a  tax  credit  and  assists  in  qualifying  for  a  home  loan.  The  City  is  also  a 
participant  in  the  California  Rural  Housing  Mortgage  Finance  Authority  homebuyer  fund  that 
provides  low‐interest  loan  to  first‐time  home  buyers.  Low‐interest  loans  and  grants  are  also 
offered through the Community Development Block Grant Program for home improvements to 
help maintain existing housing units. 
 
Under  state  law,  it  is  illegal  for  real  estate  lending  institutions  to  discriminate  against  entire 
neighborhoods in lending practices because of the physical or economic conditions in the area 
(“redlining”). In monitoring new construction sales, re‐sales of existing homes, and permits for 
remodeling, it would not appear that redlining is practiced in any area of the city. 
 
7.4.3        Fair Housing 
 
Fair  housing  issues  are  addressed  in  Camarillo  through  anti‐discrimination  programs  and  two 
rent review commissions. 
 
A.           ANTI‐DISCRIMINATION 
 
State law prohibits discrimination in the development process or in real property transactions, 
and it is the City’s policy to uphold the law in this regard. Camarillo participated in a countywide 
consortium  that  prepared  an  Analysis  of  Impediments  to  Fair  Housing  Choice  in  2010.  Such 
impediments are typically any action, omission, or decisions that have the effect of restricting 
housing  choices  or  the  availability  of  housing  on  the  basis  of  race,  color,  ancestry,  national 
origin,  religion,  sex,  disability,  marital  status,  familial  status,  source  of  income,  sexual 
orientation, or any other arbitrary factor. 
 
Fair housing programs, referral, and counseling for Camarillo residents are funded through the 
City’s CDBG program. The City contracts with the Housing Rights Center, a fair housing agency 
for these services.  
 
B.           RENT REVIEW COMMISSIONS 
 
In addition to the fair housing program, two rent review commissions have been established by 
the City Council to assist in resolving rental disputes between tenants and landlords. The Rent 
                                                                                          JANUARY 2014    7‐85

                                                                                                        
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
Review  Commission  for  Multi‐Family  Housing  assists  in  the  resolution  of  rental  disputes  in 
connection  with  multi‐family  residential  facilities  of  five  or  more  units.  The  Commission’s 
determination is only advisory to tenants and landlords and cannot be appealed to or subject to 
any review by the City Council. Those filing a complaint may be charged a fee to cover the cost 
of stationery, postage, clerical support and telephone charges. 
 
Similarly, the Rent Review Commission for Mobile Home Parks assists in the resolution of rental 
disputes by reviewing proposed rent increases if petitioned to do so by one or more tenants. 
The  Commission  evaluates  the  proposed  increase  based  on  actual  and  anticipated  park 
operating expenses and income, vacancy rates, length of leases and other information to reach 
a  recommendation.  If  any  party  finds  the  recommendation  unacceptable,  the  matter  is 
submitted to binding arbitration, the cost of which is borne equally by the park owner and the 
petitioning tenant(s). The arbitrator is guided by the criteria established by the City Council in 
determining what a fair and just return is. The arbitrator's determination is final and conclusive. 
                                                                                  JANUARY 2014    7‐86

                                                                                                          
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
7.5         HOUSING PLAN 
7.5.1       Goals and Policies 
 
The housing goals of Camarillo are to: 
 
        Goal 1      Protect the qualities that have created a highly desirable living environment 
                    in the City. 
        Goal 2      Encourage the availability of a variety of housing designs, tenures and prices 
                    to meet the needs of present and future City residents. 
        Goal 3      Ensure that the quality of residential development is adequate to protect the 
                    health, safety and general welfare of City residents. 
In support of these goals, the following policies are adopted: 
 
        Policy 1  Preserve the high quality of the City's existing housing stock and residential 
                    environment. 
        Policy 2    Meet the City's local housing needs commensurate with its fair share of 
                    regional needs, including housing that is affordable to all income groups, to 
                    the maximum feasible extent. 
        Policy 3    Promote accessibility to housing opportunities by all households, regardless 
                    of income, race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, marital status, 
                    age, familial status, disabilities/medical conditions, source of income, sexual 
                    orientation, or any other arbitrary factors. 
7.5.2       Housing Programs 
 
This section describes the City’s housing programs, including the funding source and objectives 
for the 2013 – 2021 planning period. 
 
1.          AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT 
 
To maintain a supply of affordable housing, maximize the number of affordable units to eligible 
households,  and  preclude  windfall  profits,  the  City  requires  developers  of  projects  (including 
affordable housing units for which a density bonus exemption or other incentive(s) is granted) 
to enter into an Affordable Housing Agreement which: 
 
            a. Establishes  the  sales  prices  or  rents  of  the  affordable  units  for  lower‐income 
                households (i.e., extremely low, very low and low income); 
                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐87

                                                                                                                 
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
              b.  Establishes the number, type, and phasing of affordable units; 
              c.  Limits through deed restriction the initial and subsequent renters/purchasers of 
                  affordable units to those certified by the City as being eligible households; 
              d.  Requires for‐sale affordable units to be owner‐occupied; 
              e.  Limits  the  resale  price  of  an  affordable  unit  to  that  which  is  affordable  to  the 
                  same income category as the seller; 
              f.  Provides  for  the  City  to  receive  any  proceeds  of  the  last  sale  or  transfer  under 
                  the terms of the agreement that are in excess of the amount at which the unit 
                  could be purchased; and 
              g.  Affordable housing agreements shall be for a minimum period of 30 years.   
              Responsible Agency:           Department of Community Development  
              Timeframe:                    Ongoing 
              Funding source:               General fund 
              Program objective:            Maintain  a  long‐term  supply  of  affordable  housing  and 
                                            preclude windfall profits. 
               
2.            ENCOURAGEMENT OF ELDERLY, AFFORDABLE AND RENTAL HOUSING 
              THROUGH RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT CONTROL SYSTEM CRITERIA 
 
In  order  to  encourage  the  provision  of  elderly,  affordable  and  rental  housing  under  the 
Residential  Development  Control  System,  Part  B  of  the  allocation  criteria  was  amended  to 
award  bonus  points  over  and  above  the  other  points  earned  by  a  project.    This  action  would 
encourage developers to offer a portion of their project as elderly, affordable or rental housing.  
This would target projects which are not comprised completely of such housing or which do not 
offer  at  least  25  percent  of  their  units  as  affordable  (which  would  then  qualify  for  a  density 
bonus). 
 
In addition to the criteria set forth in Title 20 of the Camarillo Municipal Code, the City Council 
has the power to use (and has used) supplemental criteria that are consistent with the intent of 
the  Residential  Control  System  and  the  General  Plan.    These  criteria  include  whether  the 
project  will  enable  the  City  to  provide  a  balance  of  housing  types  and  values  that  will 
accommodate  a  variety  of  families  including  families  of  moderate  income  and  families  of 
limited or fixed incomes.  The City Council also considers the general location, type, value, size 
and relationship to adjoining properties in order to ensure reasonable public services and not 
unduly increase the costs for providing such services. 
                                                                                         JANUARY 2014    7‐88

                                                                                                             
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
 
             Responsible Agency:           Department of Community Development 
             Timeframe:                    Ongoing 
             Funding source:               General fund 
             Program objective:            Increase the supply of elderly affordable or rental housing 
                                           through the residential development control system. 
              
3.           DESIGN AND DISPERSAL OF INCLUSIONARY AND/OR DENSITY‐BONUS 
             AFFORDABLE UNITS 
 
In  order  to  minimize  the  differentiation  between  affordable  and  market  rate  units,  and  to 
ensure  that  no  portion  of  the  city  contains  an  overconcentration  of  affordable  units,  the  City 
intends to encourage the building of affordable inclusionary housing units in all specific plans 
and  other  developments  that  include  market‐rate  housing.   In  addition,  the  City  will  consider 
the amendment or creation of policies that encourage developers to design inclusionary and/or 
density‐bonus housing projects with affordable units that are:  
 
     a. Dispersed  throughout  the  development  for  which  the  affordable  housing  obligation  is 
        created, incentivized or otherwise induced, unless the developer can demonstrate that 
        including the affordable units on‐site makes the development economically infeasible.  
         
     b. Similar  in  exterior  appearance  to  market  rate  units  of  like  plan  type  (but  may  include 
        alternate equipment and interior finishes). 
         
     c. Available for occupancy at the same time market rate units are available for occupancy 
        in each development phase. 
         
     d. Distributed  among  four  target  income  groups  (Extremely‐Low,  Very  Low,  Low  and 
        Moderate),  in  accordance  with  the  City’s  density  bonus  ordinance,  or  as  otherwise 
        negotiated or incentivized. 
         
     e. Distributed among a range of unit sizes and types (i.e. single story, two‐story, efficiency) 
        to address the housing needs of a diverse demographic. 
         
     f. Subject to an affordability agreement to ensure long‐term affordability in accordance 
        with City ordinances and policies. 
These  proposed  policy  amendments  would  not  apply  to  fully  affordable  housing  projects, 
except  to  the  extent  that  such  a  fully  affordable  housing  project  will  be  of  a  design  that 
                                                                                      JANUARY 2014    7‐89

                                                                                                              
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
conforms  with  the  City’s  Community  Design  Element  standards  and  is  compatible  with 
surrounding market rate housing. 
 
             Responsible Agency:          Department of Community Development 
             Timeframe:                          Within one year of Housing Element adoption 
             Funding source:                  General fund 
             Program objective:                  Adopt  new  General  Plan  policies  and/or  Zoning  Code 
                                                 amendments  and/or  City  Council  policies  to  implement 
                                                 the  dispersal  and  design  requirements  for  affordable 
                                                 housing. 
              
4.           SECOND UNITS 
 
Second units provide an effective means of addressing the needs of very low and extremely low 
income households, including seniors on fixed incomes. The City will continue to allow second 
units on lots with existing single‐family residences, maintaining minimum separation and rear 
yard  requirements  to  ensure  compatibility  with  adjoining  properties,  as  well  as  provide 
brochures  and/or  informational  displays  at  the  Community  Development  counter  and  other 
appropriate  locations  (with  PDF  versions  for  website  distribution)  detailing  the  benefits  of 
second units and the process for obtaining approval. 
 
             Responsible Agency:                 Department of Community Development 
             Timeframe:                          Ongoing 
             Funding source:                     General fund 
             Program objective:                  To provide rental units for low‐income households. 
              
5.           FAIR HOUSING PRACTICES  
 
In order to discourage discriminatory housing practices, the City supports fair housing programs 
to investigate discrimination complaints, and provide referral and counseling service. The City 
contracts  with  the  Housing  Rights  Center  which  distributes  fair  housing  materials  at  various 
locations throughout the City, including but not limited to City Hall and on the City’s website, 
the  Board  of  Realtors  office,  and    apartment  complexes  in  the  City.  Fair  housing  literature  is 
provided in various languages, including English, Spanish, Arabic, and Tagalog.  Additionally, the 
City facilitates fair housing workshops that discuss the importance of fair housing practices for 
both renters and landlords. The Housing Rights Center also investigates fair housing violations 
as well as responds to complaints regarding fair housing issues. 
                                                                                       JANUARY 2014    7‐90

                                                                                                          
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
 
            Responsible Agencies:        Department  of  Community  Development;  Housing  Rights 
                                         Center 
            Timeframe:                   Ongoing 
            Funding source:              CDBG 
            Program objective:           To discourage discriminatory housing practices in the City 
                                         of Camarillo. 
             
6.          NONPROFIT HOUSING ORGANIZATIONS  
 
The City will continue to collaborate with the Area Housing Authority of the County of Ventura 
(AHACV) and other nonprofit organizations (such as Many  Mansions,  Habitat for Humanity of 
Ventura  County,  Housing  Farmworkers,  and  Cabrillo  Economic  Development  Corporation)  to 
pursue the development and preservation of affordable housing. Between 2011 and 2013, the 
City  provided  a  donation  of  $100,000  to  the  Ventura  County  Housing  Trust  Fund  (VCHTF).  
These funds, totaling $750,000 from various agencies, were used as loans to future affordable 
housing projects in Ventura County.  
 
The City will also provide staff and clerical aid in completing funding applications and serve as 
liaison  with  state  and  federal  funding  agencies  as  well  as  providing  technical  assistance  on 
engineering  and  planning  matters.  The  City  will  continue  to  meet  with  non‐profits  to  discuss 
potential affordable housing opportunities in the City, especially for very low and extremely low 
income  households  and  housing  for  persons  with  special  needs  (such  as  the  elderly, 
farmworkers,  and  persons  with  disabilities,  including  persons  with  developmental  disabilities, 
and other special needs groups). The City will proactively contact nonprofit housing developers 
and agricultural stakeholders to share the inventory of properly zoned sites for residential and 
mixed  use  development  and  funding  opportunities.    The  City  will  also  expeditiously  assist 
builders and stakeholders to pursue funding resources, infrastructure availability, if necessary, 
and  entitlements.    Annually,  the  City  will  conduct  a  meeting  with  nonprofit  housing  and 
supportive service providers to discuss needs in the City and funding opportunities, as part of 
its  CDBG  Request  for  Proposal  process.  The  City  will  continue  to  expedite  entitlements  for 
affordable housing projects.  
 
                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐91

                                                                                                          
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                  
            Responsible Agency:           Department of Community Development 
            Timeframe:                    Ongoing 
            Funding source:               General fund 
            Program objective:            To  maximize  the  uses  of  all  housing  resources  to  assist 
                                          affordable housing. 
             
7.          CODE COMPLIANCE 
 
The  City  shall  continue  to  encourage  the  maintenance  of  residential  structural  and  site 
conditions  through  code  compliance  efforts.  The  City  maintains  a  proactive  code  compliance 
program that conducts surveys twice a year for property maintenance, responds daily to code 
compliance  issues,  and  refers  property  owners  to  appropriate  maintenance  and  repair 
assistance programs.   
 
            Responsible Agency:           Department of Community Development 
            Timeframe:                    Ongoing 
            Funding source:               General fund  
            Program objective:            To maintain and preserve existing housing stock. 
                  
8.          PRESERVATION OF EXISTING AFFORDABLE HOUSING  
 
The City shall continue to strive to preserve existing affordable housing.  This includes avoiding 
the  intrusion  of  commercial  and  industrial  land  uses  in  existing  residential  neighborhoods  as 
well as preserving the existing stock of affordable housing.  In addition, the City shall assist in 
minimizing the number of units lost when affordability agreements terminate. 
 
Most of the City’s affordable housing projects are not at risk of converting to market rate during 
the ten‐year 2013‐2023 at‐risk housing planning period.  Only two assisted developments have 
restrictions that could expire during this time: Ponderosa Village Senior Apartments and Corte 
Madera apartments. 
 
Assisted units identified as at risk of conversion will be monitored, and the City will facilitate the 
extension of affordability covenants through appropriate means, including purchase by a non‐
profit  organization.    The  City  will  also  ensure  that  owners  of  at‐risk  housing  comply  with 
noticing  requirements,  tenant  education,  and  include  a  timeline  for  the 
                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐92

                                                                                                          
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
conversion/preservation  of  the  units.  The  City  will  continue  to  monitor  the  at‐risk  units  to 
insure compliance with any statutory requirements. 
 
            Responsible Agency:           Department of Community Development 
            Timeframe:                    Ongoing  
            Funding source:               CDBG funds, General fund 
            Program objective:            To  ensure  the  long‐term  preservation  of  affordable 
                                          housing. 
             
9.          HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHERS PAYMENT STANDARDS 
 
In  order  to  encourage  landlord  participation  in  the  Housing  Choice  Vouchers  (Section  8) 
program,  the  City  will  support  the  efforts  of  the  Area  Housing  Authority  of  the  County  of 
Ventura  (AHACV)  to  petition  for  increases  in  the  payment  standards  to  reflect  local  market 
conditions.    The  City  will  also  help  promote  the  program  by  providing  links  to  the  AHACV 
website. 
 
            Responsible Agencies:  AHACV; Department of Community Development 
            Timeframe:                    Ongoing 
            Funding source:               Section 8 funds 
            Program objective:            To  ensure  that  Housing  Choice  Vouchers  (Section  8) 
                                          payment standards support local rent levels. 
                 
10.         INCLUSIONARY HOUSING PROGRAMS 
 
In 2006, the City Council adopted an Inclusionary Housing Policy that establishes guidelines for 
the inclusion of affordable housing within residential developments.  Based on this policy, each 
residential development shall be reviewed to consider the inclusion of affordable housing units 
for a range of incomes, including lower and moderate income households.  The guidelines apply 
to new residential developments and the conversion of existing apartments to condominiums. 
Developments within the Springville Specific Plan area are also obligated to provide inclusionary 
housing  units.  The  City  of  Camarillo  has  prepared  a  public  handout  that  describes  the 
inclusionary housing policy and what is expected from developers. The handout is available at 
the public counter. The City will continue to maintain a monitoring program for the inclusionary 
housing units to support the successful implementation of this program.  
 
            Responsible Agency:               Department of Community Development 
                                                                                 JANUARY 2014    7‐93

                                                                                                         
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
              Timeframe:                   Ongoing 
              Funding source:              General fund 
              Program objective:           Continue to maintain a monitoring program to support 
                                           the successful implementation of this program 
11.           ADEQUATE SITES  
 
The  City  has  a  Regional  Housing  Needs  Allocation  (RHNA)  of  2,224  units,  including  539 
extremely  low/very  low  income,  366  low  income,  411  moderate  income,  and  908  above 
moderate  income  units  for  the  2014‐2021  RHNA  planning  period.  The  City  is  committed  to 
ensuring adequate capacity in its residential sites inventory to meet its RHNA. 
 
              Responsible Agency:      Department of Community Development 
              Timeframe:               Ongoing 
              Funding source:          General fund 
              Program objective:       Provide  adequate  residential  sites  and  opportunities  for 
                                       affordable housing commensurate with the City’s RHNA. 
               
12.           SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY (SRO) HOUSING 
 
The  Camarillo  Zoning  Code  does  not  currently  define  SROs  or  include  specific  provisions  for 
their  development.  The City  will  amend  the  Zoning  Code  within  two  years  of  adoption  of  the 
Housing Element to facilitate the development of this housing type.   
 
              Responsible Agency:      Department of Community Development 
              Timeframe:               Within two years of Housing Element adoption  
              Funding source:          General fund 
              Program objective:       To  provide  housing  opportunities  for  extremely  low 
                                       income and special needs households.  
               
13.           DESIGN FLEXIBILITY 
 
The City will continue to utilize the Residential Planned Development (RPD) process to provide 
flexibility from development standards in the approval of development applications.  Through 
the  RPD  approval  process,  the  City  will  continue  to  allow  modifications  in  development 
standards  as  an  incentive  to  encourage  the  development  of  housing  for  lower‐income 
                                                                                 JANUARY 2014    7‐94

                                                                                                          
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
households.  Periodic  review  of  the  Municipal  Code  requirements  is  done  to  ensure  design 
standards do not impede the development of affordable housing. 
 
            Responsible Agency:           Department of Community Development 
            Timeframe:                    Ongoing 
            Funding source:               General fund 
            Program objective:            To  facilitate  the  development  of  housing  and  ensure  that 
                                          development standards do not unnecessarily constrain the 
                                          development of housing. 
                   
14.         HOUSING REHABILITATION ASSISTANCE 
 
The  City  utilizes  CDBG  funds  to  operate  a  Housing  Rehabilitation  Program.    The  program 
provides  loans  at  below‐market  interest  rates  to  lower  income  households  to  address  health 
and safety issues, code violations, overcrowding, accessibility, and maintenance and repairs.  In 
addition, the City is working with Habitat for Humanity to provide maintenance and repairs for 
lower income households through Habitat’s Neighborhood Revitalization Program. 
 
                  Responsible Agency:            Department of Community Development 
                  Timeframe:                     Ongoing 
                  Funding source:                CDBG 
                  Program objective:             To  preserve  and  conserve  the  City’s  affordable 
                                                 housing stock; facilitate rehabilitation of six housing 
                                                 units  annually  or  48  units  during  the  planning 
                                                 period. 
 
15.         PRESERVATION OF MOBILE HOME PARKS 
 
The City previously assisted in the conversion of two mobile home parks to resident ownership. 
The  City  will  continue  to  monitor  and  where  possible  assist  the  preservation  of  mobile  home 
parks as an affordable housing resource.  
 
                                                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐95

                                                                                                       
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
               Responsible Agency:      Department of Community Development 
               Timeframe:               Ongoing 
               Funding source:          General Fund, CDBG  
               Program objective:       To retain affordable housing opportunities in mobile home 
                                        parks, whenever feasible. 
7.5.3          Quantified Objectives 
 
The  City’s  quantified  objectives  for  new  construction,  rehabilitation  and  conservation  are 
presented in TABLE 7‐45. 
 
                   TABLE 7‐45 Quantified Objectives – 2013‐2021 City of Camarillo 
                                                       Income Category 
                            Ex. Low     V. Low        Low          Mod         Upper      Totals 
  New Construction 
                                  266         273          366          411         908       2,224 
  (RHNA) 
  Rehabilitation 
                                     8          20          20            ‐‐          ‐‐          48 
  Assistance 
  Conservation of At‐Risk 
                                   56           73          16            ‐‐          ‐‐        145 
  Housing 
 
                                                                                JANUARY 2014    7‐96

                                                                                                         
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
APPENDIX A – EVALUATION OF THE 2008 HOUSING ELEMENT 
 
Section 65588(a) of the Government Code requires that jurisdictions evaluate the effectiveness 
of the existing Housing Element, the appropriateness of goals, objectives and policies, and the 
progress in implementing programs for the previous planning period. This appendix contains a 
review the housing goals, policies, and programs of the previous housing element, adopted in 
2003  and  evaluates  the  degree  to  which  these  programs  have  been  implemented  during  the 
previous  planning  period,  2008  through  2014  (amended  by  SB  375  to  close  on  October  15, 
2013). This analysis also includes an assessment of the appropriateness of goals, objectives and 
policies.  The  findings  from  this  evaluation  have  been  instrumental  in  determining  the  City’s 
2013‐2021 Housing Implementation Program. 
 
Table  7‐A‐1  summarizes  the  programs  contained  in  the  previous  Housing  Element  along  with 
the  source  of  funding,  program  objectives,  accomplishments,  and  implications  for  future 
policies and actions. 
 
Table  7‐A‐2  evaluates  the  appropriateness  of  previous  goals  and  policies,  and  identifies  any 
changes that are called for in response to the City’s experience during the past planning period. 
 
Table 7‐A‐3 presents the City’s progress in meeting the quantified objectives from the previous 
Housing Element. 
                                                                                  JANUARY 2014    7‐A1

                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                          7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                            TABLE 7‐A‐1 Housing Element Program Effectiveness Evaluation – City of Camarillo 2008‐2014 
                                       Funding 
             Program                                     Program Objectives                             Accomplishments                                      Appropriateness 
                                        Source 
1.    Affordable Housing             General Fund  Maintain long‐term supply of  The City has implemented affordable housing agreements                This program continues to 
      Agreement                                    affordable housing and        with  a  variety  of  programs  for  over  30  years.  In  the  last  be appropriate and will be 
To maintain a supply of                            preclude windfall profits.    year,  Camarillo  has  had  several  affordable  homes  resale        included in the 2013‐2021 
affordable housing, maximize the                                                 in  the  last  year  and  the  affordability  agreement  was          Housing Element. 
number of affordable units to                                                    transferred to the new home owners. 
eligible households, and preclude                                                The 384‐unit AMLI apartment complex that was approved 
windfall profits, the City requires                                              in  2011  requires  a  development  agreement  for  the 
developers of projects (including                                                affordable  housing  units.  The  agreement  will  be 
affordable housing units for                                                     completed  prior  to  issuance  of  any  building  permits.  In 
which a density bonus exemption                                                  addition,  the  City  has  approved  the  following  additional 
or other incentive(s) is granted)                                                residential projects:  
to enter into an Affordable                                                                 84 units (RPD‐172) 
Housing Agreement.                                                                          75 units (RPD‐183) 
                                                                                            57 units (RPD‐184) 
                                                                                            163 units (RPD‐178)  
                                                                                 All  of  these  projects  require  approval  of  an  affordable 
                                                                                 housing  agreement  prior  to  issuance  of  any  building 
                                                                                 permits. 
2.    Design of Affordable           General Fund  Minimize difference between   Camarillo  continues  to  review  residential  developments  This is not an ongoing City 
      Housing                                      affordable and market rate    to  ensure  that  the  affordable  units  have  similar  exterior  requirement and not a 
In order to minimize the                           units.                        treatments as the market rate units.                                  specific program.  This 
differentiation between                                                                                                                                requirement is discussed in 
affordable and market rate units,                                                                                                                      the Housing Constraints 
require that affordable units                                                                                                                          section and not included in 
included within a project for                                                                                                                          the 2013‐2021 Housing 
which a density bonus,                                                                                                                                 Element as a housing 
exemption or other incentive(s)                                                                                                                        program.  
has been granted are: 
a.   Similar in exterior 
      appearance to market rate 
      units of like plan type and 
      may include alternate 
                                                                                                                                                        JANUARY 2014    7‐A2

                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                          7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                            TABLE 7‐A‐1 Housing Element Program Effectiveness Evaluation – City of Camarillo 2008‐2014 
                                        Funding 
               Program                                   Program Objectives                              Accomplishments                                    Appropriateness 
                                         Source 
       equipment 
b.   Available equally in each 
       development phase 
c.   Distributed among four 
       target income groups 
       (Extremely‐Low, Very Low, 
       Low and Moderate). 
d.    Include a range of unit sizes 
       to address the needs of 
       seniors, larger households 
       and reduce overcrowding. 
3.   Encouragement of Elderly,        General Fund  Increase supply of elderly      Camarillo  has  used  the  Residential  Development  Control      This program continues to 
       Affordable and Rental                        affordable or rental housing    System as a tool in providing affordable housing for over         be appropriate and will be 
       Housing Through Residential                  through the residential         25 years. In 2011, the City allocated 300 units under the         included in the 2013‐2021 
       Development Control                          development control system.     residential  development  control  system  for  the  384  unit    Housing Element. 
       System Criteria                                                              AMLI  apartment  development.  The  developer  agreed  to 
In order to encourage the                                                           provide  $200,000  to  fund  additional  affordable  housing 
provision of elderly, affordable                                                    with  $100,000  designated  for  the  Ventura  County 
and rental housing under the                                                        Housing  Trust  fund  and  in  return  the  City  permitted  9 
Residential Development Control                                                     additional  market  rate  units.  The  remaining  75  units  are 
System, Part B of the allocation                                                    exempt  as  they  are  designated  for  low  and  very  low 
criteria was amended to award                                                       income  persons.  As  a  result  of  the  exemptions  the 
bonus points over and above the                                                     developer was be able to construct the entire apartment 
other points earned by a project.                                                   complex in 2013.  
This action would encourage 
developers to offer a portion of 
their project as elderly, affordable 
or rental housing.   
4.  Maintenance of Density            General Fund  Provide a variety of densities  Camarillo  continued  to  provide  for  a  residential  mix  in   This is an ongoing 
       Balance                                      and housing in new              new  developments.  All  developments  approved  were             requirement of State law 
Evaluate General Plan                               development.                    developed at the density range designated in the General          and is merged with Program 
Amendment requests that                                                             Plan.                                                             19 (discussed later) to 
change residential density in                                                                                                                         formulate a program in the 
                                                                                                                                                      2013‐2021 Housing Element 
                                                                                                                                                       JANUARY 2014    7‐A3

                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                          7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                            TABLE 7‐A‐1 Housing Element Program Effectiveness Evaluation – City of Camarillo 2008‐2014 
                                      Funding 
              Program                                    Program Objectives                                Accomplishments                                  Appropriateness 
                                       Source 
relation to the impact on the                                                                                                                         for ensuring adequate sites 
distribution of residential                                                                                                                           for the City’s RHNA. 
densities with consideration given 
to this provision.  
5.  Second Units                    General Fund  Continue to allow second units    The City’s Housing Element was not certified by the State         This program continues to 
Second units provide an effective                 on lots with existing single‐     until  August  2009,  which  delayed  program                     be appropriate and will be 
means of addressing the needs of                  family residences.                implementation.  Since  certification,  the  City  has            included in the 2013‐2021 
very‐low‐ and extremely‐low‐                      Provide brochures and/or          continued to market the second residential unit program.          Housing Element. 
income households, including                      informational displays at the     The  second  residential  handout  material  was  updated  in 
seniors on fixed incomes.                         Community Development             2010  and  in  2011  and  made  available  on  the  City’s 
                                                  counter and other appropriate  website. 
                                                  locations (with PDF versions for   
                                                  website distribution) detailing   Though  the  City  ministerially  approves  requests  for 
                                                  the benefits of second units      second  residential  units,  only  four  second  unit  permits 
                                                  and the process for obtaining     have been issued between 2008 and 2012, for an average 
                                                  approval.                         of about one unit per year. 
6.     Fair Housing Practices       CDBG          Continue to contract with the     The  City  continues  to  offer  fair  housing  services  to      This program continues to 
In order to discourage                            Housing Rights Center to          residents. This service has been provided by the Housing          be appropriate and will be 
discriminatory housing practices,                 provide fair housing services to  Rights Center and is funded with CDBG funds. On Nov. 29,          included in the 2013‐2021 
the City will support fair housing                residents.                        2012  and  April  7,  2011  a  Fair  Housing  Forum  for  the     Housing Element. 
programs to investigate                           Facilitate fair housing           public  was  conducted  at  the  Camarillo  Library.  An 
discrimination complaints, and                    workshops that discuss the        additional fair housing workshop was conducted on June 
provide referral and counseling                   importance of fair housing        16,  2011  to  train  City  employees  about  their  obligations 
service.                                          practices for both renters and    under fair housing law. 
                                                  landlords. 
7.     Nonprofit Housing            General Fund  Conduct an annual housing         Camarillo  continues  to  coordinate  with  non  profits  and     With the present economic 
       Organizations                              forum where all non‐profits and   housing  providers  to  see  that  all  housing  resources  are   downturn, new residential 
In order to maximize the use of                   housing providers are invited to  used to assist affordable housing. The City on December           developments are not being 
all In order to maximize the use                  discuss housing opportunities in  5, 2012 held a Housing Forum at the Camarillo Library. At         built, and affordable 
of all funding sources, the City                  the City of Camarillo.            the meeting an overview of residential development and            housing opportunities were 
will continue to support the                      Continue to support the           housing opportunities was presented.                              not available. Camarillo 
formation and efforts of                          formation and efforts of          The  City  in  2011  and  2012  contributed  $33,333.33  each     continues to explore future 
                                                  nonprofit organizations and       year  to  the  Ventura  County  Housing  Trust  Fund  and  will  opportunities and when an 
                                                                                                                                                       JANUARY 2014    7‐A4

                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                          7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                           TABLE 7‐A‐1 Housing Element Program Effectiveness Evaluation – City of Camarillo 2008‐2014 
                                       Funding 
              Program                                    Program Objectives                                Accomplishments                                    Appropriateness 
                                        Source 
nonprofit organizations and                        citizens groups.                   contribute  the  same  amount  in  2013  for  a  total            opportunity becomes 
citizens groups who are eligible to                Continue to cooperate with the  contribution of $100,000. The City is a board member and             available, will support the 
apply for federal and state                        Ventura County Area Housing        helps  determine  which  affordable  housing  project             expansion of affordable 
housing funds and who may                          Authority and/or other             receives  housing  trust  funds.  The  funds  can  be  used  for  housing if funding is 
sponsor proposals to provide                       nonprofit organizations, (such     predevelopment  and  construction  costs  associated  with        available. If a project or 
affordable housing.                                as the Many Mansions and           affordable housing.                                               program is consistent with 
                                                   Habitat for Humanity of                                                                              Camarillo’s Housing 
                                                   Ventura County).                                                                                     Element and Consolidated 
 
                                                                                                                                                        Plan, the City is willing to 
                                                   Provide staff and clerical aid in 
                                                                                                                                                        support applications for 
                                                   completing funding applications 
                                                                                                                                                        HOME funds. This program 
                                                   and serve as initiator and 
                                                                                                                                                        continues to be appropriate 
                                                   liaison with state and federal 
                                                                                                                                                        and will be included in the 
                                                   funding agencies as well as 
                                                                                                                                                        2013‐2021 Housing 
                                                   providing technical assistance 
                                                                                                                                                        Element. 
                                                   on engineering and planning 
                                                   matters. 
                                                   Continue to meet with non‐
                                                   profits to discuss potential 
                                                   affordable housing project 
                                                   opportunities within the City. 
                                                   Continue to expedite 
                                                   entitlements and assist with the 
                                                   financing of non‐profit 
                                                   affordable housing projects. 
8.    Article 34 Authority           General Fund  Compliance with Article 34 to      Camarillo  continues  to  monitor  its  compliance  with  its  This is a requirement under 
The City has the authority                         develop construct, or acquire      Article 34 Authority.                                             State law.  However, the 
pursuant to an initiative under                    low rent housing projects.                                                                           City does not typically serve 
Article 34 of the California                                                                                                                            as developer or owner of 
Constitution, to develop,                                                                                                                               low‐cost housing.  
construct, or acquire a low rent                                                                                                                        Furthermore, with the 
housing project.  As a result, the                                                                                                                      dissolution of the Camarillo 
City will continue its monitor                                                                                                                          Redevelopment Agency, the 
                                                                                                                                                        City’s ability to facilitate 
                                                                                                                                                         JANUARY 2014    7‐A5

                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                         7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                           TABLE 7‐A‐1 Housing Element Program Effectiveness Evaluation – City of Camarillo 2008‐2014 
                                        Funding 
              Program                                     Program Objectives                                  Accomplishments                                   Appropriateness 
                                         Source 
compliance with this provision.                                                                                                                           affordable housing 
                                                                                                                                                          development is greatly 
                                                                                                                                                          compromised.  This 
                                                                                                                                                          program is not included in 
                                                                                                                                                          the 2013‐2021 Housing 
                                                                                                                                                          Element.   
9.    Maintenance of Housing          General Fund  Maintain a proactive code          Camarillo  continues  to  provide  a  proactive  code  This program continues to 
In order to encourage the                           compliance program.                compliance  program,  in  conjunction  with  Building  and  be appropriate and will be 
maintenance of existing housing                     Refer property owners to           Safety.                                                            included in the 2013‐2021 
in desirable condition, the City                    appropriate maintenance and                                                                           Housing Element. 
shall continue to encourage the                     repair assistance programs. 
maintenance of residential                          Respond to citizens’ code 
structural and site conditions.                     compliance issues. 
10.  Affordable Housing Site          General Fund  Apply the site selection criteria  In 2011, the City approved the 384 unit AMLI apartment             Utilizing sound site planning 
      Criteria                                      for non‐market rate housing        complex  that  assigned  75  units  for  low  and  very  low       criteria to evaluate project 
In order to provide an                              used by HUD and CHFA.              income  units.  The  apartments  are  in  the  Springville         proposals is an ongoing 
appropriate residential                                                                Specific  Plan  area  that  includes  parks  and  is  close  to    function of the Planning 
environment, apply the site                                                            schools  and  commercial  shopping.  In  approving  the            Department.  This is not 
selection criteria for non‐market                                                      development  made  sure  the  site  was  an  appropriate           included in the 2013‐2021 
rate housing used by HUD and                                                           location and environment for affordable housing.                   Housing Element as a 
CHFA or other programs                                                                                                                                    specific housing program. 
established by the City in                                                             In  2011,  the  City  approved  TT‐5561,  RPD‐172,  183,  and 
evaluating affordable housing                                                          184  for  Laro  Properties  in  the  Springville  Specific  Plan. 
proposals.                                                                             The  developer  proposes  to  utilize  a  2  acre  lot  for  the 
                                                                                       development  of  affordable  housing.  The  lot  was  created 
                                                                                       as  part  of  TT‐5561,  which  ensured  that  the  site  was  of 
                                                                                       adequate  size  and  location  appropriate  for  affordable 
                                                                                       housing.  
11.  Preservation of Existing         CDC funds,    Assist in minimizing the number  Camarillo  continues  to  monitor  the  affordable  housing          Preservation of existing 
      Affordable Housing              CDBG funds,   of units lost when affordability  agreements  as  well  as  at‐risk  housing  developments  to        affordable housing is an 
The City shall continue to strive to  General Fund  agreements terminate.              make  sure  that  affordable  housing  opportunities  are          important strategy.  This 
preserve existing affordable                        Assisted units identified as at    maintained.                                                        program continues to be 
housing.  This includes avoiding                    risk of conversion will be                                                                            appropriate and will be 
                                                                                                                                                           JANUARY 2014    7‐A6

                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                           7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                            TABLE 7‐A‐1 Housing Element Program Effectiveness Evaluation – City of Camarillo 2008‐2014 
                                        Funding 
              Program                                     Program Objectives                            Accomplishments                                 Appropriateness 
                                         Source 
the intrusion of commercial and                    monitored and the City will                                                                    included in the 2013‐2021 
industrial land uses in existing                   facilitate the extension of                                                                    Housing Element. 
residential neighborhoods as well                  affordability covenants through 
as preserving the existing stock of                appropriate means. 
affordable housing.                                Ensure that owners of at‐risk 
                                                   housing comply with noticing 
                                                   requirements, tenant 
                                                   education, and include a time 
                                                   line for the conversion/ 
                                                   preservation of the units. 
                                                   Continue to monitor the at‐risk 
                                                   units to insure compliance with 
                                                   any statutory requirements. 
12.  Section 8 Fair Market Rents     General Fund  Support the efforts of the Area  The City is a member of the Area Housing Authority of the  This is part of the City’s 
In order to increase the number                    Housing Authority to gain        County  of  Ventura  that  maintains  the  Housing  Choice  effort to promote the 
of rental units eligible for                       Federal approval of higher fair  Vouchers (Section 8) program in Camarillo.                    Housing Choice Vouchers 
inclusion in the Section 8 Housing                 market rents.                                                                                  program.  This program is 
Assistance Payments Program the                                                                                                                   included in the 2013‐2021 
city should support the efforts of                                                                                                                Housing Element. 
the Area Housing Authority to 
gain Federal approval of higher 
fair market rents. 
13.  Revenue Bonds/Tax Credits       Revenue       Support future revenue bond      There  were  not  any  applications  for  revenue  bonds/tax  With the dissolution of the 
The City will continue to assist     bonds; low‐   applications when                credits for affordable housing in 2011 or 2012. Had there     Camarillo Redevelopment 
applications for tax credits and     income        opportunities arise.             been any applications the City would have supported the       Agency, the City’s ability to 
revenue bonds.                       housing tax                                    preparation of the applications.                              issue bonds for affordable 
                                     credits                                                                                                      housing in the future is 
                                                                                                                                                  limited.  Furthermore, 
                                                                                                                                                  bonds and tax credits are 
                                                                                                                                                  potential funding sources, 
                                                                                                                                                  not a specific City housing 
                                                                                                                                                  program.  This is not 
                                                                                                                                                  included in the 2013‐2021 
                                                                                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐A7

                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                           7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                            TABLE 7‐A‐1 Housing Element Program Effectiveness Evaluation – City of Camarillo 2008‐2014 
                                       Funding 
              Program                                    Program Objectives                                 Accomplishments                               Appropriateness 
                                        Source 
                                                                                                                                                    Housing Element as a 
                                                                                                                                                    housing program. 
14.  Density Bonus                   General Fund  Amend the Municipal Code to        The Housing Element was certified by the State in August      The City will continue to 
The City shall comply with the                     comply with state law once the     2009,  which  delayed  implementation  of  this  program.     offer density bonus as an 
provisions of state law when an                    State completes the revisions      The City waited until the State of California had updated     incentive to encourage 
eligible developer requests a                      to density bonus law.              State  law  regarding  density  bonuses  to  update  the      affordable housing.   
density bonus or other                                                                Municipal Code. In September 2012, the City of Camarillo      However, the zoning 
modifications to development                                                          amended the Municipal Code to comply with State law on        amendment is completed 
standards such as reduced                                                             density bonuses and other development incentives.             and is not included in the 
setbacks or waiver of the                                                                                                                           2013‐2021 Housing Element 
recreational vehicle parking                                                                                                                        as a housing program. 
requirement.   
15.  Right of First Refusal          CDBG funds,   Require as a condition of          Since 2008, the City has not used its right of first refusal  With the dissolution of the 
Where legally possible, require as  General Fund   approval the right of the City to  to acquire sites for affordable housing.                      Camarillo Redevelopment 
a condition of approval the right                  have the first opportunity to                                                                    Agency and reduced CDBG 
of the City to have the first                      purchase the land that was                                                                       funds, the City is not likely 
opportunity to purchase the land                   proposed to include low cost                                                                     to be in the position of 
that was proposed to include low                   units for sale or rent.                                                                          acquiring land for affordable 
cost units for sale or rent.                                                                                                                        housing.  This program is 
                                                                                                                                                    not included in the 2013‐
                                                                                                                                                    2021 Housing Element. 
16.  Community Development           CDBG          Support the City’s continuum of  Camarillo continues to support its “continuum of care” as  CDBG is a funding source.  
      Block Grant                                  care that addresses                well  as  the  fair  housing,  economic  development,  and  This is not included in the 
The City’s Community                               homelessness, fair housing,        residential rehabilitation programs with CDBG funds.          2013‐2021 Housing Element 
Development Block Grant (CDBG)                     public service programs,                                                                         as a separate housing 
funds are used to support the                      affordable housing, and                                                                          program. 
continuum of care that addresses                   residential rehabilitation. 
homelessness, fair housing, social 
service programs, affordable 
housing, and residential 
rehabilitation.  
                                                                                                                                                     JANUARY 2014    7‐A8

                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                         7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                           TABLE 7‐A‐1 Housing Element Program Effectiveness Evaluation – City of Camarillo 2008‐2014 
                                       Funding 
              Program                                     Program Objectives                              Accomplishments                                  Appropriateness 
                                        Source 
17.  Inclusionary Housing            General Fund  Prepare a procedure guide and     Developments  within  the  Springville  Specific  Plan  are     This program continues to 
      Programs                                     maintain a monitoring program     obligated  to  provide  inclusionary  housing  units.  In       be appropriate and will be 
In 2006 the City Council adopted                   for the inclusionary housing      addition,  the  City  of  Camarillo  has  prepared  a  public   included in the 2013‐2021 
an Inclusionary Housing Policy                     units to support the successful   handout  that  describes  the  inclusionary  housing  policy    Housing Element. 
that establishes guidelines for the                implementation of this            and  what  is  expected  from  developers.  The  handout  is 
inclusion of affordable housing                    program.                          available at the public counter. 
within residential developments.  
Based on this policy, each 
residential development shall be 
reviewed to consider the 
inclusion of affordable housing 
units for a range of incomes, 
including lower‐ and moderate‐
income households.   
18.  Emergency Shelter and           General Fund  Continue to support               In 2010, the City amended its Zoning Code to permit             This program is complete 
      Transitional Housing                         countywide efforts such as the    emergency shelters by‐right in the M‐1 zone.                    and is not included in the 
In 2007, Senate Bill 2 amended                     Winter Warming Shelter and                                                                        2013‐2021 Housing 
state law regarding emergency                      the RAIN transitional housing     The  amendment  also  permitted  transitional  housing  in      Element. 
shelters and transitional housing.                 facility and local organizations  the  RPD  zone.  However,  under  the  provisions  of  SB  2,    
Senate Bill 2 generally requires                   in their programs to assist       transitional  housing,  meeting  the  definition  outlined  in 
that emergency shelters be                         those who are re‐establishing     Health  and  Safety  Code  section  50675.2(h),  is  allowed 
permitted by‐right in at least one                 themselves                        wherever  residential  use  is  permitted,  subject  to  the 
zoning district.                                   Amend the Municipal Code in       same    standards  that  apply  to  that  zone.  The  2010 
                                                   2010 in conformance with the      amendment permits transitional housing only in PRD‐20U 
 
                                                   emergency shelter provisions of  zones  or  greater,  while  regular  single‐family  housing  in 
                                                   Senate Bill 2.                    the  PRD  zone  has  no  such  restriction.  The  City amended 
                                                                                     the Zoning Code again in May 2013 to comply with State 
                                                   Add transitional housing and 
                                                                                     law  to  treat  transitional  and  supportive  housing  as  a 
                                                   supportive housing as 
                                                                                     residential use and be permitted in the same manner as 
                                                   permitted uses within 
                                                                                     similar uses in the same zone. 
                                                   residential zone districts. 
                                                                                      
                                                                                     The City amended its Zoning Code to include provisions 
                                                                                     for supportive housing in May 2013. 
                                                                                                                                                       JANUARY 2014    7‐A9

                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                             TABLE 7‐A‐1 Housing Element Program Effectiveness Evaluation – City of Camarillo 2008‐2014 
                                       Funding 
              Program                                   Program Objectives                                Accomplishments                                       Appropriateness 
                                        Source 
19.  General Plan Amendments         General Fund  Provide opportunities for        For  over  30  years  Camarillo  has  provided  for  affordable  This is an ongoing 
As General Plan amendments are                     affordable housing               housing  opportunities  as  part  of  General  Plan  requirement of State law 
evaluated, lands shall be                          commensurate with the City’s     amendments. No change is anticipated.                                 and is merged with Program 
considered for reuse, mixed‐use                    regional housing need.                                                                                 4 (discussed earlier) to 
and infill potential, with                                                                                                                                formulate a program in the 
affordable housing opportunities                                                                                                                          2013‐2021 Housing Element 
through the designation of                                                                                                                                for ensuring adequate sites 
appropriate densities and land                                                                                                                            for the City’s RHNA. 
use types. 
20.  Farmworker Housing              General Fund  Amend the Municipal Code to      In  2012,  the  City  amended  its  Zoning  Code  to  remove          This program has been 
The City currently allows                          conform to the State Health      farmworker  housing  as  a  conditionally  permitted  use  in         completed and is not 
farmworker housing in the                          and Safety Code (Section         the  OS  and  RE  zones,  with  findings  that  these  zones  are     included in the 2013‐2021 
Residential Planned Development                    17021.5 and 17021.6) that        not  intended  to  have  agricultural  uses  as  primary  uses        Housing Element. 
district, and subject to a                         pertains to farmworker           and  there  are  limited  opportunities  for  agricultural 
conditional use permit in the O‐S,                 housing.                         activities  in  these  zones.    The  amendment  also  made 
A‐E and R‐E districts.                                                              farmworker  housing  a  permitted  use  in  the  AE  zone, 
                                                                                    which is designated for exclusive agricultural uses.  
                                                                                     
                                                                                    The  McGrath  family  is  still  working  with  the  County  of 
                                                                                    Ventura  to  receive  permits  to  build  farmworker  housing 
                                                                                    on  the  periphery  of  Camarillo.  In  pursuit  of  assisting  the 
                                                                                    McGrath  family  the  City  provided  sewer  service  without 
                                                                                    which due to high ground water the housing could not be 
                                                                                    built. 
21.  Design Flexibility              General Fund  Continue to allow modifications  Camarillo has been implementing this program for many                 This program continues to 
The City will continue to utilize                  in development standards as an  years. No change is anticipated.                                       be appropriate and will be 
the Residential Planned                            incentive to encourage the                                                                             included in the 2013‐2021 
Development (RPD) process to                       development of housing for                                                                             Housing Element. 
provide flexibility from                           lower‐income households. 
development standards in the                       Periodically review the 
approval of development                            Municipal Code requirements 
applications.                                      to ensure design standards do 
                                                   not impede the development of 
                                                                                                                                                         JANUARY 2014    7‐A10

                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                         7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                           TABLE 7‐A‐1 Housing Element Program Effectiveness Evaluation – City of Camarillo 2008‐2014 
                                        Funding 
               Program                                   Program Objectives                                Accomplishments                                      Appropriateness 
                                         Source 
                                                    affordable housing. 
22.  Reasonable Accommodation  General Fund         Adopt a Reasonable                The  City  adopted  a  Reasonable  Accommodation                    This program is completed 
       Ordinance (Persons With                      Accommodation Ordinance.          Ordinance  in  August  2011.  The  Ordinance  facilitates  the      and will no longer be 
       Disabilities)                                                                  processing of requests and provides exceptions in zoning            included in the 2013‐2021 
The City will adopt a Reasonable                                                      and land use regulations for persons with disabilities.             Housing Element. 
Accommodation Ordinance to                                                                                                                                 
facilitate the processing of 
requests and provide exceptions 
in zoning and land use regulations 
for persons with disabilities. 
 
23.  Residential Rehabilitation      CDBG           Continue to implement the City  During  2012  Camarillo  assisted  the  rehabilitation  of  five      This program continues to 
       Program                                      of Camarillo Residential          units including four very low, and one low income units.            be appropriate and will be 
Continue to implement the City                      Rehabilitation Program.           This brings the total number of units rehabilitated during          included in the 2013‐2021 
of Camarillo Residential                                                              the  planning  period  to  33,  which  is  significantly  greater   Housing Element. 
Rehabilitation Program to provide                                                     than the 10 units anticipated when the Housing Element 
rehabilitation loans for qualifying                                                   was prepared. 
residents to maintain and 
enhance residential 
neighborhoods and preserve 
affordable housing. 
24.  Preservation of Mobile          General Fund,  Continue to monitor and where     The Camarillo Mobile Home Park‘s subdivision application            This program continues to 
       Home Parks                    CDBG, Mobile   possible assist the preservation  was approved in 2010. The City will monitor the Camarillo           be appropriate and will be 
The City previously assisted the     Home Park      of mobile home parks as an        Mobile  Home  Park  and  will  assist  with  the  tenants           included in the 2013‐2021 
conversion of two mobile home        Resident       affordable housing resource.      purchasing  of  lots,  where  feasible.  The  park  owner  has      Housing Element. 
parks to resident ownership. Two     Ownership                                        offered  to  extend  the  residents’  leases;  the  impact  on 
additional parks have submitted      Program.                                         residents should be minimized. 
applications to subdivide their 
property.  
25.  Definition of Family            General Fund   Amend the Zoning Code to          The City amended the Municipal Code definition of family  This program is completed 
The City will examine and amend                     define a family as “one or more  to be consistent with current law and to insure it did not  and is not included in the 
                                                                                                                                                         JANUARY 2014    7‐A11

                                                                                                                                                                         
                                          7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                            TABLE 7‐A‐1 Housing Element Program Effectiveness Evaluation – City of Camarillo 2008‐2014 
                                       Funding 
              Program                                   Program Objectives                          Accomplishments                                   Appropriateness 
                                        Source 
its definition of family to ensure it           persons living together in a      constrain  the  development,  maintenance,  and  2013‐2021 Housing 
does not act as a constraint on                 dwelling unit, with common        improvement  of  housing  for  persons  with  disabilities  in  Element. 
the development, maintenance                    access to, and common use of      August 2010.                                                      
and improvement of housing for                  all living, kitchen, and eating 
persons with disabilities.                      areas within the dwelling unit.” 
                                                                                                                                                  JANUARY 2014    7‐A12

                                                                                                                         
                 7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                                                      
             TABLE 7‐A‐2 Appropriateness of Housing Goals and Policies City of Camarillo 
  Goals                                                                                           Appropriateness 
  1.   Protect the qualities that have created a highly desirable living environment   Appropriate ‐ retain 
       in the City. 
   
  2.   Encourage the availability of a variety of housing designs, tenures and prices  Appropriate ‐ retain 
       to meet the needs of present and future City residents. 
   
  3.   Ensure that the quality of residential development is adequate to protect the   Appropriate ‐ retain 
       health, safety and general welfare of city residents. 
   
  Policies                                                                                                  
  1.   Preserve the high quality of the City's existing housing stock and residential  Appropriate ‐ retain 
       environment. 
   
  2.   Meet the City's local housing needs commensurate with its fair share of         Appropriate ‐ retain 
       regional needs, including housing that is affordable to all income groups, to 
       the maximum extent feasible. 
   
  3.   Promote accessibility to housing opportunities by all households, regardless    Appropriate ‐ retain 
       of income, race, color, religion, sex, marital status, age, household size or 
       physical disability. 
 
 
 
                                                                                                  JANUARY 2014    7‐A13

                                                                                                                                              
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
Quantified Objectives 
The  City’s  quantified  objectives  for  new  construction,  rehabilitation  and  conservation  are 
presented in Table 7‐A‐3. 
                                                                        
       TABLE 7‐A‐3 Progress in Achieving Quantified Objectives City of Camarillo 2008‐2014 
                                                                             Income Category 
                                      Ex. Low            V. Low            Low               Mod                 Upper               Totals 
  Objectives 
  New Construction*                     364                363             591               687                  1,335              3,340 
  Rehabilitation                         4                   3              3                  ‐‐                   ‐‐                 10 
  Conservation                          (a)                90               ‐‐                 ‐‐                   ‐‐                 90 
  Accomplishments 
  New Construction*                      ‐‐                58              608               279                   449               1,394 
  Rehabilitation                         ‐‐                22               11                  0                   0                  33 
  Conservation                           ‐‐                76               0                   0                   0                  76 
  *Quantified objective for new construction is for the period 1/11/2006‐6/30/2014 per the RHNA
  (a) Camarillo preserved the 305‐unit Mira Vista Village apartments in 2006. Due to technicalities in California State law the City cannot 
  receive credit for the units in the Quantified Objectives. 
 
                                                                                                                 JANUARY 2014    7‐A14

                                                                                                          
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
          APPENDIX B – RESIDENTIAL LAND INVENTORY 2013‐2021 
 
A.          SPRINGVILLE SPECIFIC PLAN 
 
Table  7‐B‐1  and  Figure  7‐B‐2  summarizes  the  remaining  residential  capacity  in  the  Springville 
Specific Plan.  
                                                                                JANUARY 2014    7‐B1

                                                                                                                                                                    
                                               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                                                                                  
                                                                         Table 7‐B‐1 Springville Specific Plan Sites 
                                                                                                                    Remaining Capacity 
Map ID             APNs                  Land Use            Acreage       Density  Anticipated Units                                            Application Number 
                                                                                                         Lower        Mod        Upper  Total 
                                                               14.5                         90             18           0          72     90 
                                    Low‐Medium 
                                                                6.1           10            55             11          46           0     57       T‐5561/RPD‐184 
                                    Density 
                                                                8.2                         55 
                                                                                                                                          75       T‐5561/RPD‐183 
                                                                5.9                         63             15           0          60 
                                                                2.5                         30 
                                                                                                                                          84       T‐5561/RPD‐172 
                                                                2.5                         30             16           0          68 
               1570020200           Medium Density              6.1           18           102             20          82           0    102             n/a 
               1570020210 
    23                                                           7                         110             22          88           0    110             n/a 
               1570030350 
                                                               11.5                        135             32           0          131   163           RPD‐178 
               1570030180 
               1570020185                                      11.8                        150             33           0          132   165           RPD‐177 
                                    Mixed 
                                                                              25                                                          50           CUP‐350 
                                    Use/Commercial             12.3                         25             10           0          40 
                                                                15                         375              0           0           0      0             n/a 
                                    High Density                              30 
                                                                 2                          40             40           0           0     40             n/a 
                                    Senior Housing               3            30            90             90           0           0     90             n/a 
                                    Total                     108.4           ‐‐          1,350           307         216          503  1,026 
Notes: 
1.  Includes all units that will not be permitted prior to January 1, 2014.  
 
                                                                                                                                             JANUARY 2014    7‐B2

                                                                                                        
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
B.         CAMARILLO COMMONS STRATEGIC PLAN 
 
The  potential  residential  capacity  of  the  Camarillo  Commons  Strategic  Plan  is  summarized  in 
Table 7‐B‐2 and Figure 7‐B‐3. 
 
                                                                                 JANUARY 2014    7‐B3

                                                                                                                                                         
                             7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                    TABLE 7‐B‐2 Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan – Potential Residential Projects Sites 
                                                                                                                                                  From 
                                                                                                                                                 2008‐
                                                                       Realistic     Existing Use/Site
Map ID     APN           Zoning   GP    Lot size (Acres)  Density                                                        Note                     2014 
                                                                     Net Capacity     Considerations 
                                                                                                                                                Housing 
                                                                                                                                                Element 
                                                     A: Mobil Avenue/Pickwick Drive 
        1650080255        CCM    CMU          0.83            20          13          Office building                                                
        1650080355        CCM    CMU          0.65            20          10              Church                                                     
        1650080515        CCM    CMU          0.98            20          15          Office building                                                
        1650080535        CCM    CMU          0.20            20           3          Office building                                                
                                                                                                       This area would have mixed use with 
        1650080505        CCM    CMU          1.27            20          20              Church       office or commercial on the lower floor       
17 
        1650080525        CCM    CMU          0.45            20           7              Church       with an average density of 20 units to        
                                                                                                       the acre. 
        1650080595        CCM    CMU          1.37            20          21          Office building                                                
        1650140205        CCM    CMU          0.92            20          14         Shopping center                                                 
        1650140195        CCM    CMU          0.93            20          14          B & B hardware                                                 
        1650140215        CCM    CMU          1.85            20          29             Post Plaza                                                  
Total                                         9.45                        146 
                                                          B: Pickwick Drive NE 
        1650140015        CCM    CMU          1.27            25          25               Retail      This area would have a mixed use and          
                                                                                                       stand alone high density multi‐family 
        1650140025        CCM    CMU          0.85            25          17               Retail                                                    
                                                                                                       residential land uses. The density 
18      1650140035        CCM    CMU          0.85            25          17               Retail                                                    
                                                                                                       would range from an average of 20 
        1650140045        CCM    CMU          0.85            25          17               Retail      units to the acre for the mixed uses          
                                                                                                       and to an average of 30 units to the 
        1650140055        CCM    CMU          0.56            25          11               Retail      acre for the stand alone multi‐family.        
Total                                         4.38                        87 
                                                                                                                                JANUARY 2014    7‐B4

                                                                                                                                                            
                             7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                    TABLE 7‐B‐2 Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan – Potential Residential Projects Sites 
                                                                                                                                                     From 
                                                                                                                                                    2008‐
                                                                         Realistic     Existing Use/Site
Map ID     APN           Zoning   GP    Lot size (Acres)    Density                                                        Note                      2014 
                                                                       Net Capacity     Considerations 
                                                                                                                                                   Housing 
                                                                                                                                                   Element 
                                                           C: Pickwick Drive SE 
        1650140105        CCM    CMU          0.84            20            13               Retail                                                     
        1650140125        CCM    CMU          0.83            20            13               Retail      This area would have mixed‐use with            
19                                                                                                       office/residential land uses with an 
        1650140175        CCM    CMU          0.84            20            13               Retail      average density of 20 units to the acre.       
        1650140185        CCM    CMU          0.84            20            13               Retail                                                     
Total                                         3.35                          52 
                                                           D: Ponderosa Center 
        1650080585        CCM    CMU         10.75            20            172        Ponderosa Center  This area would have mixed‐use with            
                                                                                                         office/residential over retail land uses 
20      1650080045        CCM    CMU          0.59            20             9         Ponderosa Center                                                 
                                                                                                         with an average density of 20 units to 
        1650080435        CCM    CMU          0.36            20             5               Vacant      the acre.                                      
Total                                         11.7                          186 
                                                      E: Arneill/Daily Drive Frontage 
        1650080545        CCM    CMU          0.67            20            10             Car wash                                                     
        1650080565        CCM    CMU          0.45            20             7             Car wash                                                     
        1620033210        CCM    CMU          0.21            20             3         Steak and Hoagie                                                 
21 
        1620033280        CCM    CMU          0.18            20             2            Restaurant                                                    
        1620033300        CCM    CMU          0.31            20             4               Retail                                                     
        1620033320        CCM    CMU          0.61            20             9            Burger King                                                   
Total                                         2.43                          35 
                                                                                                                                  JANUARY 2014    7‐B5

                                                                                                                                                        
                             7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                    TABLE 7‐B‐2 Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan – Potential Residential Projects Sites 
                                                                                                                                                 From 
                                                                                                                                                2008‐
                                                                       Realistic   Existing Use/Site
Map ID     APN           Zoning   GP    Lot size (Acres)  Density                                                      Note                      2014 
                                                                     Net Capacity   Considerations 
                                                                                                                                               Housing 
                                                                                                                                               Element 
                                                            F: Bowling Alley 
                                                                                                        This area would have stand alone 
22      1650080575        CCM    CMU          3.35           30           80         Bowling alley    attached residential land uses with an        
                                                                                                     average density of 30 units to the acre. 
Total                                         3.35                        80 
                                                  G: Raemere Residential Neighborhood 
        1620033010        CCM    CMU          0.18           18            1             Duplex                                                     
        1620033020        CCM    CMU          0.15           18            1             Duplex                                                     
        1620033030        CCM    CMU          0.15           18            1             Duplex                                                     
        1620033060        CCM    CMU          0.15           18            1             Duplex                                                     
        1620033070        CCM    CMU          0.15           18            1             Duplex                                                     
        1620033090        CCM    CMU          0.15           18            1             Duplex                                                     
        1620033100        CCM    CMU          0.15           18            1             Duplex            Duplex units characterized by            
                                                                                                          uninsulated two bedroom, one 
        1620033110        CCM    CMU          0.15           18            1             Duplex      bathroom units with an one car garage.         
24 
        1620033120        CCM    CMU          0.30           18            1             Duplex        The neighborhood was developed in            
                                                                                                       1957 and most of the structures are 
        1620033130        CCM    CMU          0.22           18            1             Duplex              overcrowded and aging.                 
        1620033140        CCM    CMU          0.16           18            1             Duplex                                                     
        1620033220        CCM    CMU          0.15           18            1             Duplex                                                     
        1620033230        CCM    CMU          0.15           18            1             Duplex                                                     
        1620033240        CCM    CMU          0.15           18            1             Duplex                                                     
        1620033250        CCM    CMU          0.15           18            1             Duplex                                                     
        1620033260        CCM    CMU          0.15           18            1             Duplex                                                     
                                                                                                                             JANUARY 2014    7‐B6

                                                                                                                                                    
                              7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                    TABLE 7‐B‐2 Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan – Potential Residential Projects Sites 
                                                                                                                                             From 
                                                                                                                                            2008‐
                                                                    Realistic    Existing Use/Site
Map ID      APN           Zoning   GP   Lot size (Acres)  Density                                                   Note                     2014 
                                                                   Net Capacity   Considerations 
                                                                                                                                           Housing 
                                                                                                                                           Element 
        1620033270         CCM    CMU         0.15          18          1              Duplex                                                   
          Subtotal                            2.81                      17                                                                       
        1620034010         CCM    CMU         0.20          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034020         CCM    CMU         0.16          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034030         CCM    CMU         0.16          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034040         CCM    CMU         0.16          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034050         CCM    CMU         0.16          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034070         CCM    CMU         0.16          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034080         CCM    CMU         0.16          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034090         CCM    CMU         0.16          18          1              Duplex                                                   
                                                                                                        Duplex units characterized by 
        1620034100         CCM    CMU         0.16          18          1              Duplex          uninsulated two bedroom, one             
                                                                                                   bathroom units with an one car garage. 
25      1620034110         CCM    CMU         0.19          18          1              Duplex                                                   
                                                                                                    The neighborhood was developed in 
        1620034120         CCM    CMU         0.18          18          1              Duplex       1957 and most of the structures are         
                                                                                                          overcrowded and aging. 
        1620034135         CCM    CMU         0.15          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034145         CCM    CMU         0.16          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034155         CCM    CMU         0.16          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034165         CCM    CMU         0.17          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034175         CCM    CMU         0.17          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034185         CCM    CMU         0.17          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034195         CCM    CMU         0.17          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034205         CCM    CMU         0.17          18          1              Duplex                                                   
                                                                                                                          JANUARY 2014    7‐B7

                                                                                                                                                    
                              7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                    TABLE 7‐B‐2 Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan – Potential Residential Projects Sites 
                                                                                                                                             From 
                                                                                                                                            2008‐
                                                                    Realistic    Existing Use/Site
Map ID      APN           Zoning   GP   Lot size (Acres)  Density                                                   Note                     2014 
                                                                   Net Capacity   Considerations 
                                                                                                                                           Housing 
                                                                                                                                           Element 
        1620034215         CCM    CMU         0.16          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034225         CCM    CMU         0.16          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034230         CCM    CMU         0.21          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034240         CCM    CMU         0.19          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034250         CCM    CMU         0.17          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034260         CCM    CMU         0.15          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        1620034270         CCM    CMU         0.15          18          1              Duplex                                                   
          Subtotal                            4.36                      26                                                                       
        162003106          CCM    CMU         0.15          18          1              Duplex                                                   
        162003107          CCM    CMU         0.15          18          1              Duplex           Duplex units characterized by           
                                                                                                       uninsulated two bedroom, one 
        162003108          CCM    CMU         0.15          18          1              Duplex      bathroom units with an one car garage.       
28      162003103          CCM    CMU         0.15          18          1              Duplex       The neighborhood was developed in           
                                                                                                    1957 and most of the structures are 
        162003104          CCM    CMU         0.20          18          1              Duplex             overcrowded and aging.                
        162003105          CCM    CMU         0.15          18          0              Triplex                                                  
          Subtotal                            0.95                      5                                                                        
Total                                         8.12                      48 
                                                                                                                          JANUARY 2014    7‐B8

                                                                                                                               
                          7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                TABLE 7‐B‐2 Camarillo Commons Strategic Plan – Potential Residential Projects Sites 
                                                                                                                        From 
                                                                                                                       2008‐
                                                                Realistic    Existing Use/Site
Map ID  APN           Zoning   GP   Lot size (Acres)  Density                                     Note                  2014 
                                                               Net Capacity   Considerations 
                                                                                                                      Housing 
                                                                                                                      Element 
                                                          Summary 
Area A                 CCM    CMU         9.45          20         146                           
Area B                 CCM    CMU         4.38          25          87 
Area C                 CCM    CMU         3.35          20          52 
Area D                 CCM    CMU        11.70          20         186 
Area E                 CCM    CMU         2.43          20          35 
Area F                 CCM    CMU         3.35          30          80 
Area G                 CCM    CMU         8.12          18          48 
Total                                    42.78                     634 
                                                                                                        JANUARY 2014    7‐B9

                                                                                               
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
C.         PROPOSED PROJECTS 
 
Table 7‐B‐3 and Figures 7‐B‐3 and 7‐B‐4 summarizes the residential projects that are currently 
being proposed within the City of Camarillo. 
 
                                                                        JANUARY 2014    7‐B10

                                                                                                                                                 
                                          7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
        
                                                          TABLE 7‐B‐3 Proposed Projects 
                                                                                                     Residential Capacity                           From 
                                                                                                                                                   2008‐
 Map                                        Housing                                                                                 Application
              Project             APN                  Zoning       GP       Acres  Density  Very                                                   2014 
   ID                                        Type                                                  Low     Mod      Upper    Total    Number 
                                                                                             Low                                                  Housing 
                                                                                                                                                  Element 
   10       Mammana            1620200015     SF         RE       Rural       3.00    3.0     0     0       0         9        9       T‐5724          
         Standard Pacific                                                                                                             T‐5367/ 
   11                          2290150195     SF      RPD‐5U       LDR       12.20    6.3      0    0       0         77       77                      
         Easton Crossing                                                                                                             RPD‐155  
                                                                                                                                      T‐5753/          
   13         Hiji MU          2290320125     MU        CMU         GC        8.68    4.1     0     0       0         36       36 
                                                                                                                                     CUP‐307  
   14         LLS, LLC         1650140065     MU        CMU        CCM        1.02   31.3     0     0       0         32       32    CPD‐219           
   15         Hiji/TFR         2290150395     MU        CMU         GC        0.50   24.0     0     0       0         12       12    CUP‐337           
                                                                                                                                                       
                               2290070210             Current:   Current:                                                               GPA 
         Village Gateway       2290320105             M1/CPD       I/GC                                                             Anticipated 
   16                                         MF                             32.37   22.3     24    0       0        533      557 
         (Fairfield Realty)    2290320085            New: RPD‐    New:                                                              September   
                               2290320095               30U     Residential                                                             2013 
                                                                                                                                                       
Total                                                                        86.55            24    0       0        699      723                      
        
        
                                                                                                                         JANUARY 2014    7‐B11

                                                                                                           
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
D.         OPPORTUNITY AREAS 
 
Opportunity  areas  that  have  been  previously  identified  by  the  City  as  likely  opportunities  for 
redevelopment are summarized in Table 7‐B‐4 and Figures 7‐B‐4 to 7‐B‐5. 
 
                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐B12

                                                                                                                                          
                                    7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                                      TABLE 7‐B‐4 Opportunity Areas  
                                                                                           Remaining Capacity                           From 
                                                                                                                                       2008‐
                                    Housing                                                                                Existing 
  Map ID     Project       APN               Zoning      GP      Acreage  Density  Very                                                 2014 
                                     Type                                                Low     Mod     Upper    Total      Use 
                                                                                   Low                                                Housing 
                                                                                                                                      Element 
                        1620104010 
           Cedar Oak 
     1                  1620135050     MF      COT       GC       0.59     37.0      0    22       0        0      22       Vacant           
               MU 
                        1620104060 
           Village at                         RPD‐                                                                       Vacant ‐ No 
     2                  2290150375    MF                High       1.94    25.0      0    49       0        0       49                      
            the Park                          25UU                                                                       Entitlement 
                                                                                                                              No 
     3      McGauly     1720040025     SF   RE‐30 AV    Rural     16.20     1.5      0     0       0        18      18                      
                                                                                                                         Entitlement 
                        1520201115 
     5     La Marina                   SF    RE‐1AC     Rural      3.28     1.0     0      0       0        2        2      Vacant          
                        1520201145 
              Barry 
                                                        Low 
     6    St./Mathias   1620014120    MF       RPD                 0.18    18.0     0      0       2        0       2       Vacant          
                                                       Medium 
          Apartments 
                        1520242015 
                        1520242075 
                        1520242195 
                        1520243045 
                        1520243055 
                        1520251345 
            Spanish 
    7                   1520251405     SF    RE‐1AC     Rural     17.71     1.0     0      0       0        13      13      Vacant          
              Hills 
                        1520281175 
                        1520282045 
                        1520282085 
                        1520282095 
                        1520283125 
                        1620135060 
              Villa     1650070555                                                                                        124 unit 
    8                                  MF                          8.00    30.0      0   116       0        0      116                      
             Palazzo    1650070565                                                                                       apartment 
                                                                                                                JANUARY 2014    7‐B13

                                                                                                                                        
                                    7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                                    TABLE 7‐B‐4 Opportunity Areas  
                                                                                           Remaining Capacity                         From 
                                                                                                                                     2008‐
                                    Housing                                                                              Existing 
  Map ID    Project         APN             Zoning      GP       Acreage  Density  Very                                               2014 
                                     Type                                                Low     Mod     Upper    Total    Use 
                                                                                   Low                                              Housing 
                                                                                                                                    Element 
            Village                                                                                                                       
    26                  2290203105    SF    RPD‐5U    Public      3.12      5.0     0     0        0        12     12    Vacant 
          Square, LLC 
           Western                                     Low                                                                                
                                        
    27      Pacific      229015040          RPD‐5U   Density      16.65     5.0     0     0        0        66     66    Vacant 
                                      SF 
           Housing                                  Residential 
          Keshmeshi     1720202125                                                                                                        
     4                                SF      ‐‐         ‐‐       54.00     2.5     0     0        0        56      56   Vacant 
              an        1720202065 
            Second                                                                                                                        
                            n/a                                                     0     0        8        0       8          
             Units 
  Total                                                          121.67             0    187      10       167     364                    
                                                                                                                JANUARY 2014    7‐B14

                                                                           
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                             FIGURE 7‐B‐1 
                                                    JANUARY 2014    7‐B15

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                             FIGURE 7‐B‐2 
                                                               
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐B16

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                             FIGURE 7‐B‐3 
                                                              
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐B17

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                             FIGURE 7‐B‐4 
                                                              
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐B18

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                             FIGURE 7‐B‐5 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐B19


                                                                                                           
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                  APPENDIX C PUBLIC PARTICIPATION SUMMARY 
                                                       
This summary of Housing Element public‐participation efforts describes opportunities for public 
involvement  along  with  an  explanation  of  how  public  comments  were  incorporated  into  the 
Housing Element. In addition, prior to the adoption hearings all interested parties were given 
the opportunity to review the recommended revisions.  
 
Public  participation  is  an  important  component  of  the  planning  process  in  Camarillo,  and  this 
update to the Housing Element has provided Camarillo residents and other interested parties 
numerous  opportunities  for  review  and  comment.  These  opportunities  included  public 
meetings before the Planning Commission and City Council. 
 
The  Housing  Element  update  began  with  a  joint  City  Council  and  Planning  Commission  study 
session  on  August  28,  2013.  The  public  meeting  provided  the  Planning  Commission  with  an 
overview  of  what  would  be  addressed  in  the  2013‐2021  Housing  Element  and  gave  the 
Commission the opportunity to review the document prior to its submittal to HCD for a 60‐day 
review.  A representative from the non‐profit organization Many Mansions was in attendance 
at the study session; however, no public comments were received during this meeting. 
 
In  addition,  on  August  29,  2013,  City  staff  met  with  the  Camarillo  Work  Force  Housing  Task 
Force,  a  diverse  group  of  affordable  housing  developers,  lenders,  and  advocates,  including 
those advocating advancements in Farmworker Housing.  At that meeting, the City presented 
the draft Housing Element and received comments.  City staff received comments regarding the 
need  to  correct  and  enhance  one  of  the  site  inventory  maps  and  ensure  that  index  78‐1  is 
correct.    No  other  comments  were  received  at  this  meeting  regarding  affordability  issues  or 
Farmworker  Housing  issues,  although  a  representative  from  House  Farm  Workers!  of  Santa 
Paula  was  present  (the  representative  is  also  the  Secretary  for  the  Camarillo  Work  Force 
Housing Task Force. 
 
City staff has met with the Camarillo Work Force Housing Task Force on an ongoing basis since 
the  adoption  of  the  2008‐2014  Housing  Element  to  discuss  not  only  farmworker  housing  but 
also workforce housing in general. 
 
The  draft  Housing  Element  was  made  available  for  public  review  on  August  9,  2013.  Copies 
were available on the City’s website as well as at City Hall, the Camarillo Library, and the Area 
Housing Authority.  
                                                                                   JANUARY 2014    7‐C1

                                                                                                                     
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
Outreach List 
 
The following agencies were contacted to provide input during the 2013‐2021 Housing Element 
update process. 
 
                               Agency                         Contact                              Address
                                              Jim McGee, CEO, Central Coast         836 Calle Plano 
  American Red Cross Ventura County 
                                              Region                                Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                                    5103 Walker St. 
  Assoc. for Retarded Citizens                Jim White 
                                                                                    Ventura, CA 93003 
  Barbareno/Ventureno Band of Mission                                               365 North Poli St 
                                              Julie Lynn Tumamait‐Stennsile, Chair 
  Indians                                                                           Ojai, CA 93023 
                                                                                    445 Rosewood Ave, Suite Q 
  Big Brothers Big Sisters of Ventura County  Lynne West, CEO 
                                                                                    Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                    1500 Temple Ave 
  Boys & Girls Club of Camarillo              Bill Locker, CEO & President 
                                                                                    Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                    P.O. Box 1561 
  California Rural Legal Assistance           Cruz Reynoso 
                                                                                    Oxnard, CA 93032‐1561 
                                                                                    2400 E Ventura Blvd 
  Camarillo Chamber of Commerce               Jennifer Wells, President/CEO 
                                                                                    Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                    600 Temple Ave 
  Camarillo Council PTA                       Kamala Nahas, President 
                                                                                    Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                                    3111 Village at the Park Dr 
  Camarillo Family YMCA                       Megan Voshell, Executive Director 
                                                                                    Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                                    400 Rosewood Ave, Suite 102 
  Camarillo Hospice Foundation                Sandy Nirenberg, Executive Director 
                                                                                    Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                    P.O. Box 157 
  Camarillo/Somis Pleasant Valley Lions Cluv  Greg Steinmetz, President 
                                                                                    Camarillo, CA 93011 
                                                                                    1459 E. Thousand Oaks Blvd. #D 
  Camarillo Workforce Housing Task Force      Mark Trinidad, Chair 
                                                                                    Thousand Oaks, CA 91362 
  Casa Pacifica Centers for Children &                                              1722 South Lewis Rd 
                                              Steven Elson, Ph.D., CEO 
  Families                                                                          Camarillo, CA 93012 
  Catholic Charities of Los Angeles, Inc.,    Patrice Esseff, Regional Program      2532 Ventura Blvd 
  Ventura County OASIS                        Director                              Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                    422B Arneill Rd 
  Centers for Family Health 
                                                                                    Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                    5251 Verdugo Way, Suite G 
  Channel Islands Social Services             Sharon M. Francis, CEO 
                                                                                    Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                                    3100 Wright Rd 
  Citizens Advisory Committee ‐ VYCF          Dennis Laack, President 
                                                                                    Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                    621 Richmond Ave 
  Community Action of Ventura County          Socorro Lopez‐Hanson 
                                                                                    Oxnard, CA 93030 
  Consumer Credit Counseling                                                        80 N. Wood Rd., Ste 312 
                                              Joy Thormodsgard, CEO 
  Srvcs.                                                                            Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                              Tina Mcdonald, RAIN Program           855 Partridge Dr 
  County of Ventura ‐ Human Services Agency 
                                              Manager                               Ventura, CA 93003 
                                                                                    4156 Southbank Rd 
  FOOD Share                                  Kristy Pollard 
                                                                                    Oxnard, CA 93036 
                                                                                    4101 Las Posas Rd 
  Friends of the Camarillo Library            Dorothy Penney, President 
                                                                                    Camarillo, CA 93010 
  Habitat for Humanity                        Stacy Swanson                         167 Lambert St, Ste 109 
                                                                                               JANUARY 2014    7‐C2

                                                                                                                        
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                      Agency                                     Contact                             Address
                                                                                     Oxnard, CA 93036 
                                                                                     P.O. Box 402 
  House Farm Workers! Of Santa Paula             Sonja Flores, Coordinator 
                                                                                     Santa Paula, CA 93061 
                                                                                     121 S. Rice Ave 
  Housing Rights Center (HRC) 
                                                                                     Oxnard, CA 93030 
                                                                                     4001 Nussuib Iajs Bkvd, Suite I 
  Interface Children & Family  Services          Tanya Kellam 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                                     P.O. Box 533 
  Kiwanis Club of Camarillo 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93011 
                                                                                     330 Wood Rd 
  Legal Debt Foundation                          Marc Mathys, Founder 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                 Sylvia Taylor‐Stein, Executive      2021 Sperry Ave, Ste 35 
  Long Term Care Services of Ventura City Inc 
                                                 Director                            Ventura, CA93003 
  Lutheran Social Services of Southern                                               80 East Hillcrest Dr, #101 
                                                 Leslie Orth 
  California                                                                         Thousand Oaks, 91360 
                                                                                     P.O. Box 3063 
  Meadowlark Service League                      Anita Lawrence, President 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93011 
                                                                                     711 Daily Drive, Suite 120 
  Mission Without Borders 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                     380 Mobil Ave. 
  Pacific Camps Family Resource, Inc.            Bob Harley, Executive Director 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                     360 Mobil Ave, Suite 213C 
  Pleasant Valley Education Foundation           Sharon Taylor, Executive Director 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                     1099 Bedford Dr 
  Pleasant Valley Neighborhood for Learning      Rafaela Fausto, Executive Director 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                     P.O. Box 171 
  Rotary Club of Camarillo                       Mitchell Crespi, President 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                     P.O. Box 517 
  Santa Ynez Band of Mission Indians             Vincent Armenta, Chairperson 
                                                                                     Santa Ynez, CA 93460 
                                                                                     5800 Santa Rosa Rd, #112 
  Saving Lives Camarillo                         Rabbi Aryeh Lang, Program Director 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                                     P.O. Box 3081 
  Soroptimist International of Camarillo         Barbara Baham, President 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93011 
                                                                                     6103 Walker St 
  The Arc of Ventura County 
                                                                                     Ventura, CA 93003 
                                                                                     P.O. Box 1884 
  The Camarillo Noontime Optimist Club 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93011 
                                                                                     2890 Thousand Oaks Blvd 
  The Children Come First, Inc.                  Bill Formanek 
                                                                                     Thousand Oaks, 91362 
  The Society of Saint Vincent de Paul, Council                                      210 North Ave 21 
                                                 Gigi Tsontos 
  of Los Angeles, Inc.                                                               Los Angelese, CA 90031 
                                                                                     2401 East Gonzales Rd, Suite 100 
  Tri‐Counties Regional Center 
                                                                                     Oxnard, CA 93036 
                                                                                     505 Poli St, Suite 401 
  Turning Point Foundation                       Clyde Reynolds 
                                                                                     Ventura, CA 93002 
                                                                                     4001 Mission Oaks Blvd, Suite E 
  United Way of Ventura County                   David M. Smith, President & CEO 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                                     1601 Carmen, Ste 215 
  VCEDA                                          Bill Buratto 
                                                                                     Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                     646 County Square Dr, Suite 100 
  Ventura County Area Agency on Aging            Victoria Jump, Director 
                                                                                     Ventura, CA 93003 
                                                                                                JANUARY 2014    7‐C3

                                                                                                                       
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                        Agency                                Contact                             Address
                                                                                   5450 Ralston St, #112 
  Ventura County Childcare Food Program 
                                                                                   Ventura, CA 93003 
                                                                                   4001 Mission Oaks Blvd 
  Ventura County Community Foundation         Hugh J. Ralston, President & CEO 
                                                                                   Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                                   1317 Del Norte Road, Suite 100 
  Ventura Co Homeless & Housing Coalition     Cathy Brudnicki 
                                                                                   Camarillo, CA 93010 
  Cabrillo Economic Development                                                    702 County Square Drive 
                                              Nancy Conk, CEO 
  Corporation                                                                      Ventura, CA 93003 
  Ventura County Community Development                                             702 County Square Drive 
                                              Nancy Conk, CEO 
  Corporation                                                                      Ventura, CA 93003 
                                                                                   1372 El Lazo Court 
  Veteran’s Standown                          Claire Hope 
                                                                                   Camarillo, CA 93012 
  Women of Substance and Men of Honor,        Rosalinda P. Vint, President &       P.O. Box 771 
  Inc                                         Founder                              Newbury Park, CA 91319 
                                                                                   3195 Redhill Ave, Loft F 
  AMLI Residential                            Jason Armison 
                                                                                   Costa Mesa, CA 92626 
                                                                                   2850 Redhill Ave, Suite 210 
  City Ventures                               Bill McReynolds 
                                                                                   Santa Ana, CA 92705 
                                                                                   21300 Victory Blvd, Suite 700 
  DR Horton                                   Julie Williams 
                                                                                   Woodland Hills, CA 91387 
                                                                                   211 Village Commons Blvd, Suite 
  Hiji Investment Co., LLC                    Dennis Hardgrove                     15 
                                                                                   Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                                   16633 Ventura Blvd, Ste 1330  
  Laro Properties                             Aleks Baharlo 
                                                                                   Encino , CA 91436 
                                              Rick Schroeder 
                                                                                   1459 E. Thousand Oaks Blvd, Ste D 
  Many Mansions, Inc.                         Mark Trinidad, Senior Project 
                                                                                   Thousand Oaks, CA 91362 
                                              Manager 
                                                                                   270 Conejo Ridge Ave, Suite 200 
  Pegh Inv, LLC, Trilliad Dev. Inc.           Valeria Draeger 
                                                                                   Thousand Oaks, CA 91381 
  Saint Demetrios Greek Orthodox Church of                                         3398 Willow Lane, Suite 200 
                                              Gary Heathcote 
  Camarillo                                                                        Westlake Village, CA 91361 
                                                                                   5655 Lindere Canyon Rd, #301 
  Selleck Properties                          David Ghirardelli 
                                                                                   Westlake Village, CA 91362 
                                                                                   757 Nile River Drive 
  Standard Pacific                            Ted McKibbin 
                                                                                   Oxnard, CA 93036 
  Area Housing Authority of the County of                                          1400 W Hillcrest Dr 
  Ventura                                                                          Newbury Park, CA 91320 
  Association of Water Agencies Ventura                                            5156 McGrath St, Suite 104 
                                              Kelle L. Pistone, Managing Director 
  County                                                                           Ventura CA 93303 
                                                                                   4101 Las Posas Rd 
  Camarillo Public Libraray 
                                                                                   Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                              Daniel LaBrado, District General     1605 E Burnley St 
  Pleasant Valley Recreation & Park District 
                                              Manager                              Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                   600 Temple Ave 
  Pleasant Valley School District             RaeAnne Michael, Superintendent 
                                                                                   Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                   P.O. Box 3312 
  Ventura County Sherrif's Foundation         Nancy Frawley, Executive Director 
                                                                                   Thousand Oaks, CA 91359 
                                                                                   2323 Portola Rd, #150 
  AMS Realty                                  William Whit 
                                                                                   Ventura, CA 93003 
                                                                                   P.O. Box 2310 
  Anchor Community Management                 Ann Duval 
                                                                                   Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                              JANUARY 2014    7‐C4

                                                                                                             
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                      Agency                                 Contact                        Address
                                                                            P.O. Box 7466 
  Association Services of Ventura            Dale Sweatt 
                                                                            Oxnard, CA, 93031 
                                                                            P.O. Box 2817 
  Community Property Management              Chelsi 
                                                                            Camarillo, CA 93011 
                                                                            P.O. Box 308 
  Condoministration                          John 
                                                                            Port Hueneme, CA 93044 
                                                                            P.O. Box 1209 
  Ekam, Inc                                  Carolyn Abul‐Haj 
                                                                            Ventura, CA 93002 
                                                                            22120 Claredon S, Ste 200 
  Essex Property Trust                       Jennifer Arriola 
                                                                            Woodland Hills, CA 91637 
                                                                            P.O. Box 1007 
  Gold Coast Management                      Michael Marsh 
                                                                            Thousand Oaks, CA 91358 
                                                                            P.O. Box 185 
  Las Posas Gardens HOA                      Dave Vizents 
                                                                            Camarillo, CA 93011 
                                                                            1104 Calle El Halcon 
  Lincoln Military Housing                   Susan Sharp, District Manager 
                                                                            Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                            P.O. Box 1777 
  Management Innovations, Inc                Jennifer Berman 
                                                                            Santa Ynez, CA 93460 
                                                                            340 Rosewood Ave, Suite M 
  Management Preferred                       Pat 
                                                                            Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                            P.O. Box 700 
  Pinnacle Association Management Co         Jean Waal 
                                                                            Port Hueneme, CA 93044 
                                                                            P.O. Box 5285 
  Spectrum Property Services                 Adrian Rivas 
                                                                            Ventura, CA 93005 
                                                                            1 Boardwalk, Suite 102 
  The Emmons Co                              Tish Matthews 
                                                                            Thousand Oaks, CA 91316 
                                                                            100 E Thousand Oaks Blvd 
  Transpacific Companies                     Randy Howard 
                                                                            Thousand Oaks, CA 92360 
                                                                            333 N Lantana, Ste 257 
  Paramount Management Group                 Pat Cox 
                                                                            Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                            200 Liesure Village Dr 
  Liesure Village                            Judy 
                                                                            Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                            P.O. Box 2157 
  Preferred Asspciation Management           Nicole 
                                                                            Camarillo, CA 93011 
                                                                            P.O. Box 800490 
  Euclid Management Company                  Mary Carpenter 
                                                                            Santa Clarita, CA 91360 
                                                                            15315 Magnolia Blvd, #212 
  Ross Morgan & Company                      Tammi Gablin 
                                                                            Sherman Oaks, CA 91403 
                                                                            888 West Ventura Blvd, Ste C 
  Concord Consulting & Association Services  Ramona 
                                                                            Camarillo, CA 93011 
                                                                            33204 Village 33 
  Al Fox Realty 
                                                                            Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                             Ryan Rosenthal, Home Loan      1708 S Victoria Ave 
  Bank of America Home Loans 
                                             Manager                        Ventura, CA 93003 
                                                                            5257 Mission Oaks Blvd 
  Barlow Williams Realty 
                                                                            Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                            771 Daily Drive, Suite 120 
  Broadview Mortgage 
                                                                            Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                            525 S. Virgil Ave 
  California Association of Realtors         Joel Singer, CEO 
                                                                            Los Angeles, CA 90020 
                                                                            77 Rolling Oaks Dr 
  Century 21 Rolling Oaks 
                                                                            Thousand Oaks, CA 91361 
                                                                                       JANUARY 2014    7‐C5

                                                                                                                 
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                      Agency                             Contact                              Address
                                                                               165‐B Arneill Rd 
  Chase Homeownership Center 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               400 Mobil Ave 
  Chicago Title Co 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               770 Paseo Camarillo, Suite 110 
  Cobalt Realty Group 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               1320 Flynn Rd, Suite 301 
  County Property Management 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                               711 E Daily Dr, Suite 110 
  Guild Mortgage Co                      Linda Hall, Branch Manager 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               215 Ventura Blvd 
  Heritage Real Estate Group             Doug Kubiske, Co‐Owner 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               1690 Ventura Blvd 
  Keller Williams Realty                 Nancy Amorteguy 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               360 Mobil Ave, Ste 101 
  Loan Production Office 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               2357‐A Pickwick Dr 
  M.F. Daily Corporation 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               761 Daily Dr, Suite 200 
  Pacific Oaks Credit Union 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               1000 Paseo Camarillo, Suite 108 
  Premier Options Real Estate 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               770 Paseo Camarillo, Suite 100 
  Prospect Mortgage 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               350 N Lantana G‐1 
  Prudential California Realty 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               601 E Daily Dr, Suite 102 
  RE/MAX Gold Coast Realtors 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               1203 Flynn Rd, Ste 210 
  RE/MAX Integrity 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                               1203 Flynn Rd, Ste 260 
  The Escrow Place, Inc                  Ruth Price, President 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                               770 Paseo Camarillo, Suite 111 
  Tri‐Emerald Financial Group 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               2301 Daily Drive, Suite 1 
  Troop Real Esate, Inc 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                         Mark Monro, Mortgage Loan             601 Daly Drive, Suite 206 
  U.S. Bank Home Mortgage 
                                         Originator                            Camarillo, CA 93010 
  Ventura County Coastal Association of                                        2350 Wankel Way 
                                         Randy McCaslin, CEO 
  Realtors                                                                     Oxnard, CA 93030 
                                                                               1601 Carmen Dr, Suite 100 
  Ventura Investment Co                  Barton Stern, President 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               601 Daly Drive, Suite 130 
  Wells Fargo Home Mortgage 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               291 Anacapa Dr 
  Camarillo United Methodist Church 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               5800 Santa Rosa Rd, #112 
  Chabad Jewish Center of Camarillo      Rabbi Aryeh Lang, Executive Director 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93012 
                                                                               400 Skyway Drive 
  St. Demetrios Greek Orthodox Church    Rev. Fr. Gary Kyriacou 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                               515 Temple Ave 
  Temple Ner Ami                         Rabbi Lisa Bock 
                                                                               Camarillo, CA 93010 
                                                                                         JANUARY 2014    7‐C6

                                                                                                                 
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
Telephone Interviews 
 
In  addition  to  the  public  meeting  discussed  above,  the  City  contacted  local  social  service 
agencies, developers, and community groups to solicit input on housing needs and issues in the 
community.  Three agencies responded and provided input. 
 
Agency: The Society of Saint Vincent de Paul, Council of Los Angeles, Inc – 
           West Ventura County Winter Warming Shelter 
Contact: Gigi Tsontos 
 
The Winter Warming Shelter operates from December 1st through March 31st. The shelter does 
not  have  a  capacity  limit  and  typically  serves  approximately  160  persons  a  night.    Gigi  stated 
that  there  has  been  a  general  increase  in  the  number  of  persons  seeking  services  over  time, 
though  the  actual  number  of  persons  served  fluctuates  annually.    In  recent  years,  the 
organization  has  seen  an  increase  in  the  number  of  families  seeking  shelter.  Typically,  the 
shelter serves more males than females and most of the clients served come from the larger 
cities in Ventura.  Gigi stated that over time the organization has seen a decrease in the amount 
of  funding  it  receives  from  the  City  and  that  this  has  impacted  the  organization’s  ability  to 
provide  services.  However,  she  added  that  the  decrease  is  understandable  and  reflects  the 
community’s desire to see additional longer term housing options and ways to prevent people 
from  needing  shelters  year  after  year.  She  also  suggested  looking  at  other  communities  that 
implement smaller rotating shelters, which are closer to where people need services and have 
proven  successful  when  operated  by  volunteers.    She  also  added  that  more  opportunities  to 
create low income/affordable housing would be beneficial and are needed.  In interacting with 
the shelter’s clientele, the staff has also noticed that many clients struggle with a wide array of 
housing  issues  and  need  access  to  supportive  services  that  cater  to  their  specific  needs  (i.e. 
disabilities, persons with mental illness, unemployment, etc.). 
 
Agency: FOOD Share 
Contact: Kristy Pollard 
 
FOOD Share operates a Countywide food bank for Ventura County and aids food sites and food 
service programs with the supplies they need to operate.  Their Senior Share Program provides 
food  at  32  distribution  points  throughout  the  County,  two  of  which  are  in  Camarillo.    Kristy 
stated that over the last few years, the amount of CDBG funding the organization has received 
from the City to operate the Senior Share program for City residents has fluctuated.  She noted 
that  the  organization  is  aware  this  is  a  result  of  changes  in the  amount  of  funding  the  City  is 
allocated from HUD, and that they receive roughly $8,500 annually.  Overall, they feel that the 
City has always been supportive in helping them to provide their services over the years.  In the 
near future, the organization is looking to put together a food policy council in cooperation with 
other area non‐profit organizations. The organization is currently looking at gaps in the system 
                                                                                       JANUARY 2014    7‐C7

                                                                                                              
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
and  identifying  what  cities  and  neighborhoods  need  assistance.    Having  the  assistance  of  all 
food entities within the County, as well as cooperation from cities such as Camarillo, would be 
helpful in achieving this objective. 
 
Agency: Catholic Charities of Los Angeles, Inc., Ventura County OASIS 
Contact: Patrice Esseff, Regional Program Manager 
 
The  OASIS  program  is  a  senior  outreach  program  that  includes  case  management  and  health 
services for persons who need access to resources in order to maintain a comfortable lifestyle 
in their home.  Patrice revealed that, over the last few years, the number of clients served has 
remained stable.  The amount of CDBG funding allocated to the organization has decreased in 
recent  years  and  Patrice  acknowledged  that  this  was  an  issue  that  affected  many  non‐profit 
agencies in the region. The decrease in funding has negatively impacted the organization and 
their ability to offer services.  Funding is a critical issue for the agency, since the organization’s 
ability to pay for the most skilled employees is compromised by decreased funding. In regards 
to  the  clientele  the  organization  serves,  one  increasingly  common  issue  is  seniors  who  have 
underestimated the amount of savings they will need. The organization has noticed that seniors 
are  falling  into  poverty  at  an  incredible  rate  as  costs  continue  to  rise,  making  it  even  more 
difficult  for seniors  to  live  on  their own.    With  funding  cuts  across  the board,  the agency  has 
had to cut back almost every service type, which affects the success of the agency’s efforts and 
goals of helping seniors to age in place. 
                                                                                        JANUARY 2014    7‐C8

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                                                     
                                             JANUARY 2014    7‐C9

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C10

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C11

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C12

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C13

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C14

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C15

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C16

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C17

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C18

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C19

                                                                                                
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
In addition the City received the following email correspondence from the Camarillo Workforce 
Housing Task Force: 
                                                                         JANUARY 2014    7‐C20

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C21

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C22

                                                                   
               7.0  City of Camarillo Housing Element
 
                                                                     
                                            JANUARY 2014    7‐C23

City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                          4.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                             EXISTING LAND USE/ZONING
         Introduction                                        ANALYSIS
         The Land Use Element of the General                 The collection of Land Use/Zoning data
         Plan identifies the classifications of land         was updated in 2002, using a GIS
         within the city. The definition, principles         program which updated prior land use
         and proposals for each is described in              surveys. The information was
         the first part of the Element. The                  subsequently measured, and a complete
         location and generalized boundaries are             tabulation of the quantities of land in
         shown on the General Plan Land Use                  each of the land use classifications was
         Map.                                                prepared by the city Planning staff. The
         The basis for the adopted land uses is a            land use data collected in prior updates
         result of an evolution of decisions and             was also recorded on maps as depicted
         General Plan updates within the context             by colors representing the classification
         of adopted goals, existing characteristics          of use.
         and related factors.                                The data collected by this process
         Throughout the preliminary review and               provides not only a quantitative analysis
         analysis, the main theme that constantly            of the disposition of land, but through
         emerged was that the special quality of             the mapping of the findings, it is
         life that exists throughout much of the             possible to observe and analyze groups
         area should be preserved and extended               of like uses, clusters of development,
         to encompass all of Camarillo and its               their relative intensity and also areas
         environs. This concern provided one of              where conflicting land use patterns have
         the fundamental criteria from which this            developed.
         Plan was developed.                                 The discussion which follows is a
         This theme was recently enhanced with               detailed analysis of Land Use by zoning
         the adoption of the revised Community               categories. Immediately following this
         Goals. The goals were adopted in 1992,              analysis are tables which break down
         and reflect a desire to further promote             land use and zoning by acreage.
         C a m a r i l l o a s a r u r a l s u bu r b a n    ANALYSIS OF LAND USE BY ZONE
         community that has a quality, small                 AE Zone
         town, family atmosphere. The citizens in
         Camarillo take pride in the city’s climate          The Agricultural Exclusive Zone is
         and design. The city looks toward the               intended for promotion and preservation
         future through the Land Use Element to              of agricultural activities on lands capable
         further promote the character of                    of producing and supporting agricultural
         Camarillo with sound principles,                    uses and excluding those uses which
         objectives and standards for the land               have a detrimental effect on areas
         uses within the city and open spaces                designated for agricultural purposes.
         surrounding the city.
        October 8, 2003                                                                              4.1

City of Camarillo General Plan
    RE Zone                                        CN Zone
    The Rural Exclusive Zone is a large lot        The Commercial Neighborhood Zone is to
    residential zone with lots varying in size     provide facilities supplying both daily
    from 10,000 square feet to 1 acre or           convenience goods and services as well as
    larger in size with a limited area used for    to provide an environment of a stable,
    mobile home parks. The majority of the         desirable character which will be in
    property in this classification is used for    harmony with existing and potential
    agricultural activities with the remainder in  development             of    surrounding
    public and semi‑public uses or vacant.         neighborhoods and which may be located
                                                   in or adjacent to residential areas. In
    R-1 Zone
                                                   order       to     produce      commercial
    The R‑1 Zone is the city’s basic single-       neighborhood centers which meet modern
    family residential zone, with the rest of the  environment and design standards, each
    land in public and semi‑public uses or         center shall be approved only under a
    vacant.                                        planned development permit.
    RPD Zone                                       SC Zone
    The Residential Planned Development            The     Service      Commercial     Zone      is
    Zone is intended to encourage imaginative      established       to    provide    areas      of
    residential design. The majority of the RPD    development for service type uses that are
    Zone is 5 or less units per acre with the      heavier than general retail and somewhat
    density ranging from 1 unit to a maximum       lighter than the industrial categories such
    of 30 units which is high density.             as service, assembly of materials or a
    MHPD Zone                                      craft. The placement, design, and intensity
                                                   of use in the zone are required to be
    The Mobile Home Park Development Zone          planned to protect and preserve the
    is oriented toward mobile home parks.          character of the adjoining properties while
    There is MHPD‑zoned land in the city,          increasing      efficiency   and    promoting
    although mobile home development is            harmonious relationships. Therefore, all
    found in various locations and zones.          applications are required to be submitted
    Mobile home park subdivisions are also         to and approved by the Planning
    authorized under a conditional use permit      Commission under a planned development
    which allows unit owners to own their pad      permit.
    space.
                                                   PO Zone
    OS Zone
                                                   The Professional Office Zone is located
    The Open Space Zone was established in         throughout the city and is intended as the
    1978, to preserve valuable natural             primary office zone. The PO Zone often
    environmental and recreation resources.        serves as a transitional use between
    RC Zone                                        commercial uses and residential zones.
                                                   Development is approved under a planned
    The Recreation Commercial Zone is
                                                   development permit.
    intended to provide for outdoor recreation
    and    agricultural      uses   suitable   for CPD Zone
    development without significant impact to      The Commercial Planned Development
    the environment of the area. The RC Zone       Zone     is    intended     for   commercial
    also recognizes incidental and accessory       development associated with planned
    uses such as residences, commercial and        communities or large subdivision tracts.
    public service facilities subject to review,   At present, the major portion of
    and in some cases, conditions to protect       CPD‑zoned land is committed or partially
    natural scenic or recreational value.          committed.
    4.2                                                                              October 8, 2003

 COT Zone                                    M-1 Zone
 The COT zone is a zone which was added      The M-1 Zone, the city’s industrial
 in 1998 for use in the “Camarillo Old       classification, is substantially taken up by
 Town” area. The zone was established to     the Camarillo Airport and the area located
 protect and preserve the unique character   northerly of Mission Oaks Boulevard, east
 of the commercial area along Ventura        and west of Flynn Road with interim usage
 Boulevard and includes standards for new    of the property for agriculture. The rest of
 developments       such    as  mixed‑use    the developed M-1 land use is used for
 buildings.                                  commercial,       office  and     semi-public
                                             purposes.
 LM Zone
 The Limited Manufacturing Zone is the       M-2 Zone
 most restrictive industrial zone with       The M-2 Zone area is the smallest of the
 approval required for any use under a       manufacturing zones and permits the
 planned development permit and intended     heaviest uses. The land in this category
 for industrial parks.                       not developed with industrial uses is either
                                             in agriculture or vacant.
                               REVISED 07/29/2013
                                       TABLE 1
                                 Existing Land Use
                           CATEGORY                                   ACRES
                     Agriculture                                  1,303.75
                     Residential                                  4,953.61
                     Commercial                                      461.96
                     Industrial                                      716.55
                     Public Uses                                     574.07
                     Quasi-Public                                    367.06
                     Transportation/Utility/Airport                 828.58
                     Open Space/Hillside                             868.56
                     Vacant/Miscellaneous                            636.44
                                           Subtotal            10,710.58
                     Right of Way                                 1,883.01
                                TOTAL                           12,593.59
October 8, 2003                                                                        4.3

City of Camarillo General Plan
                                         TABLE 2
                                      Zoning Acres
                Revised 1/15/2014
                  ZONE                     TOTAL                  % TOTAL
                    CCM                    48.542                  0.385%
                     AE                   987.028                  7.838%
                     RE                  2,612.235                  20.743
                    R-1                  1,869.880                  14.848
                    R{D                  3,122.801                  24.797
                  MHPD                     49.675                   0.394
                     RC                     0.000                   0.000
                     PO                   110.394                   0.877
                     CN                     0.000                   0.000
                    CPD                   511.542                   4.061
                     SC                    24.457                   0.194
                    COT                    27.378                   0.217
                     LM                   488.472                   3.879
                    M-1                  1,208.747                  9.598
                    M-2                    80.800                  0.642%
                     OS                  1,063.231                 8.443%
                   CMU                     23.869                  0.190%
           US 101 Freeway                 364.540                  2.895%
                  TOTAL                  12,593.59                100.00%
                    (note: acreage includes adjacent street to centerline)
    4.4                                                                    October 8, 2003
  AGRICULTURAL USES                             recommends that the following criteria be
  Agriculture has, and continues to play,       used to determine if the minimum
  an important role in the life of the City of  acreages are sufficient to support viable
  Camarillo. Historically, agriculture has      agricultural operations within areas which
  represented the economic mainstay of          fall under an agricultural classification
  the community, as well as Ventura             within the city.
  County. To some extent, this situation        Criteria for 10-Acre Minimum
  still exists.                                 Agricultural Operation
  The General Plan proposes that the            A. Structural Features
  agricultural activities be encouraged to          1. Existing parcel size is 10 acres or
  continue both as a source of economic                 more.
  substance to the community and the                2. Parcel     is     determined   to   be
  County and as a physical definition to                agri cul tu rall y    viabl e  as     a
  the urban area of the city. The General               self‑sufficient farm unit.
  Plan also recognizes the importance of
                                                    3. Parcel      is     not   adjacent    to
  agricultural land within the city. This
                                                        Agricultural Preserve.
  land should be conserved but could be
  converted to other uses if there is a             4. Parcel is not adjacent to AE zoning.
  community need or benefit. With the               5. Contiguous parcels under one
  adoption of the SOAR Ordinance, the                   ownership total 10 acres or more.
  Camarillo Urban Restriction Boundary          B. Physical Features
  (CURB) was established which identifies           1. Plantable soil is present on at least
  limits for urban development (refer to                90% of the parcel.
  Section III of the Camarillo General              2. None of the following hazards are
  Plan).                                                present on the parcel.
  For the purpose of the plan, an                       a. Poor soil classification of Class
  Agricultural Use Category has been                        IV or below.
  included, both on the map and in this
                                                        b. Erosion hazard.
  text and addressed in the Open Space
                                                        c. Poor land stability.
  Conservation Element.
                                                        d. Slope.
  This type of classification will permit, in
  addition to agricultural uses, those                  e. P o t e n t i a l  groundwater
  residential     and   industrial   activities             degradation.
  associated      with   farming,    including          f. Potential soil degradation.
  housing at a density not to exceed 1                  g. Surface drainage.
  unit/10 acres, the processing, packing
                                                Criteria for 20-Acre Minimum
  and storing of produce raised on the site
                                                Agricultural Operation
  and such other uses that are pertinent to
  agriculture.                                  A. Structural Features
                                                    1. Existing parcel size is 20 acres or
  PRINCIPLES
                                                        more.
  The following criteria is based on                2. Parcel     is     determined   to   be
  conclusions reached in the Las Posas                  agri cul tu rall y    viabl e  as     a
  Study, which was conducted by Ventura                 self‑sufficient farm unit.
  County Planning Department, Las Posas
                                                    3. Parcel is adjacent to Agricultural
  Citizens      Committee     and      various
                                                        Preserve.
  agricultural consultants. The County of
  Ventura now uses a 40‑acre minimum                4. Parcel is adjacent to other parcels
  parcel size for agricultural parcels. The             zoned AE.
  City      of   Camarillo   General      Plan      5. Contiguous parcels under one
October 8, 2003                                                                           4.5

City of Camarillo General Plan
            ownership totaling 20 acres or       recommends          substantial   setbacks,
            more.                                vegetative buffers, and fencing to reduce
    B. Physical Features                         potential conflicts between agricultural
         1. Erosion and/or fire hazards are      practices land and uses, such as
            identified where plantable soil is   residential areas. These conflicts may
            present on more than 75% of          include application, of pesticides and
            parcel.                              fertilizers, dust odors, noise, trespassing,
                                                 vandalism, pilferage, and other inherent
         2. Landslide area or slope over 25% is
                                                 aspects related to farming near urban
            identified where plantable soil is
                                                 uses.     Recent developments within the
            present on more than 75% of
                                                 City of Camarillo have incorporated uses of
            parcel.
                                                 setback and buffer areas, such as the
    For the 10 and 20 acre criteria, either the  Village at the Park Specific Plan which
    first two or the last three structural       provides for an increased setback and
    features, but not all five, are intended to  buffer areas along the Urban Growth
    act as recommendations for each parcel or    Boundary Lines along the southerly portion
    set of parcels.                              of that Specific Plan. Other areas have
    Criteria for 40-Acre Minimum                 utilized     building   setbacks,   fencing,
    Agricultural Operation                       vegetated shelter belts, or other methods.
                                                 Oftentimes, a barranca setback area,
    A. Physical Features
                                                 which also functions as a drainage pattern
         1. Erosion hazard and landslide area    or habitat area, is utilized which can
            and/or slope over 25% are present    achieve a multi-purpose use to define an
            on more than 50% of parcel.          edge area between urban land uses and
         2. Fire hazard and landslide area       permanent agricultural areas.
            and/or slope over 25% are present
            on more than 50% of parcel.          RESIDENTIAL USES
         3. Landslide area and at least one      The residential section of the Land Use
            other hazard are present on more     Plan provides areas within which the
            than 50% of parcel.                  principal uses permitted are residential.
         4. Slope over 25% and at least one      The standards in support of the plan
            other hazard are present on more     designate basic densities, not to exceed 30
            than 50% of the parcel.              dwelling units per acre.
                                                 These densities are in terms of dwelling
    AGRICULTURAL BUFFERS                         units permitted per net acre of land.
    With the adoption of the urban limits lines  Where large developments are possible,
    established through the county S.O.A.R.      there may be some flexibility in the zoning
    measures and the Camarillo Urban Growth      to permit a variety of types of housing as
    Boundary Lines, urban edge treatments        long as the overall density is not violated.
    adjacent to agricultural areas are more      The upper density limit set for each
    important than ever to establish viable,     category does not mean that a project will
    long-lasting edge conditions to transition   necessarily receive the maximum number
    between urban land uses and agricultural     of     unit.   Topographical    restrictions,
    areas surrounding the city. These can        easements, flood plains, fault zones, or
    include measures such as setbacks, buffer    other factors described in other elements
    areas, shelter belts, fencing, land use      of the General Plan can affect the
    limitations,     and      further   measures development potential as can the type of
    implemented during the project review        residential product (e.g. detached versus
    process.      The     County     of  Ventura attached units design).
    Agricultural Policy Advisory Committee and
    Agricultural      Commissioner’s      Office
    4.6                                                                           October 8, 2003

 OBJECTIVES                                         Heritage Zone design program in the
 In order to implement the community                residential areas as set forth in the
 goals,      the  following     objective   for     Community Design Element.
 residential land use is established:              Encourage      the    establishment      of
    To continually improve the areas as             pathways within various residential
    places for living by ensuring that              projects with interconnects to city or
    those portions of the city which are            regional pathway systems.
    best suited for residential use will be        Encourage       adequate       recreation
    developed       and    preserved      as        facilities to serve the population
    healthful, safe, pleasant, attractive           expected to reside in cluster residential
    neighborhoods where all citizens are            projects which may include recreation
    served by a full range of appropriate           equipment for children, swimming
    community facilities.                           pools, tennis courts, etc.
 PRINCIPLES                                        Encourage pathways which provide
                                                    priority for pedestrians and separation
 In order to accomplish the intent of the           from vehicle traffic except where street
 plan,      the  following      policies   are      crossing is required, in which case
 established:                                       proper notice and design should be
    To identify residential neighborhood           provided.
     patterns as a means of assisting in           Consider residential opportunities for
     their planning and protection.                 properties being studied for reuse
    To provide each neighborhood with              potential.
     adequate      and    convenient     public
     facilities and amenities, particularly     STANDARDS
     park and recreation facilities.            The General Plan adopts the following
    To protect residential property values     classifications and standards for residential
     and privacy by ensuring compatible         development:
     development with surrounding land          The unit-per-net-acre figure represents
     uses and by preventing the intrusion of    the maximum average density for the
     incompatible land uses.                    areas designated; a residential density
    To discourage through traffic in order     within a range less than that which is
     to promote safe neighborhoods.             designated, may         be considered        as
                                                consistent and approved where deemed
    To encourage the maintenance and
                                                appropriate by the city. For example, a
     improvement of all residential areas
                                                density range from 10 units to 18 units
     throughout      the   city    through    a
                                                per acre and classified as a medium
     continuous program of street tree
                                                density residential development, may be
     planting and care, adequate streets
                                                permitted in a high density residential
     and sidewalks, street and sidewalk
                                                development        area    where      deemed
     lighting, storm drainage and other
                                                appropriate where the development plan is
     utilities.
                                                not able to achieve the higher range of
    To encourage the highest quality of        density given factors such as topography
     development in those cases where           or geology and not based on market
     structures are replaced.                   conditions. It is the intent to try to achieve
    Continue programs for preservation of      densities within the stated ranges to
     hou sing     units     in    th e   Barry  efficiently use lands shown for residential
     Street/Raemere Street areas through        development        consistent      with    the
     redevelopment         programs        and  objectives of the Housing Element.
     maintenance programs.                      The following overall maximum densities
    Encourage the continued use of the         have been established and utilized for the
October 8, 2003                                                                            4.7

City of Camarillo General Plan
    purpose of relating population density and    neighborhood pattern.
    land use intensity to the necessary public    Other techniques which are compatible
    facilities and utilities.                     with this density range are the use of
    Rural                                         single‑family attached and patio‑house
                                                  developments.       Single‑family    attached
    [Not to exceed two-and-one-half (2.5)
                                                  developments involve the attaching of two
    dwelling units (d.u.) per acre]:
                                                  single‑family residential units by a
    This density classification has been          common wall on a side property line, thus
    designed to preserve the open and             eliminating the need for a side yard on at
    basically rural quality of the hillside areas least one side of each dwelling. This
    surrounding present urban concentration       permits doubling the size of the opposite
    in Camarillo. Rural development areas will    side for each dwelling, which results in
    enable the city to minimize adverse impact    more usable open space. The patio‑house
    on      the    physical     and    ecological concept surrounds the lot completely with
    environments which fall within this           a wall of up to eight feet in height to
    designation.                                  maximize the use of the lot as an outdoor
    Low Density                                   living space with privacy.
    (Not to exceed four (4) d.u. per acre or      Low-Medium Density
    five (5) in a cluster):                       (Not to exceed ten (10) d.u. per acre):
    This density classification allows for the    This classification is oriented towards
    typical single‑family subdivision patterns    single‑family      housing    in    clusters,
    being      developed      throughout    urban townhouses, and duplex‑type units. There
    California. This pattern of residential       are numerous opportunities for flexibility
    subdivision is also typical in Camarillo.     and innovation in this classification. Many
    The cluster concept could be utilized in      of    these    housing    types    will    lend
    this density range to introduce innovative    themselves to the Camarillo scene and
    techniques into future developments, thus     should be encouraged where appropriate
    providing greater variety in dwelling unit    in the city.
    choice within the city.                       The intensity of development at this
    It would provide for the grouping of          density requires detailed consideration of
    structures in a far more efficient            open spaces, internal and external traffic
    relationship to streets and utilities while   circulation and relationship of larger
    combining yards and building setbacks         buildings to each other. These indicators
    into larger, more usable open spaces for      help to define the quality of the living
    enjoyment by residents.                       environment.
    Where parcels of land can be unitized into    Medium Density
    large blocks, five or more acres in an area,
                                                  (Not to exceed eighteen (18) d.u. per
    a technique known as open space
                                                  acre):
    subdivision could also be used effectively.
    This concept provides for the clustering of   This classification allows a medium density
    homes about open spaces with interior         considered to be appropriate for Camarillo.
    pedestrian walkways. The pedestrian           Development within this range usually
    walkway can provide access to elementary      takes the form of garden or two‑story
    schools     and     neighborhood     shopping apartments or studio apartment units.
    facilities while eliminating unnecessary      High Density
    pedestrian/motor vehicle conflict. Through
                                                  (Not to exceed thirty (30) d.u. per acre):
    the unification of neighborhoods, this type
                                                  This classification allows the highest
    of development tries to provide a more
                                                  density, up to 30 units per acre, in
    desirable      living     environment    with
                                                  Camarillo. Development within this range
    amenities         integrated      into    the
    4.8                                                                             October 8, 2003

 usually is the two‑story or three‑story       apartment        units.       This    density
 apartments.                                   classification is in various areas within the
                                               planning     area.    These     areas   could
 Mobile Homes
                                               accommodate various designs and forms
 (Not to exceed seven (7) d.u. per acre):      and a varied population.
 Where mobile home developments have           Medium Density (not to exceed eighteen
 been proposed, the maximum density            (18) d.u. per acre):
 shall not exceed seven units to the net
                                               The General Plan proposes several areas
 acre.
                                               at this density. These areas could
 PROPOSALS                                     accommodate a varied population and
 Rural (not to exceed two and one‑half         include a variety of housing types from
 (2.5) d.u. per acre):                         apartments to condominiums and have
                                               been substantially completed.
 Table 3 indicates the number of acres that
 have been designated as rural within the      High Density (not to exceed thirty (30)
 planning area. Most of the areas shown for    d.u. per acre):
 rural development at the east and west        This designation contains the highest
 ends of the city are substantially            number of units per acre authorized under
 developed. A population estimate also has     the General Plan. In the majority of cases,
 been indicated on Table 3 which could be      the units considered would be for rental
 sustained in these areas if they were         purposes.      Areas     for   high   density
 totally     developed.   This,   given    the development include a site on Flynn Road
 population limitations and growth rate,       and two sites within the Village at the
 would be some time in the future.             Park.
 Areas, identified in the Las Posas Estates    Mobile Homes (not to exceed seven (7)
 and the Heights. This area may eventually     d.u. per acre):
 be within the city and its development        All areas designated for mobile home
 should be at a density standard consistent    development       have     been    developed.
 with the physical characteristics.            Existing     developments        have   been
 Low Density Residential: (not to exceed       identified in the plan. As a result of a
 four (4) d.u. per acre or five (5) in a       change in city Ordinances, a mobile home
 cluster):                                     subdivision may now be created under the
 The low density single‑family classification  CUP process and has been accomplished in
 accounts for a majority area in the city.     two of the mobile home parks.
 This     density   represents   the    stable
 single‑family     residential   subdivisions
 existing throughout the planning area.
 Additional low density residential acres are
 proposed where conditions indicate this
 type of development to be a feasible and
 desirable part of the housing inventory.
 These areas could contain a population as
 indicated on Table 3 within present city
 limits and Sphere area and primarily
 include the area known as the Village at
 the Park Specific Plan.
 Low Medium Density (not to exceed ten
 (10) d.u. per acre):
 The General Plan proposes the low
 medium density for cluster and garden
October 8, 2003                                                                          4.9

City of Camarillo General Plan
    October 8, 2003            4.10
4.11 October 8, 200
City of Camarillo General Plan
    4.12                       October 8, 2003
 Table 3 summarizes the approximate            improvement of efficiency and visual
 amounts of land in each category, as well     appeal of all commercial areas in
 as the factors used in determining a          keeping with the Heritage Zone policy
 projected population. The factors are         of the city as set forth in the
 reflective of recent trends demonstrated in   Community Design Element.
 the 2000 Census and other samples. Due       Alleviate the problems of traffic
 to the nature of a General Plan, the          congestion and require adequate
 numbers are not precise, but rather an        off‑street parking geared to each of
 approximation.                                the types of commercial activity and
 COMMERCIAL USES                               the promotion of on‑site pathways with
                                               interconnects to adjoining areas.
 The general placement and massing of
 commercial structures should consider the    Ensure compatibility by preventing the
 area and scale of the city and promote        intrusion of incompatible uses within
 quality design in keeping with the            commercial areas.           Improve the
 community environment. The commercial         relationship between commercial areas
 areas of the city include the Business        and adjacent noncommercial land
 district     along    Ventura    Boulevard,   through landscape buffers which will
 community        shopping    centers  along   insure the protection of adjacent
 Carmen Drive and Arneill Road, several        residential land from annoyance by
 neighborhood convenience centers, the         undue noise, light, traffic and other
 highway oriented uses along the freeway       activities    generated     by    intensive
 and all of the other commercial and           commercial use.
 business areas of the City of Camarillo. In  Maintain      a    proper     balance     of
 addition,      recent   major    commercial   commercial activities between the
 developments are the Camarillo Town           various commercial areas so that
 Center and Camarillo Premium Outlets.         business opportunities and support will
                                               be at an optimum.
 PRINCIPLES
                                              Encourage the development of grouped
 The following principles for the commercial   neighborhood convenience shopping
 development are established:                  facilities to serve the needs of the
  To achieve a balance of commercial          adjacent residential areas. Require the
     areas that will provide for the retail    development of landscaped pedestrian
     business, professional and service        ways, bike paths, adequate parking
     needs of the residents of Camarillo, as   and      safe   access    from     adjacent
     well as attracting customers from the     thoroughfares.
     surrounding service areas.
    Provide adequate land and proper
                                              Promote       improved       architectural
                                               appearance of commercial buildings
     location for the various types of
                                               and structures and require adequate
     commercial activities so that they can
                                               setbacks and properly landscaped sites
     provide optimum service to the
                                               and means for proper maintenance.
     community and surrounding service
     area.                                    Provide adequate municipal services
    Recognize the old downtown area           for all commercial areas, including the
     (Ventura Boulevard) as a special type     improvement of street appearance,
     of commercial area with a variety of      through a program of street tree
     architectural      styles   worthy   of   planting, suitable street lighting and
     preservation and enhancement and          the relocation of unsightly wires and
     encourage its role in the commercial      utility poles. There should be careful
     spectrum of the city.                     regulation of signs and outdoor
                                               advertising     to    prevent     unsightly
    Encourage and promote the overall
October 8, 2003                                                                        4.13

City of Camarillo General Plan
         proliferations which confuse      rather center are located here.
         than inform or identify uses.            The community center generally includes
    STANDARDS                                     between 100 and 250 thousand square
                                                  feet of gross leasable area, on a site of
    In order to implement the General Plan,
                                                  between 10 and 20 acres. Normally a fully
    the following classifications, standards and
                                                  developed,      well‑designed     community
    proposals for commercial development are
                                                  center would serve approximately 40,000
    adopted.
                                                  people. The mobility of the population,
    General Commercial                            intervening competitive uses, accessibility,
    The general commercial classification         merchandising      policies   and    personal
    designated by the General Plan will           preference      levels    towards     specific
    provide services to the City of Camarillo     commercial uses may alter this figure
    on neighborhood and community levels          considerably in specific locations.
    and on a specialized level also, such as      The freeway commercial classification
    freeway‑oriented commercial and outlet        includes those commercial uses which are
    centers.                                      located adjacent to and directly related to
    Neighborhood convenience centers will be      the uses of the freeway. Typical uses would
    dispersed throughout the city in order to     include gasoline service stations, other
    provide      convenience     shopping    and  automotive service facilities, restaurants,
    personal services for residents of local      hotels, motels and similar related uses.
    neighborhood areas. The activities and        Freeway commercial also includes other
    services     provided by these limited        retail uses; such as, outlet centers and
    developments usually include a grocery        membership retail or regional retail; such
    store, drug store, laundry and dry            as, furniture, appliances, etc. Freeway
    cleaners, barber shop, shoe repair shop       service commercial uses, where possible,
    and similar uses which can be supported       should be concentrated in areas most
    by the population within the service area.    appropriate for such development with
    This would call for a relatively small site,  convenient access to the freeway but
    but adequate enough to provide for            designed to be a complement to the area.
    required parking, landscaping and related     Development       standards    for    freeway
    amenities. It is not the intent that these    commercial uses should assure that such
    centers expand in size or change the          uses can be served by public streets to
    nature of the services they provide.          carry traffic, and should not detract from
                                                  the aesthetic quality of the community at
    The exact service size of local convenience   large.
    centers will depend on the number of
    residents in the neighborhood being           High development standards should be
    served. The standard of between three         employed in these areas to limit the
    and five acres has been utilized effectively  number of access points, to secure
    in many communities.                          substantial setbacks for new structures, to
                                                  require     adequate      landscaping      and
    The community center provides a wider         off‑street parking, and in general, to
    range of retail sales outlets, including soft obtain a high quality of design for those
    goods (wearing apparel) and hard lines        critical areas. In addition, the currently
    (hardware, appliances, et cetera).          A developed portion of freeway commercial
    junior department store or a variety store    land should be maintained and improved
    would usually be the major tenant in          where possible to insure the most efficient
    addition to the grocery store. These          and economic way to improve their
    centers provide a greater variety and         physical     quality.   Future     residential
    depth of merchandise to serve the needs       development in areas abutting the freeway
    of a larger population. Many services not     should, by design, avoid fronting the
    available at the neighborhood convenience
    4.14                                                                            October 8, 2003

 freeway.                                      PROPOSALS
 The old downtown/commercial district on       General Commercial
 Ventura Boulevard is recognized as an         The General Plan recognizes existing
 area of historical, cultural and economical   neighborhood centers located throughout
 significance to Camarillo and efforts should
                                               the city. If, however, future demand
 be made to preserve and enhance this
                                               indicates      a   need    for    additional
 important area.                               neighborhood shopping facilities, it is
     The overall appearance should follow     intended that they be carefully planned
      the existing architectural styles of the and integrated into the neighborhoods.
      existing buildings in the area, which    This proposal is consistent with the
      will establish the area as one with      principle    indicating   the   desire    for
      special interest and attractiveness.     concentrating commercial activities and
     Where possible, automobile parking       will assure that the character of the
      should be located off‑street and         residential areas will not be adversely
      designed to make the walk to the         affected by the intrusion of unplanned
      offices and shops relatively short and   commercial activities.
      pleasant.                                Neighborhood shopping areas, when
     The     Ventura    Boulevard    business located on major streets, should not be
      district is encouraged to promote        allowed to string out and thus become
      special activities and events that add   strip     commercial     areas.    Adequate
      support to the existing businesses on    provision must be made to assure the
      the Boulevard.                           compatibility of the development with the
 Camarillo’s regional shopping mall needs      adjacent land uses and streets. Each
 are currently being adequately served by      proposal for a neighborhood convenience
 regional shopping centers in adjacent         commercial center should be evaluated in
 cities. There is no reason to doubt the       terms of community need for such
 adequacy of these centers in providing        facilities and how it relates to the specific
 service to Camarillo in the future.           areas and population to be served.
 Office                                        Several of the community commercial
                                               centers built in the 1960’s and early
 A classification is provided in the General   1970’s have undergone modifications
 Plan for the grouping of the medical and      including exterior enhancements and
 dental professions, lawyers, engineers,       additions. Most notably, the Camarillo
 architects and other similar services.        Village Square has included a variety of
 Medical clinics, banks, savings and loans,    site features (landscaping, street furniture,
 real estate, insurance, utility offices and   pedestrian ways, trellis, etc.) with the
 facilities for other administrative functions remodeling of the center.
 related to the operation of both private
                                               Freeway commercial uses are currently
 and public corporations are also included
                                               scattered along the Ventura Freeway. The
 in this classification.
                                               General Plan proposes that, insofar as
 Office uses of this type should, wherever     possible, future freeway commercial uses
 possible, be designed as an integrated        be developed in clusters as highway
 group on large parcels of land to assure      centers. The uses should be grouped into
 the most efficient and desirable conditions.  integrated and planned entities similar to
 Due to the intensity and frequency of         other types of shopping centers. The
 office uses, access by way of major           grouping of similar uses will bring
 arterials is essential, as is adequate        economic benefit to the participants.
 off‑street parking, landscaping and other
                                               This proposal is intended as a means of
 amenities which assure a high quality of
                                               accomplishing the objective and principle
 development.
October 8, 2003                                                                         4.15

City of Camarillo General Plan
    for sound commercial development and as        INDUSTRIAL USES
    an alternative to the scattering and           The current inventory of developed
    spreading      of   segmented,     unrelated,  industrial land in the city amounts to
    unsound       commercial      uses   in    an  slightly more than four percent of the
    environment        that    encourages    and   city’s 12,000+ acres.        Industrial areas
    perpetuates community chaos.                   include the Flynn Road area, Mission Oaks
    The current status of Ventura Boulevard        Business Park, Adamson industrial area,
    Business District is that of a functional      Lewis Road/Dawson Drive area, Airport
    economic node which serves sundry              area and other areas of the community.
    commercial and professional needs of           Manufacturing, research and development,
    people throughout the city and its             and agricultural oriented industries are the
    environs. The Ventura Boulevard Business       predominate industrial operations in the
    District was improved with new sidewalks       city.
    and     planters     which    improved     its The goals, which were developed and
    appearance and in turn enhanced its            adopted by the City Council, indicated the
    economic          and      environmental       desire that all industrial proposals be
    characteristics.                               analyzed and based primarily on existing
    The city previously completed an economic      and projected demand for industrial land,
    survey in 1992 to better determine its         environmental considerations, and the
    position with regard to commercial uses.       preservation of a “rural” lifestyle.
    The study was used to indicate the ability     Based on the analysis of the above factors
    to locate types of commercial uses such as     and others, the General Plan adopts the
    specialized retail uses including “outlet      following    principles,     standards      and
    centers.” This has been successful in          proposals for industrial development.
    attracting a more diverse range of
    commercial services for the community          PRINCIPLES
    and region. Additional uses such as            The following principles should be adhered
    restaurants, book store and electronic         to in order to promote quality in new
    stores are yet desirable, however,             industrial developments, as well as to
    duplication of uses beyond what the            improve existing industrial uses:
    community could support should be                 “Industrial      park”    concepts       are
    avoided.                                           encouraged        in   developing      land
    Office                                             assigned to industrial uses.
    The clustering of related office uses into        Promote       the      general      visual
    specific areas has, in the past, and will          improvement of industrial areas by
    continue to be a desirable practice. It is         including architectural review as well
    for this reason that the General Plan has          as heavy landscaping and other visual
    included an office category and the                protection      for   the    surrounding
    following proposals.                               residential and commercial community.
    All existing office clusters of significance      Ensuring compatibility by preventing
    are recognized by this plan. Those office          the intrusion of incompatible uses
    areas include locations on Daily Drive at          which would reduce the efficiency of
    Rosewood, Arneill Road at Ponderosa, and           the industries that already exist.
    Dos Caminos Plaza, a medical oriented             Ensure    proper      access,    off‑street
    office complex adjacent to St. John’s              parking     for     employees,     vanpool
    Pleasant Valley Hospital.          The total       parking, rideshare parking, off‑street
    acreage in this category is shown on               loading, and protected service area.
    Table 3.                                          That    development       plan    approval
                                                       consider the use, storage, and disposal
    4.16                                                                              October 8, 2003

     of hazardous materials in industrial             That uses which involve hazardous
     facilities in accordance with the Safety          materials be reviewed with regard to
     Element of the General Plan.                      impacts on adjoining residential uses
    Promote the use of the Heritage Zone              and in accordance with the Safety
     policy in the Community Design                    Element of the General Plan and
     Element       when      considering     the       Zoning Ordinance.
     development of new buildings or              PROPOSALS
     additions to buildings in the industrial
                                                  The General Plan recommends land be set
     areas.
                                                  aside for industrial uses as illustrated on
 STANDARDS                                        Table 3. Although this is substantially the
 In order that the above principles may be        same as the 1993 General Plan and zoned
 realized, the utilization of land for industry   for industrial uses, it is recommended that
 should conform to the following general          review continue for reasons discussed in
 standards. These may be applied to new           the following paragraphs.
 industrial uses, as well as to the               The problems of air quality in the
 improvement of existing uses.                    Camarillo basin are well documented. The
    The least intensive industrial uses          pollutants that would be generated by
     should be located as a transition            large industrial operations and the
     between the heavier uses and adjacent        associated traffic that such developments
     residential or other more restrictive        would bring to the area cannot be justified
     uses.                                        by any positive economic benefits which
                                                  might be enjoyed by the City of Camarillo.
    Access to manufacturing districts
     should not be through or along the           Another issue which was analyzed was the
     border of a residential area. Traffic        existing and projected demand for
     should collect on industrial streets         industrial land. While the current rate of
     located within an industrial district and    absorption has been variously described
     then be routed to external areas by          by the city’s economic consultant and
     way of major highways and freeways.          those in the industrial land market, the
                                                  general feeling seems to be that there is a
    In te ri or   i n du stri al su bdi vi si on
                                                  substantial     potential     for continued
     circulation should be simple and
                                                  i n du stri al  devel opmen t,     an d   to
     functional and built to industrial
                                                  accommodate that market, sufficient
     standards.
                                                  acreage (See Table 3) has been set aside
    Where possible, access to railroad           in the General Plan for industrial
     lines, by way of spur trackage, should       expansion. This industrial acreage will
     be available to those industries             adequately serve the needs of the city in
     desiring this type of service.               providing additional employment and a
    Large setbacks and landscaped front          broader economic base for the foreseeable
     yards should be required to improve          future.
     the visual quality of the industrial         This plan also recognizes the danger of
     environment.                                 premature or overzoning of land for
    All storage and waste areas should be        industrial purposes (or other purposes, for
     screened from view and enhance the           that matter) leading to undesirable
     quality of the environment.                  growth, imbalance and/or “leapfrogging”
    An extensive program of overall              which could cause economic hardship on
     industrial area beautification and           the city.
     maintenance should be encouraged to          The industrial use categories proposed for
     assure the maintenance of a high             the city include General Industrial and
     quality for the industrial districts.        Research and Development.
October 8, 2003                                                                           4.17

City of Camarillo General Plan
    General Industrial                             PUBLIC USES
    The     General     Industrial  classification This segment of the Land Use Element
    provides land (See Table 3) for many           discusses the sundry classifications of
    types of industry including basic assembly,    public uses and the principles, standards,
    research and development, agricultural         and proposals which relate to them. The
    processing, and manufacturing. Although        uses include parks, schools, libraries,
    primarily concentrated near or around the      police facilities and fire facilities.
    railroad right‑of‑way, some industrial
                                                   PRINCIPLES
    areas are proposed for strategic outlying
    sections of the city. Generally, the outlying  In order to assist in the implementation of
    areas proposed for industry serve a            the Land Use Element, the following
    specialized function.                          general principles are established for
                                                   public uses:
    Research and Development
                                                      Locate facilities where they provide
    This category provides for a variety of high       maximum service with the greatest
    technology manufacturing, distribution,            efficiency.
    and research functions as well as office
                                                      Utilize public funds with care to assure
    activities within a planned development
                                                       the maximum service for the dollar.
    intended to create a campus atmosphere
    with substantial landscaping. Table 3             Welcome cooperation from the private
    designates      the    acreage  under     this     sector in all community enterprises.
    category in the planning area.                    Whenever        possible     and     feasible,
                                                       attempt to secure State and Federal
    URBAN RESERVE
                                                       assistance in the development of public
    This designation of the General Plan is            uses.
    intended to be used as an interim
    designation prior to the conversion from       SCHOOLS
    its current designation to some other land     The relationship between schools and land
    use determined appropriate by the city.        use, particularly residential patterns, are
    The conversion should only be allowed          directly associated. The need for future
    after a specific plan has been developed       school facilities is primarily based on
    by the city. The specific plan process will    population projections. The planning and
    be initiated at a time determined              location      of    school     sites     requires
    appropriate by the City Council. This          cooperation and coordination between the
    program will provide the following:            school     district   and     the     city.    The
        An indication to the property owners      responsibility for providing school facilities
                                                   is that of the various school districts which
         that the area is appropriate for
                                                   have jurisdiction in the Camarillo area.
         conversion from agriculture or similar
                                                   Therefore, this section discussed the
         use to an urban usage.
                                                   subject of schools on a general basis,
        An opportunity for the City Council to    knowing that principles, standards and
         establish the rate of conversion and      proposals may differ from district to
         determine the uses that would be most     district.
         appropriate for the area.
                                                   OBJECTIVE
        An opportunity for the city to examine
         the infrastructure necessary to service   The objective for public education in the
         such conversion and to indicate the       City of Camarillo is:
         shortcomings of the project and the          To support the local school districts
         necessary     improvements     required      by making studies to determine the
         before the project can become a              most     appropriate      location      and
         reality.                                     distribution of school facilities to
    4.18                                                                                October 8, 2003

    serve the educational needs for the        Intermediate Schools
    citizens of Camarillo.                     Intermediate schools (7-8 grades) should
 PRINCIPLES                                    be located on approximately 15‑20 acre
                                               sites, as centrally as possible within the
 In order to implement the above objective,
                                               areas they are to serve.
 the following principles are established for
 public education facilities:                  Intermediate schools should be designed
                                               to accommodate between 800 and 1,000
    En dorse      th e   devel opment      of
                                               students. The large area served requires
     well‑rounded educational programs
                                               that access be planned from a secondary
     and opportunities for all citizens in the
                                               arterial.
     community.
                                               Wherever possible, intermediate schools
    Protect school plant investments by
                                               should be located adjacent to public
     preserving the character and quality of
                                               recreation facilities so that the joint use of
     residential      development      which
                                               both facilities will be possible by the
     surround school facilities and by
                                               schools and the recreation and park
     prohibiting objectionable uses from
                                               district.
     encroaching into immediate service
     areas.                                    High Schools
    Assist in the coordination of school and  High schools (9-12 grades) should be
     park       authorities    to    develop   located on an approximately 40 to 55‑acre
     education/recreational        complexes   site as central as possible to the
     throughout the community, thereby         residential area it is to serve.
     providing mutual benefit of service,      High      schools   should     be   able    to
     safety, convenience, efficiency, and      accommodate between 1,500 and 2,500
     economy.                                  students.
    Promote the safety of children by         This plan recognizes all existing public
     requiring safe sidewalks, bikeways,       school facilities within the Camarillo
     and crossings in areas adjoining and      Sphere of Influence. Table 4 provides a
     leading to school sites.                  composite list of those public schools.
    Coordinate with school authorities to
     make schools, by their design and
     location, contribute to the identities of
     the communities which they serve.
 STANDARDS
 Elementary Schools
 An elementary school (K-6) should be
 located on an approximate 10‑acre site,
 central to the residential area it is to
 serve. The service radius should, ideally,
 be one‑half mile. Thus the school would be
 within easy walking distance of elementary
 school children. Elementary schools should
 accommodate between 500 and 600
 students and should be served by and
 have access from local streets within the
 residential neighborhood.
 Pedestrian access should be encouraged to
 optimize convenience and safety.
October 8, 2003                                                                          4.19

City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                       Table 5
                                              Public School Facilities
                    NAME                             LOCATION           SITE    DISTRICT
                                                                       (acres)
       ELEMENTARY
       Camarillo Heights                    35 Catalina                    8.53    PVSD
       El Descanso                          1099 N. Bedford Dr.            9.12    PVSD
       University Preparation               550 Temple Avenue              8.81 PVSD/VCSS
       Dos Caminos                          3635 Appian Way                9.01    PVSD
       Las Posas                            75 Calle La Guerra             9.06    PVSD
       Los Senderos                         1555 Kendall Avenue            9.67    PVSD
       Los Primeros Structured (K-8)        2222 Ventura Blvd.             8.47    PVSD
       Valle Lindo* (preschool)             777 Aileen Street              8.93    PVSD
       Santa Rosa                           13282 Santa Rosa Rd.           7.79    PVSD
       Tierra Linda                         1201 Woodcreek Rd.             6.00    PVSD
       La Mariposa                          4800 Corte Olivas            10.00     PVSD
                                            SUB-TOTAL                    95.39
       INTERMEDIATE
       Monte Vista (7-8)                    888 N. Lantana St.           19.06     PVSD
       Los Altos (7-8)                      700 Temple Avenue            19.99     PVSD
       Las Colinas (6-8)                    5750 Fieldcrest Drive        12.80     PVSD
                                            SUB-TOTAL                    39.05
       HIGH SCHOOL
       Adolfo Camarillo                     4660 Mission Oaks Blvd.      44.56    OUHSD
         High School (9-12)
                                            545 Central Avenue
       Rio Mesa High (9-12)                 Oxnard (not within                    OUHSD
                                            Camarillo city limits)
       Frontier High                        275 Pleasant Valley Rd.        3.29   OUHSD
         Continuation School (9-12)         (Camarillo Airport)
                                            SUB-TOTAL                    47.85
       SPECIAL EDUCATION
       Dorothy Boswell (for severely
       handicapped) and Regional            275 Pleasant Valley Rd.      16.00  Ventura Co.
       Occupation Program                   (Camarillo Airport)                  Unified SD
       TOTAL ALL
       PUBLIC SCHOOLS                                                   195.09
       PVSD—Pleasant Valley School District
       OUHSD—Oxnard Union High School District
       VCSS—Ventura County Superintendent of Schools
    4.20                                                                           October 8, 2003

                                    Table 6
                      Proposed Public School Facilities
                          Proposed Public School Facilities
 Based on the projected population increase, the following public school facilities are
 proposed by this Plan:
      PROPOSED SCHOOLS                                            APPROXIMATE
  CLASSIFICATION AND NAME        APPROXIMATE LOCATION                 SIZE
 Elementary,                    North of Pleasant Valley
 Village at the Park            Road, West of Calleguas              10 Acres
                                Creek
October 8, 2003                                                                    4.21
City of Camarillo General Plan
    Higher Education                              Fire Stations and Paramedics
    The area is currently within the Ventura      Four fire stations currently serve the
    County Community College District and is      needs of Camarillo. They are located: on
    served by Ventura Community College,          Pickwick Drive just west of Arneill Road,
    Moorpark Community College, and Oxnard        on Valley Vista Drive north of Las Posas
    Community College. The            community   Road; at the Camarillo Airport on Las
    college conducts satellite classes within     Posas Road; and a facility in eastern
    the City of Camarillo.                        Camarillo on Santa Rosa Road and
    Saint John’s Seminary/College and West        Woodcreek Road. Presently, paramedic
    Coast University are located within the       services are provided by private enterprise
    city. California Lutheran University and      with locations in western and eastern
    other higher education facilities are within  Camarillo. This service would be monitored
    the nearby areas.                             to insure that it meets the needs of the
                                                  city.
    California State University at Channel
    Islands has recently opened as a fully        QUASI-PUBLIC USES
    operational 4‑year state university. CSUCI    The quasi‑public classification of the
    is located south of the city on Lewis Road.   General Plan provides land areas for those
    The city supports the university and the      uses which are private in nature, but will
    assets such a facility will provide to the    serve the public needs. This includes such
    city. The city also recognizes the            uses as hospitals, private educational
    importance to preserve the area around        institutions, religious institutions and other
    the university in agricultural uses which     similar uses.
    should be supported by agreements
    between the City of Camarillo, County of      Hospitals
    Ventura, City of Oxnard, and the              St. John’s Pleasant Valley Hospital
    university.      The university should be     presently serves the needs of Camarillo
    self‑contained to remove the pressure on      and will continue to do so in the
    adjoining areas for conversion.               foreseeable future. If at such time an
    Libraries                                     additional hospital facility is required, it is
                                                  recommended that the city coordinate the
    Ventura County currently administers and      planning and development of future
    operates one library in Camarillo located     general service hospital facilities with the
    immediately adjacent to the Pleasant          Ventura County Comprehensive Health
    Valley     Park   recreational   facility  on Planning Organization.
    Ponderosa        Drive.    Camarillo      has
    commenced the planning efforts for the        Private Schools
    construction of a new library on Las Posas    The General Plan recognizes all existing
    Road, westerly of Lewis Road.                 private schools, including colleges and
    Police Facilities                             grade schools.
    The current police facilities are located on  Religious Institutions
    Las Posas Road. The facility was recently     Existing     religious     institutions      are
    developed to address the need for             designated on the General Plan. This type
    adequate space and for on‑site support        of facility, with adequate buffering from
    facilities. The facility is located north of  adjacent uses, is compatible with the area
    Las Posas Road, west of Antonio, and east     along the perimeter of residential areas
    of Ponderosa which is in the northern         when located on arterial streets.
    center part of the city.
                                                  Flood Control Channels
                                                  That the city in coordination with the Flood
                                                  Control District and other agencies
    4.22                                                                             October 8, 2003

 encourage the multi‑purpose use of flood       Signs
 control channel rights of way for flood        That the city’s strict sign control and
 control, maintenance access, bicycle           amortization program be continued.
 routes, walking, jogging, horseback riding
 and open space beautification. That            Utility Undergrounding
 smaller channels be enclosed whenever          Continue the city policy of undergrounding
 economically feasible in conjunction with      utilities   in    conjunction     with    new
 adjacent development and as part of a          development and vigorously pursue a
 long term capital improvement program.         program      of   undergrounding      existing
 Calleguas Creek and Conejo Creek should        overhead utilities wherever possible and
 be maintained in a natural state where         whenever funds are available.
 possible in accordance with the design
 approved by the City of Camarillo and          Cultural Arts Facility
 Ventura County Flood Control District.         That in consideration of the various land
                                                use proposals throughout the City of
 Conservation
                                                Camarillo,      the    city   consider     the
 That development plan approval consider        establishment of a cultural arts facility to
 energy conservation through means of           serve the performing and visual arts. This
 care in siting of buildings and landscaping,   facility should be placed in a location to
 insulation, use of design features such as     serve the community in general and also
 overhangs,         awnings      and    natural assist     the    educational      programs
 ventilation as well as renewable energy        established by the public school system.
 sources.                                       Consideration of a joint county-city project
 Air Quality                                    should be given in light of the fact that
                                                Camarillo      is   the    closest   to    the
 Air quality continues to play an important     demographic center of the County.
 role to the City of Camarillo and its
 residents. When addressing projects which      Recreation
 exceed the threshold, every effort should      The city should promote cultural events to
 be made to establish real non‑banked           enrich the quality of life within the city.
 maintainable solutions. The Open Space         Adequate recreational facilities and space
 and Conservation Element Air Quality           to satisfy a community‑wide need should
 Section should be considered along with        be considered and include a diverse
 the Air Pollution Control District standards.  recreational program for both passive and
 Centrum                                        active recreation. The Recreation Element
                                                of the General Plan should be used as a
 That the centrum concept continue to be        guide when considering such facilities.
 maintained. The Centrum can be defined
 as a central or core element of a city         Specific Plan
 which        provides       a   complex     of The land use designated on the southerly
 multi‑functional public, quasi‑public and      side of the Ventura Freeway, northerly of
 commercial        services.   Some    of   the the Camarillo airport, westerly of Las
 advantages that a centrum offers are:          Posas to Central Avenue has been
 convenience, cohesiveness, concentration       provided with a specific plan. Other
 of uses, access and centralization. The        specific plans include the civic center,
 uses proposed to be part of the Centrum        Leonard, Rancho Calleguas, Pitts Ranch
 include a civic center, transit center, and    and Village at the Park Specific Plan.
 additional      recreation     and   education Properties classified as “urban reserve”
 facilities. Identity and cohesiveness in the   allow for consideration of specific plans as
 Centrum        can   be     achieved   through do other areas converted from agricultural
 architectural controls, sign controls and      use. Points of consideration during review
 landscaping programs.
October 8, 2003                                                                            4.23

City of Camarillo General Plan
    of a specific plan should include building       appropriate measures to avoid impacts of
    separation to maintain an open feeling           hazardous materials from one use to
    which      presently      exists,   expansive    another.
    setbacks,      rolling     landscaping      and
                                                     Open Space
    pedestrian ways in keeping with the
    quality and standards established by the         Camarillo is surrounded by open space
    city. Specific plans should also address         areas including agricultural lands, hillsides,
    phasing, implementation           and     design and waterways. Open space is discussed in
    criteria.                                        the Open Space Element of the General
                                                     Plan and includes various policies and
    Energy                                           standards. The community goals call for
    That the city review and implement an            an open space separation between
    energy conservation program for the city.        Camarillo and adjoining communities to be
    That the city encourage the retrofitting of      maintained through the use of agricultural
    existing     commercial,      industrial,   and  lands, hillsides, and golf courses.
    residential structures to include passive        Open space within Camarillo is found in
    and active solar features.                       the form of parks, agricultural lands,
    That      the   city     review    residential,  hillside areas, golf courses and waterways.
    commercial, and industrial site plans to         Open space within the community should
    assure that landscaping provides solar           be     promoted      through    trails    along
    access.                                          waterways       and     appropriate     buffers
                                                     between land uses. The preservation of
    Hillside Development
                                                     visual access from public spaces within the
    That the city continue to implement the          city to hillsides and unique features
    adopted hillside development ordinance           surrounding the City can serve to broaden
    which regulates development within those         the sense of space by creating the feeling
    areas having a natural slope of 20 percent       that the open space areas are continuous.
    or greater.
                                                     WATER QUALITY RUNOFF
    That the city identify those areas within its
    Sphere of Interest in excess of 20 percent       Camarillo is within the Calleguas Creek
    slope and use the established guidelines         Watershed       Management        area.     The
    for the hillside development.                    watershed includes a diversity of land
                                                     uses, including urban, rural, agricultural,
    That the city coordinate with the County to
                                                     and open space areas. Various land use
    assure the city’s hillside development
                                                     patterns have differing effects both on the
    policies are respected within their Sphere
                                                     quantity and quality of runoff. Various
    of Interest.
                                                     federal, state, and local mandates affect
    That the hillside development ordinance          planning      practices    and    engineering
    address clustering, architectural features,      principles related to water runoff for both
    grading, and ridgeline protection on all         quantity and quality issues. The runoff
    proposed hillside development.                   does affect the watershed area from paved
    Hazardous Materials                              and unpaved surfaces, drainage channels,
                                                     streams, and bodies of water. The city
    The city adopted in the Safety Element
                                                     currently participates in a number of
    Hazard Waste Management Programs and
                                                     programs to implement federal, state, and
    the Commercial Industrial Performance
                                                     local mandates set forth for the protection
    Standards in the Zoning Ordinance for
                                                     of the environment. These include the
    reviewing hazardous materials to address
                                                     planning process for the Calleguas Creek
    their uses, storage, disposal and recycling.
                                                     Watershed Management program, the
    The city should review developments for          permit requirements as part of the county-
    compatibility between zones to incorporate       wide stormwater permit process, and a
    4.24                                                                                October 8, 2003

 number of other programs. Through these     basic pattern for future development for
 processes, planning policy is being         the City of Camarillo, It in itself is not the
 developed and implemented. Engineering      sole determining factor in how the city is
 practices are improved through project      to be developed. The Land Use Element is
 requirements, design solutions, and best    assisted in its implementation by the other
 management practices. The planning          elements of the General Plan which
 process and public works process have       contain a variety of principles and
 been expanded to incorporate these          objectives which vary in degree from
 measures.                                   specific in nature to general in concept.
                                             The Land Use Element addresses more
 Section on Interpretation of the General
 Plan                                        than just land use patterns; it also
                                             recognizes the infrastructure, community
 Occasionally situations arise where it is   facilities and limiting factors as discussed
 not exactly clear where the boundary falls  in other elements, including the Circulation
 between two land use designations. This     Element,      Recreation     Element      and
 can be as a result of adjustments in        Conservation Element. The Land Use
 property lines or the engineering of a      Element is the basis for other elements;
 specific alignment of a street or water     such as the Housing Element, which
 course. Since the General Plan Land Use     indicates areas for existing and future
 Element is somewhat broad due to its        housing needs based upon the residential
 scale and topographical factors not         designations shown on the land use plan.
 expressly      shown    on    the   maps,   The Land Use Element is also tempered by
 interpretations of the map are occasionally policies of other elements including the
 requested.      When    situations   occur  Safety Element, Noise Element and
 regarding administerial permit, such as a   Community        Design    Element      which
 lot line adjustment where zone boundary     establish other controlling factors in
 lines are specifically established by       considering developments under the land
 ordinance, interpretation can be rendered   use plan. Every effort is made to ensure
 by the Director of Department of            that policies and standards are compatible
 Community Development with proper           between the various elements. Future
 notification to the Planning Commission.    amendments to the Land Use Element
 Where discretionary permits are involved;   must recognize factors contained in the
 such as planned development permits,        other elements before amendments are
 land divisions, etc., the decision shall be approved.
 rendered by the Planning Commission
 upon recommendation from the Director of
 Department of Community Development.
 When actions involve changes of zone or
 subdivisions which require final action by
 the City Council, the City Council shall
 include in its review a recommendation
 from the Planning Commission.        Where
 evidence does not support the request for
 interpretation or where the matter is
 greater than a review of the map, a
 General Plan amendment would be
 required to be approved for processing
 and considered by the City Council.
 Correlation Between the Land Use Element
 and the General Plan
 The Land Use Element establishes the
October 8, 2003                                                                         4.25
                                    NOISE ELEMENT 2015
                                     CAMARILLO
     This element provides goals,
           objectives, policies and
implementation measures to help
     protect citizens of Camarillo
             from excessive noise
                                               CITY OF CAMARILLO NOISE ELEMENT 2015
                 This Page Left Blank Intentionally
ii NOISE ELEMENT
              CONTENTS
12.1		        INTRODUCTION	                                   12-3
12.2		        PURPOSE OF NOISE ELEMENT	                       12-3
12.3		        GENERAL PLAN CORRELATION	                       12-3
12.4		        STATUTORY AUTHORITY	                            12-4
12.5		        FUNDAMENTALS OF SOUND AND ENVIRONMENTAL NOISE	  12-5
12.6		        NOISE STANDARDS, GUIDELINES, AND REGULATIONS 	  12-8
12.7		        NOISE ENVIRONMENT	                             12-11
12.8		        NOISE MITIGATION	                              12-18
12.9		        GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES	   12-23
		REFERENCES	                                                12-30
Adopted
September 9, 2015
Resolution 2015-99
Previously Adopted
August 28. 1996
Prepared By
Rincon Consultants, Inc.
                                                                   12-1
                   This Page Left Blank Intentionally
12-2 NOISE ELEMENT
                                                Noise Element
12.1		 INTRODUCTION
       The City of Camarillo is a suburban community whose focus is on maintaining a pleasant,
       healthy, and productive environment for the people who live, work, and play within the City.
       Accordingly, Camarillo should be a place where residents and visitors alike are protected
       from excessive noise, which has been demonstrated to have a potentially negative impact
       on the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
12.2		 PURPOSE OF NOISE ELEMENT
       The Noise Element of a General Plan is a comprehensive program for including noise control
       in the planning process. It is a tool for local planners to use in achieving and maintaining
       land uses that are compatible with current and projected future environmental noise levels.
       The Noise Element identifies noise sensitive land uses and noise sources, and defines areas
       of noise impact for the purpose of developing and implementing programs to ensure that
       Camarillo residents will be protected from excessive noise intrusion.
12.3		 GENERAL PLAN CORRELATION
       The General Plan is required to be internally consistent. Therefore, this Noise Element
       has been prepared to be consistent with all other elements of the Camarillo General Plan.
       Because the Noise Element is a tool for achieving and maintaining land uses that are
       compatible with current and projected future environmental noise levels, it relates most
       directly to the Land Use Element, and should be used in conjunction with it. For example,
       when planning or permitting new development, the City should ensure that that proposed
       projects are consistent with applicable land use designations from the Land Use Element, as
                                                                                       INTRODUCTION 12-3
                                                    City of Camarillo General Plan
                well as the information and standards contained in this Noise Element, including whether
                or not the proposed project is in a noise impact zone or would itself create noise that would
                negatively impact surrounding land uses. The Noise Element should also be referred to
                during any amendments to, or updates of, the Land Use Element, to ensure that the noise
                environment is properly taken into account. The Noise Element also uses data and other
                information from the Circulation Element of the General Plan to identify and forecast the
                geographical location and potential impacts of transportation-related noise, which is the
                predominant noise source in Camarillo.
     12.4		     STATUTORY AUTHORITY
                The State of California has mandated that each county and city prepare a Noise Element
                as part of its General Plan. The Noise Element follows guidelines in Section 65302(f) of
                the State Government Code and Section 46050.1 of the Health and Safety Code. Section
                65302(f) of the State Government Code requires that the Noise Element consider the
                following major noise sources:
                     a.	 Highways and freeways.
                     b.	 Primary arterials and major local streets.
                     c.	 Passenger and freight online railroad operations and ground rapid transit systems.
                     d.	 Commercial, general aviation, heliport, helistop, and military airport operations, aircraft
                         overflights, jet engine test stands, and all other ground facilities and maintenance
                         functions related to airport operation.
                     e.	 Local industrial plants, including, but not limited to, railroad classification yards.
                Other ground stationary noise sources including, but not limited to, military installations,
                contributing to the community noise environment.
                Section 65303(f) of the State Government Code requires the Noise Element to include
                implementation measures and possible solutions that address existing and foreseeable noise
                problems, if any.
                The State Guidelines for Preparation and Content of Noise Elements of the General Plan
                indicate that the Noise Element should present the noise environment in terms of noise
                contours and, for those areas identified as containing noise sensitive facilities, the noise
                environment should be determined by monitoring.
12-4  NOISE ELEMENT
                                                 Noise Element
12.5		  FUNDAMENTALS OF SOUND AND ENVIRONMENTAL
        NOISE
12.5.1	 FUNDAMENTALS OF SOUND
        Sound is technically described in terms of the loudness (amplitude) of the sound and
        frequency (pitch) of the sound. The standard unit of measurement of the loudness of sound
        is the decibel (dB). Since the human ear is not equally sensitive to sound at all frequencies,
        a special frequency-dependent rating scale has been devised to relate noise to human
        sensitivity. The A-weighted decibel scale (dBA) performs this compensation by emphasizing
        certain frequencies and de-emphasizing others in a manner approximating the sensitivity of
        the human ear.
        Decibels are based on the logarithmic scale. The logarithmic scale compresses the wide
        range in sound pressure levels to a more usable range of numbers in a manner similar to the
        Richter scale used to measure earthquakes. In terms of human response to noise, a sound
        10 dBA higher than another is judged to be twice as loud; and 20 dBA higher four times as
        loud; and so forth. Everyday sounds normally range from 30 dB (very quiet) to 100 dB (very
        loud). Examples of various sound levels in different environments are shown in Figure 1.
        Sound levels typically attenuate (or drop off) at a rate of 6 dBA per doubling of distance
        from point sources (such as industrial machinery). Sound levels from lightly traveled roads
        typically attenuate at a rate of about 4.5 dBA per doubling of distance. Sound levles from
        heavily traveled roads typically attenuate at about 3 dBA per doubling of distance. Sound
        levels may also be reduced by intervening structures; generally, a single row of buildings
        between the receptor and the sound source reduces the sound level by about 5 dBA, while
        a solid wall or berm reduces sound levels by 5 to 10 dBA. The manner in which older homes
        in California (approximately 30 years old or older) were constructed generally provides a
        reduction of exterior-to-interior sound levels of about 20 to 25 dBA with closed windows
        and doors. The exterior-to-interior reduction of newer residential units and office buildings
        is generally 30 dBA or more (FTA, May 2006).
12.5.2	 DEFINITION AND IMPACTS OF NOISE
        Noise is defined as unwanted sound and it is known to have several adverse effects on
        people. Based on these known effects of noise, criteria have been established to help
        protect the public health and safety and prevent disruption of certain human activities.
        These criteria are based on such known impacts of noise on people as hearing loss, speech
        interference, sleep interference, physiological responses and annoyance. Each of these
        potential noise impacts on people is briefly discussed below:
                                       F U N D A M E N TA L S O F S O U N D A N D E N V I R O N M E N TA L N O I S E 12-5
                                                              City of Camarillo General Plan               Noise Element
                           FIGURE 1 - EXAMPLES OF TYPICAL SOUND LEVELS
                      PUBLIC                    NOISE                  COMMON                       COMMON
                   REACTION                     LEVEL              INDOOR NOISE               OUTDOOR NOISE
                                                 (dBA)                   LEVELS                      LEVELS
                                                       110          Rock band
                                                                                              Jet flyover at 1000 ft
                                                       100          Inside subway train
        Local committee activity with
            influential or legal action                                                       Gas lawn mover at 3 ft
                                                                    Food blender at 3ft       Diesel truck at 50 ft
                    Letters of protest                 90
                                                                    Garbage disposal at 3ft
                    Complaints likely                                                         Noisy Urban Daytime
                                                       80           Shouting at 3ft.
                                                                    Vacuum cleaner at 10ft    Gas Lawn Mower at 100 ft
                 Complaints possible                   70
                                                                                              Commercial area
                                                                    Normal Speech at 3ft.
                                                                                              Heavy traffic 300 ft
                     Complaints rare                   60
                                                                    Large business office
                                                                    Dishwasher next room      Quiet Urban Daytime
                                                       50
                                                                    Small theater, conference
                          Acceptance                                                          Quiet Urban Nighttime
                                                                    room (background)
                                                       40
                                                                                              Quiet Suburban Nighttime
                                                                    Library
                                                       30           Bedroom at night
                                                                    Concert hall (background) Quiet rural Nighttime
                                                       20
                                                                    Broadcast and recording
                                                                    studio
                                                       10
                                                                    Threshold of hearing
                                                       0
             Common Noise Levels and Public Reaction
             Source: Caltrans Noise Manual, California State Department of Transportation
12-6 NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                                     Camarillo General Plan
                                                 Noise Element
                    Hearing Loss is not a major noise concern in outdoor environments in Camarillo
                    because the potential for noise induced hearing loss is more commonly
                    associated with occupational noise exposures in heavy industry or very noisy work
                    environments. Noise levels in neighborhoods, even in very noisy environments
                    such as near airports, are not sufficiently loud to cause hearing loss.
                    Speech Interference is one of the primary noise concerns. Normal conversational
                    speech is in the range of 60 to 65 dBA, and any noise in this range or louder may
                    interfere with speech.
                    Sleep Interference is a major noise concern because sleep is the most noise
                    sensitive human activity. Sleep disturbance studies have identified interior noise
                    levels that have the potential to cause sleep disturbance. Sleep disturbance does
                    not necessarily mean awakening from sleep, but can refer to altering the pattern
                    and stages of sleep.
                    Physiological Responses are those measurable effects of noise on people, which
                    are realized, for example, as changes in pulse rate and blood pressure. While such
                    effects can be induced and observed, the extent to which these physiological
                    responses cause harm or are signs of harm is not fully known.
                    Annoyance is the most difficult of all noise responses to describe. Annoyance
                    is a very individual characteristic and can vary widely from person to person.
                    What one person considers tolerable can be quite unbearable to another of equal
                    hearing capacity.
12.5.3	 NOISE METRICS
        Community noise is generally not a steady state and varies with time. Under conditions
        of non-steady state noise, some type of statistical metric is necessary in order to quantify
        noise exposure over a long period of time. Several rating scales have been developed for
        describing the effects of noise on people. They are designed to account for the above known
        effects of noise on people.
        Based on these effects, the potential for noise to impact people is dependent on the total
        acoustical energy content of the noise. A number of noise scales have been developed to
        account for total acoustical energy exposure. These scales are: the Equivalent Noise Level
        (Leq), the Day Night Noise Level (Ldn), and the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL).
        These scales are described in the following paragraphs.
                                       F U N D A M E N TA L S O F S O U N D A N D E N V I R O N M E N TA L N O I S E 12-7
                                                    City of Camarillo General Plan
                             Leq is the sound level corresponding to a steady-state sound level containing the
                              same total energy as a time-varying signal over a given sample period. Leq is the
                              “energy” average noise level during the time period of the sample. Leq can be
                              measured for any time period, but is typically measured for 15 minutes, 1 hour,
                              or 24 hours.
                             Ldn is a 24-hour, time-weighted annual average noise level. Time-weighted refers
                              to the fact that noise occurring during certain sensitive time periods is penalized
                              for occurring at these times. In the Ldn scale, 10 dBA is added to noise levels
                              experienced during the night (10 pm to 7 am). This attempts to account for
                              increased human sensitivity to noise during the night, when most people sleep.
                             CNEL is similar to the Ldn scale in that it add 10 dBA to sound levels occuring
                              between 10 pm and 7am, but it also adds 5 dBA to noise levels occurring during the
                              evening (7 pm to 10 pm). Either Ldn or CNEL may be used to identify community
                              noise impacts within the Noise Element.
     12.6		      NOISE STANDARDS, GUIDELINES, AND REGULATIONS
                 Although extensive research has been conducted on human responses to exposure to
                 different levels of noise, no uniform standard can be applied to regulate noise across
                 all communities. This is because the public’s reaction to noise varies from community
                 to community, based on factors such as the local noise environment, variations in the
                 characteristics of noise (e.g. differences in duration or pitch), and variations in the public’s
                 perceptions of local noise conditions and what constitutes acceptable noise levels for
                 different types of noise.
                 The Federal and State governments have developed noise regulations for use in projects
                 carried out by these levels of government (such as Federal or State highway projects), and
                 have also developed guidelines for use by local jurisdictions in developing and implementing
                 noise control at the local level. Local governments typically utilize this guidance to develop
                 noise ordinances to protect people from non-transportation related noise sources such as
                 music, machinery, and vehicular traffic on private property. Noise ordinances do not apply
                 to motor vehicle noise on public streets or other transportation-related noise sources that
                 are preempted by the State or Federal government. Local protections from transportation-
                 related noise are therefore accomplished through the land use planning process, of which
                 this Noise Element is part.
     12.6.1	     FEDERAL AND STATE NOISE GUIDELINES AND REGULATIONS
                 The EPA, in March 1974, published a document titled “Information on Levels of
                 Environmental Noise Requisite to Protect Public Health and Welfare with an Adequate
                 Margin of Safety” (EPA 550/9-74-004). Table 1 shows requisite noise levels for various land
                 uses from this document. In this table, 55 Ldn is described as the requisite level with an
                 adequate margin of safety for areas with outdoor uses, including residences and recreational
12-8   NOISE ELEMENT

                                                             Noise Element
areas. The EPA “levels document” does not constitute a standard, specification or regulation,
but identifies safe levels of environmental noise exposure without consideration for
economic cost for achieving these levels.
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) has adopted and published noise abatement
criteria for highway construction projects. The noise abatement criteria specified by the
FHWA are presented in Table 2 in terms of the maximum one hour Leq. The FHWA noise
abatement criteria establish an exterior noise goal for residential land uses of 67 Leq and
an interior goal for residences of 52 Leq. The noise abatement criteria apply to private yard
areas and assume that typical wood frame homes with windows open provide 10 dB of
noise reduction (outdoor to indoor) and 20 dB of noise reduction with windows closed.
Table 1 - Environmental Protection Agency Noise Guidelines
      ACTIVITY            DESIGN NOISE
                                                                      DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITY CATEGORY
    CATEGORY                 LEVEL - LEQ
   A                      57 (Exterior)              Tracts of land in which serenity and quiet are of extraordinary
                                                     signifance and serve an important public need and where
                                                     the preservation of those qualities is essential if the area is to
                                                     continue to serve its intended purpose. Such areas could include
                                                     amphitheaters, particular parks or portions of open spaces, or
                                                     historic districts which are dedicated or recognized by appropriate
                                                     local officials for activities requiring special qualities of serenity and
                                                     quiet.
   B                      67 (Exterior)              Picnic areas, recreation areas, playgrounds, active sports areas and
                                                     parks which are not Included in category A and residences, motels,
                                                     hotels, public meeting rooms, schools, churches, libraries, and
                                                     hospitals.
   C                      72 (Exterior)              Developed lands, properties, or activities not included in Category A
                                                     or B above.
   D                      -                          For requirements of undeveloped lands see FHWA PPM 773.
   E                      52 (Interior)              Residences, motels, hotels, public meeting rooms, schools,
                                                     churches, libraries, hospitals, and auditoriums.
a. Since different types of activities appear to be associated with different levels, identification of a maximum level for activity interference
  may be difficult except in those circumstances where speech communication is a critical activity. (See Figure D-2 for noise levels as a
  function of distance which allow satisfactory communication.)
b. Based on lowest level.
c. Based only on hearing loss.
d. An Leq(8) of 75 dB may be identified in these situations so long as the exposure over the remaining 16 hours per day is low enough to result
  in a negligible contribution to the 24-hour average, i.e., no greater than an Leq of 60 dB.
Note: Explanation of identified level for hearing loss: The exposure period which results in hearing loss at the identified level is a period of 40
  years.
*Refers to energy rather than arithmetic averages.
Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Information On Levels Of Environmental Noise Requisite To Protect Public Health And Welfare
  Wtih An Adequate Margin Of Safety, March 1974
                                                        N O I S E S TA N D A R D S , G U I D E L I N E S , A N D R E G U L AT I O N S               12-9

                                                                 City of Camarillo General Plan
               Table 2 Federal Highway Administration Noise Criteria
                                                                      Indoor                                        Outdoor
                                                                      Hearing        To Protect                        Hearing    To Protect
                                                      Activity        Loss           Against         Activity          Loss       Against
                           Measure                    Interference    Consid-        Both Effects    Interference      Consid-    Both Effects
                                                                      eration        (b)                               eration    (b)
                  Residential
                                     Ldn              45              -              45              55                -          55
                  with Outside
                  Space and Farm
                                     Leq(24)          -               70             -               -                 70         -
                  Residences
                  Residential with   Ldn              45              -              45              -                 -          -
                  No Outside
                  Space              Leq(24)          -               70             -               -                 -          -
                  Commercial         Leq(24)          (a)             70             70(c)           (a)               70         70(c)
                  Inside
                                     Leq(24)          (a)             70             (a)             -                 -          -
                  Transportation
                  Industrial         Leq(24)(d)       (a)             70             70(c)           (a)               70         70(c)
                                     Ldn              45                             45              55                -          55
                  Hospitals
                                     Leq(24)          -               70             -               -                 70          
                                     Leq(24)          45              -              45              55                -          55
                  Educational
                                     Leq(24)(d)       -               70             -               -                 70          
                  Recreational
                                         Leq(24)            (a)            70            70(c)             (a)             70         70(c)
                  Areas
                  Farm Land
                  and General
                                         Leq(24)             -              -              -               (a)             70         70(c)
                  Unpopulated
                  Land
                Note: These sound levels are only to be used to determine impact. These are the absolute levels where abatement must be considered. Noise
                 abatement should be designed to achieve a substantial noise reduction - not the noise abatement criteria.
                Source: Federal Highway Administration, Highway Traffic Noise Analysis and Abatement Policy and Guidance, June 1995.
                The State of California requires each city and county to adopt a Noise Element as part of
                its General Plan. Noise Elements usually contain a noise/land use compatibility matrix.
                In 1976, the California Department of Health, State Office of Noise Control published a
                recommended noise/land use compatibility matrix in its “Guidelines for the Preparation and
                Content of Noise Elements of the General Plan,” (California Department of Health, Office
                of Noise Control, February 1976). Many jurisdictions have adopted this recommended
                matrix as a standard in their Noise Element. The State of California Office of Planning and
                Research has adopted guidelines based on these recommendations in order to assess the
                compatibility of various land use types with a range of noise levels. The City of Camarillo has
                adapted the State’s recommended noise/land use compatibility matrix for use in Camarillo,
                as discussed below.
12-10 NOISE ELEMENT

                                                 Noise Element
12.6.2	 CITY OF CAMARILLO NOISE GUIDELINES AND REGULATIONS
        This Noise Element utilizes the State guidelines discussed above as the basis for its Noise/
        Land Use Compatibility Matrix, shown in Figure 2. Figure 2 is the primary tool that allows
        the City to ensure integrated planning for compatibility between land uses and outdoor
        noise. As shown in Figure 2, outdoor noise levels for residential land uses and other noise-
        sensitive land uses (schools, libraries, churches, hospitals, and nursing homes) are normally
        acceptable up to 60 dBA CNEL and conditionally acceptable (contingent on noise analysis
        and effective interior noise mitigation, when necessary) in the range of 60-70 dBA CNEL.
        This is due to the fact that 45 dBA is commonly accepted as the maximum desirable interior
        noise level for habitable structures (for example, Title 24 of the California Health and Safety
        Code establishes an interior noise standard of 45 dBA for mobile homes). As described in
        Section 12.5.1, older homes in California generally provide approximately 20-25 dBA of
        exterior noise reduction with closed windows and doors, while newer homes and office
        buildings generally provide 30 dBA or more with closed windows and doors. It is therefore
        assumed that exterior noise levels at or below 60 dBA CNEL will be reduced to below the 45
        dBA interior noise level standard by conventional construction techniques, while exterior
        noise above 60 dBA CNEL will require site-specific studies and, potentially, noise mitigation
        in order to be acceptable. Exterior noise levels above 75 dBA are assumed to be clearly
        unacceptable because even 30 dBA of noise reduction would not reduce such noise levels to
        the 45 dBA interior noise standard.
12.7		  NOISE ENVIRONMENT
        This section describes the existing and projected future noise environment in Camarillo,
        based on information from the City’s 1996 Noise Element, field observations, noise
        measurements, and noise modeling conducted in February and March of 2015.
12.7.1	 NOISE SOURCES
        Observations, noise measurements, and modeling indicate that the most common and
        primary source of noise in the City is motor vehicles (e.g., automobiles, buses, trucks, and
        motorcycles) along U.S. Highway 101 (the Ventura Freeway) and major arterial roads such
        as State Highway 34 (Lewis Road). Motor vehicle noise is of particular concern because it is
        characterized by a high number of individual events, which often create a sustained noise
        level, and because of its proximity to noise-sensitive uses. Secondary, but still important,
        sources of noise in Camarillo include:
                                                                                NOISE ENVIRONMENT       12-11

                                                           City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                                                                              Noise Element
         FIGURE 2 - CITY OF CAMARILLO LAND USE/NOISE COMPATIBILITY MATRIX
                                                            COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE
           LAND USE CATEGORY                                      Ldn or CNEL, dBA
                                                        55     60         65          70         75         80       85
           RESIDENTIAL - LOW DENSITY
           SINGLE FAMILY, DUPLEX,
           MOBILE HOMES
           RESIDENTIAL - MULTI-FAMILY
           TRANSIENT LODGING - MOTELS,
           HOTELS
           SCHOOLS, LIBRARIES,
           CHURCHES, HOSPITALS,
           NURSING HOMES
           AUDITORIUMS, CONCERT
           HALLS, AMPHITHEATRES
           SPORTS ARENA, OUTDOOR
           SPECTATOR SPORTS
           PLAYGROUNDS,
           NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS
           GOLF COURSES, RIDING
           STABLES, WATER RECREATION,
           CEMETERIES
           OFFICE BUILDINGS, BUSINESS
           COMMERCIAL AND
           PROFESSIONAL
           INDUSTRIAL, MANUFACTURING,
           UTILITIES, AGRICULTURE
           NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE                                    NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE
           Specified land use is satisfactory, based              New construction or development should
           upon the assumption that any buildings                 generally be discouraged. If new construction
           involved are of normal conventional                    or development does proceed, a detailed analysis
           construction, without any special noise                of the noise reduction requirements must be
           insulation requirements.                               made and needed noise insulation features
                                                                  included in the design
           CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE                               CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE
           New construction or development should                 New construction or development should
           be undertaken only after a detailed analysis           generally not be undertaken.
           of the noise reduction requirements is made
           and needed noise insulation features included
           in the design. Conventional construction, but
           with closed windows and fresh air supply
           systems or air conditioning will normally
           suffice.
12-12 NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                                       Camarillo General Plan
                                               Noise Element
             •	 Operations on the Union Pacific (UP)/Amtrak/
                Metrolink railroad.
             •	 Aircraft overflights from Camarillo Airport and
                Naval Base Ventura County, and to a lesser extent
                overflights from other airports such as Oxnard
                Airport.
             •	 Stationary sources. The primary noise associated
                with these facilities are caused by sources including
                delivery trucks, generators, outdoor loudspeakers,
                pressure washers, and construction equipment.
12.7.2	 COMMUNITY NOISE SURVEY
        To measure current noise levels at key locations in
        Camarillo, eight short-term noise measurements, ranging
        in length from 13 to 24 minutes, were taken on Thursday,
        February 26, 2015, and Wednesday March 4, 2015, as
        shown in Figure 3. Nine long-term (greater than 24-hour)
        noise measurements were taken on February 26-27,
        2015, and March 4-5, 2015, also shown in Figure 3. All
        measurements were taken using an ANSI Type II integrating
        sound level meter. Figure 3 also shows the major noise
        sources discussed above and the noise-sensitive receptors
        discussed below.
        The locations of these noise measurements were selected
        based on several factors, including the locations of the
        noise measurements taken for the 1996 Noise Element (so
        as to quantitatively compare the change in noise that has
        occurred over time), known significant noise sources in
        the community, and input received at a January 28, 2015
        Planning Commission/City Council Joint Study Session and a
        February 9, 2015 Citizen Advisory Committee on Land Use Meeting.
12.7.3	 NOISE SENSITIVE RECEPTORS
        Noise exposure goals for various types of land uses reflect the varying noise sensitivities
        associated with each use. Noise-sensitive land uses generally include residences, schools,
        hospitals, long term medical or mental care facilities, and libraries. The locations of such
        noise-sensitive receptors in Camarillo are shown in Figure 3, which also shows the noise
        monitoring results and major noise sources such as airport flight paths, the railroad, and
        industrial and commercial areas. As shown in Figure 3, much of the City is made up of
                                                                                NOISE ENVIRONMENT    12-13

                    This Page Left Blank Intentionally
12-14 NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                       Noise Element
                                          FIGURE 3- NOISE SOURCES, NOISE-SENSITIVE RECEPTORS, AND NOISE MEASUREMENT LOCATIONS
                                                                                                                              / Not to Scale
Source: Veneklasen Associates, March 2015
                                                                                                                                 Camarillo General Plan
                                                Noise Element
        residential neighborhoods. The City also contains one hospital (St. John’s Pleasant Valley
        Hospital), a public library, seven nursing homes, and 14 public and private schools.
12.7.4	 IDENTIFICATION OF NOISE PROBLEM AREAS
        The results of the Community Noise Survey (see Figure 3) and noise contour modeling
        (see discussion and Figure 4 below) indicate that noise-sensitive receptors in Camarillo
        are generally not in areas subject to excessive noise levels, in this case defined as noise in
        excess of 75 dBA CNEL and thus within the “Clearly Unacceptable” range shown in Figure 2.
        One exception may be the ACE Charter High School, located just east of the intersection of
        Pleasant Valley Road and Airport Way in the southwestern part of the City. In this location
        a long-term noise reading of 77 dBA CNEL was taken during the Community Noise Survey
        between Pleasant Valley Road and school buildings.
12.7.5	 NOISE MODELING
        Noise modeling was carried out for this Noise Element to model both current and future
        noise levels for the predominant sources of noise in Camarillo: transportation-related noise
        along area roadways, the Union Pacific/Amtrak/Metrolink railway, and the Camarillo Airport.
        The purpose of modeling these noise levels is to determine which areas may be subject to
        long-term noise levels in excess of City standards.
         Roadway noise levels were modeled using the Bruel & Kjaer Predictor Version 10 program
        and average daily trips (ADT) data obtained from the City. Roadway noise level modeling
        does not account for any intervening barriers or topography that may shield individual
        receptors from the noise source. Therefore, the levels that are presented represent a
        conservative yet reasonable worst-case estimate of noise levels. ADT data represents the
        total number of vehicle trips that occur on a given roadway throughout the entire day. These
        vehicle trips are distributed throughout the day, with peak periods occurring at various
        times. No future traffic counts were available. As such, future conditions were estimated
        using a 1% increase per year. Sound levels predicted at particular sites from traffic counts
        were validated by the field measurements discussed in Section 12.7.2.
        Because railway noise is expected to remain essentially unchanged through 2035, rail noise
        contours were taken from the City’s existing Noise Element. Noise contours for Camarillo
        Airport were taken from the Camarillo Airport Master Plan (Coffman Associates, July
        2011). This Master Plan has noise contours for both “Existing” and “Ultimate” (or buildout)
        scenarios, which are used for the Existing (2015) and Future (2035) scenarios in this Noise
        Element. Noise contours for Naval Base Ventura County are expected to remain essentially
        unchanged through 2035, and were taken from the Ventura County Airport Comprehensive
        Land Use Plan. For further detail regarding the noise modeling procedures and methodology
        used to model roadway noise levels, please refer to the Technical Background Report to this
        Noise Element (Appendix A).
                                                                                        INTRODUCTION   12-17

                                                    City of Camarillo General Plan
      12.7.6	     NOISE CONTOURS
                  The results of the noise modeling are expressed as “noise contours”. Noise contours are lines
                  of equal noise level, shown on a map, extending out from a noise source (or sources). Figure
                  4 shows the existing (2015) traffic noise contours for the City and Figure 5 shows the future
                  (2035) traffic noise contours. The results shown in these figures represent an estimate of
                  CNEL noise levels as modeled from the centerline of the given roadway segment, railway, or
                  flight path.
      12.7.7	     IMPACT AREAS
                  Traffic noise contours in 2035 are expected to be similar to existing noise contours. Changes
                  do, however, occur in certain areas. Traffic is projected to increase on the 101 Freeway and
                  thus noise levels will increase and the noise contours expand outward from the freeway
                  along its entire length through the City, although more so in some cases than others. For
                  example, around the area of the new Springville Road/101 Freeway interchange, increased
                  traffic on the 101 Freeway, the planned extension of Ponderosa Drive, and development of
                  the Springville Specific Plan area lead to increased traffic along local roadways and extension
                  of the 65 dBA noise contour north to approximately Ponderosa Drive. In other areas, the
                  traffic noise contours generally experience an incremental expansion from the centerline of
                  major roadways due to increased traffic noise levels.
                  Comparing these updated noise levels to the City’s exterior noise standards shown in Figure
                  3, residences in close proximity to the 101 Freeway and other major arterial roadways
                  may be exposed to noise levels that exceed the City’s 60 dBA Ldn (Day/Night) standard for
                  residential properties. Actual noise levels at individual properties near these roadways
                  may be reduced or otherwise affected by sound walls, berms, or other factors such as
                  topography.
      12.8		      NOISE MITIGATION
                  The sources of noise in Camarillo can be divided into two basic categories, transportation
                  sources (primarily traffic) and non-transportation sources. A local government has little
                  direct control of transportation noise at the source. State and Federal agencies have
                  the responsibility to control noise from the source through vehicle noise emission level
                  standards. The most effective method the City has to mitigate transportation noise is
                  through reducing the impact of noise on the community by employing various measures
                  such as land use planning, site design review, and physical interventions such as noise
                  barriers and setbacks.
12-18   NOISE ELEMENT

                                                                                           Noise Element
                                           FIGURE 4 - NOISE CONTOURS - EXISTING (2015)
Source: Veneklasen Associates, August 2015
                                                                                       Camarillo General Plan
                                                                                         Noise Element
                                           FIGURE 5 - NOISE CONTOURS - FUTURE (2035)
Source: Veneklasen Associates, August 2015
                                                                                     Camarillo General Plan
                                                Noise Element
12.8.1	 LAND USE PLANNING
        Noise mitigation through land use planning
        can be achieved for future development by
        planning the location of noise-sensitive land
        uses in areas outside areas of unacceptable
        noise levels (the “noise impact zone”). The
        existing and future noise contours shown in
        figures 4 and 5 can be used as tools to help
        achieve this end. For individual projects,
        site design review can help ensure that
        development is outside the noise impact zone
        or identify where mitigation may be necessary.
12.8.2	 NOISE BARRIERS
        Noise mitigation through the design and construction of a noise barrier, such as a wall or
        berm, is a common way of alleviating traffic noise impacts, especially in areas where existing
        development has become or may in the future become exposed to increased noise levels
        exceeding the City’s standards. The effect of a noise barrier is dependent on the geometry
        between the noise source and the receiver (see Figure 6). Noise barriers are only effective
        when the noise barrier interrupts the “line of sight” between the source and receiver. The
        noise attenuation provided by noise barriers decreases with distance from the barrier.
12.8.3	 SETBACKS
        Another common approach to mitigating noise impacts is through the use of setbacks.
        This approach may be more desirable in locations with relatively low volume roadways and
        where it is desirable to avoid a “walled in” look. The setback approach simply requires that
        the homes or other noise sensitive receptors be set back from the roadway at a distance
        sufficient to locate them outside the noise impact zone. While providing landscaping within
        this setback area actually provides little noise reduction, landscaping can provide a visual
        shield between the sensitive receptor and the road and provide aesthetic benefits.
12.9		  GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
        The overarching purpose of this Noise Element is to limit exposure of the people of
        Camarillo to excessive noise. In order to achieve this overarching purpose, the Noise
        Element includes the following goals, objectives, policies, and implementation measures.
        The meaning of these terms is defined below.
                                           G O A L S , P O L I C I E S , A N D I M P L E M E N TAT I O N M E A S U R E S 12-23

                                                               City of Camarillo General Plan
                                                                                                          Noise Element
                             FIGURE 6 - EXAMPLES OF NOISE BARRIER EFFECT
                                                           Center Line
                                                                                       Structure
                                     Barrier or Wall                                 Intervening
                                                                                      Structure
                                                             Center Line
                                                                                                 Depressed
                                                                                                 Alignment
                                  Earth Berm
       Source: City of Solvang Noise Element for the General Plan, January 28, 1987.
12-24 NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                                      Camarillo General Plan
                                      Noise Element
   •	 Goal: A general, overarching statement of a desired community outcome.
   •	 Objective: A statement providing more specific and measurable strategies to
      achieve a goal.
   •	 Policy: A statement designed to guide specific actions on the part of the City to
      achieve goals and objectives.
   •	 Implementation Measures: Specific actions that the City should take to achieve
      the goals, objectives, and policies of the Noise Element.
NOISE AND LAND USE PLANNING INTEGRATION
GOAL 1	   CAMARILLO’S LAND USE PATTERN IS COMPATIBLE WITH CURRENT AND FUTURE
          NOISE LEVELS.
          Objective 1.1
          The City should properly consider noise issues as part of the land use planning
          process in order to minimize the effects of noise in the community.
          Policy 1.1.1
          Ensure acceptable noise levels near noise-sensitive uses such as schools, houses
          of worship, hospitals, and convalescent homes in accordance with the City’s Land
          Use/Noise Compatibility Matrix (Figure 2 of this Noise Element).
          Policy 1.1.2
          Where a potential noise conflict may occur, developers should submit noise
          assessment reports during the project planning process to identify potential noise
          impacts to their own developments and on nearby residential uses and other
          noise-sensitive land uses. New developments should incorporate appropriate
          noise mitigation measures in their project designs in order to meet the standards
          contained in this Element and the Camarillo Municipal Code.
          Policy 1.1.3
          State noise insulation standards should be applied for exterior‑to‑interior and for
          party walls and floor/ceiling noise control to new single‑family and multi‑family
          structures.
          Policy 1.1.4
          Ensure the compatibility of land uses when making land use planning decisions by
          requiring noise-reducing design features for projects that are adjacent to major
          roadways, the railroad, and the airport.
                                 G O A L S , P O L I C I E S , A N D I M P L E M E N TAT I O N M E A S U R E S 12-25

                                              City of Camarillo General Plan
                        Policy 1.1.5
                        The City should encourage the use of soundwalls, berms and/or other noise
                        attenuation measures in the design of residential uses and other noise-sensitive
                        land uses that are adjacent to and impacted by major roads, rail lines, commercial
                        and industrial areas.
                        Policy 1.1.6
                        The City should continue to evaluate truck routes in the City to ensure compatibility
                        with residential uses and other noise-sensitive land uses where possible.
                TRANSPORTATION NOISE CONTROL
                GOAL 2	 NOISE IMPACTS AFFECTING NOISE-SENSITIVE LAND USES FROM
                        TRANSPORTATION SOURCES ARE MINIMIZED.
                        Objective 2.1
                        The analysis of transportation-related noise impacts upon the community should
                        consider current and future conditions.
                        Policy 2.1.1
                        Practical measures to reduce noise impacts from transportation system noise
                        sources should be utilized to the extent feasible.
                        Policy 2.1.2
                        The City should encourage coordination with Caltrans for the design of sound
                        walls located within the Caltrans right-of-way to ensure walls are attractive and
                        compatible with adjacent land uses.
                        Policy 2.1.3
                        Contractors should incorporate appropriate noise mitigation measures, such
                        as limiting the hours of construction, into new and upgraded roadway projects
                        adjacent to nearby noise-sensitive land uses.
                        Policy 2.1.4
                        The City should strive to reduce transportation system noise impacts through the
                        design and coordination of transportation infrastructure and circulation.
                        Policy 2.1.5
                        Developers of new residential projects located in the vicinity of Camarillo Airport
                        should inform potential residential property owners of airport generated and
                        overflight noise.
12-26 NOISE ELEMENT
                                     Noise Element
        Policy 2.1.6
        Coordinate with State and regional agencies and Camarillo Airport to implement
        noise reduction measures and to monitor and reduce noise associated with
        aircraft.
        Policy 2.1.7
        The City should maintain close liaison with US Navy authorities (and any successors)
        responsible for operations at NBVC Point Mugu. While the City has no control over
        NBVC Point Mugu or its operations, concerns regarding noise impacts due to flight
        operations should be communicated to the proper authorities.
        Policy 2.1.8
        Promote effective noise-reducing design features and proper maintenance of rails
        and rail cars to minimize the effect of railroad operations.
        Policy 2.1.9
        The City should encourage coordination with authorities responsible for railroad
        operations and communicate concerns regarding noise impacts to them.
COMMUNITY NOISE CONTROL
GOAL 3	 CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, AND NUISANCE NOISE IN RESIDENTIAL AND
        NOISE-SENSITIVE LAND USES IS REDUCED.
        Objective 3.1
        Ensure that noise-generating uses will not expose adjacent residential uses
        and other noise-sensitive land uses to noise levels that exceed the thresholds
        contained in the Noise Element and the City’s adopted Noise Ordinance.
        Policy 3.1.1
        The City should adopt enforceable provisions within its noise ordinance for the
        reduction of non‑transportation system noise impacts within the City of Camarillo.
        Policy 3.1.2
        The City should review and adopt practical provisions within its noise ordinance to
        limit the hours of use for powered yard and gardening equipment, machinery and
        other noise disturbances.
        Policy 3.1.3
        The City should limit the allowable hours of construction activities and maintenance
        operations.
                                G O A L S , P O L I C I E S , A N D I M P L E M E N TAT I O N M E A S U R E S 12-27

                                               City of Camarillo General Plan
                         Policy 3.1.4
                         The City should seek to limit the impact of nuisance noise sources upon residential
                         and other noise sensitive uses.
                         Policy 3.1.5
                         The City should limit the hours for deliveries to and from commercial and industrial
                         uses that are adjacent to residential uses to minimize noise impacts.
                         Policy 3.1.6
                         Design and construction features should be incorporated into residential and
                         mixed-use projects to shield residents from excessive noise.
                         Policy 3.1.7
                         The placement of noise-generating sources such as gathering places, loading
                         bays, parking lots, and trash enclosures should be considered in mixed-use
                         developments to ensure compatibility with residential uses.
                CITY OPERATIONS
                GOAL 4	  THE QUALITY OF LIFE IN THE COMMUNITY IS IMPROVED THROUGH EFFORTS
                         ON THE PART OF THE CITY TO REDUCE NOISE IMPACTS.
                         Objective 4.1
                         The City should participate in efforts to reduce noise impacts to both City
                         employees and the community.
                         Policy 4.1.2
                         The City should require its departments and agencies to observe State and Federal
                         Occupational Safety Health noise standards.
                         Policy 4.1.3
                         The City should establish and maintain coordination among the appropriate
                         agencies involved in noise abatement.
                         Policy 4.1.4
                         The City should avoid scheduling City maintenance and construction projects
                         during evening, nighttime, and early morning hours to the extent feasible and
                         practical.
12-28 NOISE ELEMENT
                                       Noise Element
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
In order to achieve the goals and policies of the Noise Element, an effective implementation
program is necessary. The underlying purpose of the implementation program is to provide
measures which will reduce the community’s exposure to excessive noise and to minimize
the future impacts of noise in the City. The City should consider implementing the following
measures to control the impacts of noise in the City of Camarillo.
            Measure 1. The City should regularly review and, when necessary, update the
            Noise Ordinance, and enforce the provisions of its Noise Ordinance that set
            appropriate noise limits for non‑transportation system related noise sources
            within various land use classifications.
            Measure 2. The City should require developers of commercial and industrial
            projects with noise-producing activities that seek to locate near residential or
            noise sensitive land uses to submit to the City noise study reports prepared by
            experienced persons with demonstrated expertise in noise control engineering.
            The noise study report shall include appropriate noise-mitigating measures, as
            necessary, to be incorporated into the proposed development that would reduce
            noise levels at noise-sensitive receptors to acceptable levels as defined in the
            City’s Noise Element and Municipal Code.
            Measure 3. The City should require developers of new noise-sensitive land uses in
            areas that would be exposed to noise exceeding the “normally acceptable” level
            for the proposed use(s) to submit to the City noise study reports prepared by
            experienced persons with demonstrated expertise in noise control engineering.
            The noise study report shall include appropriate noise-mitigating measures, as
            necessary, to be incorporated into the proposed development that would reduce
            noise levels at noise-sensitive receptors to acceptable levels as defined in the
            City’s Noise Element and Municipal Code.
            Measure 4. The City should investigate non-transportation source noise complaints
            received from the public, and notify and/or cite violators, consistent with its
            authority. Complaints regarding non-transportation noise sources received by the
            City during normal work hours should be referred to the City’s Department of
            Community Development, and to the Police Department after normal work hours.
                                  G O A L S , P O L I C I E S , A N D I M P L E M E N TAT I O N M E A S U R E S 12-29

                                               City of Camarillo General Plan
      		         REFERENCES
                 California Department of Health, Office of Noise Control, California. Office of
                 Planning and Research. Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of Noise
                 Elements of the General Plan. February 1976.
                 Federal Transit Administration, Office of Planning and Environment. May 2006.
                 Transit Noise and Vibration Impact Assessment. Available online at: http://www.fta.
                 dot.gov/documents/FTA_Noise_and_Vibration_Manual.pdf
                 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Office of Noise Abatement and Control.
                 Information on Levels of Environmental Noise Requisite to Protect Public Health and
                 Welfare With an Adequate Margin of Safety. March 1974.
                 Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). Highway Traffic Noise Analysis and
                 Abatement Policy and Guidance. June 1995.
12-30  NOISE ELEMENT
Noise Element
              REFERENCES 12-31
City of Camarillo General Plan                                             OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
                                  9.0 OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
          INTRODUCTION                                      stream channels and other areas
                                                            required for the accomplishment of
          Authority                                         the conservation plan.
          The city is charged with preparing and       4. Prevention, control and correction of
          adopting a comprehensive, long-term               the erosion of soils, beaches, and
          General       Plan    for   the   physical        shores.
          development of the city. The plan is to      5. Protection of watersheds.
          include an Open Space and Conservation
                                                       6. The location, quantity and quality of
          Element as prescribed in the state law.
                                                            the rock, sand and gravel resources.
          Section 65302(d)       of the   Government
                                                       7. Flood control.”
          Code states:
                                                     The Open Space Element as defined in
          “(d) A conservation element for the
                                                     Section 65560 of the Government Code
          conservation,        development,      and
                                                     states:
          utilization of natural resources including
          water and its hydraulic force, forests,      “65560. (a) ‘Local open space plan’ is
          soils, rivers and other waters, harbors,     the open space element of a county or
          fisheries, wildlife, minerals, and other     city general plan adopted by the board
          natural resources. The conservation          or council, either as the local open
          element shall consider the effect of         space plan or as the interim local open
          development within the jurisdiction, as      space plan adopted pursuant to
          described in the land use element, on        Section 65563.”
          natural resources located on public lands, The legislature further stated its policy
          including military installations. That     and intent as follows:
          portion of the conservation element,
                                                       “65561. The legislature            finds  and
          including waters shall be developed in
                                                       declares as follows:
          coordination with any countywide water
          agency and with all district and city          (a) That the preservation of open
          agencies that have developed, served,               space land, as defined in this
          controlled or conserved water for any               article, is necessary not only of the
          purpose for the county or city for which            maintenance of the economy of
          the plan is prepared. Coordination shall            the state, but also for the
          include the discussion and evaluation of            assurance        of  the     continued
          any      water    supply    and    demand           availability     of   land     for the
          information described in Section 65352.5,           production of food and fiber, for
          if that information has been submitted by           the enjoyment of scenic beauty,
          the water agency to the city or county.             for recreation, and for the use of
          The conservation element may also cover             natural resources.
          the following:                                  (b) That discouraging premature and
             1. The reclamation of land and waters.           unnecessary conversion of open
                                                              space land to urban uses is a
             2. Prevention and control of the
                                                              matter of public interest and will
                 pollution of streams and other
                                                              be of benefit to urban dwellers
                 waters.
                                                              because       it    will   discourage
             3. Regulation of the use of land in
        July 12, 2006                                                                             9.1

City of Camarillo General Plan
            noncontiguous development patterns          place, feature, or object described in
            which unnecessarily increase the            Sections 5097.9 and 5097.993 of the
            costs of community services to              Public Resources Code, the city or county
            community residents.                        in which the place, feature, or object is
        (c) That the anticipated increase in the        located shall conduct consultations with
            population of the state demands that        the California Native American tribe, if
            cities, counties, and the state at the      any, that has given notice pursuant to
            earliest possible date make definite        Section 65092 for the purpose of
            plans for the preservation of               determining the level of confidentiality
            valuable open space land and take           required to protect the specific identity,
            positive action to carry out such           location, character, or use of the place,
            plans by the adoption and strict            feature, or object and for the purpose of
            administration of laws, ordinances,         developing treatment with appropriate
            rules and regulations as authorized         dignity of the place, feature, or object in
            by this chapter or by other                 any corresponding management plan.”
            appropriate methods.
                                                      Purpose
        (d) That in order to assure that the
            interests of all its people are met in    The preservation of open space land is
            the orderly growth development of         necessary for the maintenance of the
            the state and the preservation and        economy and for the assurance of the
            conservation of its resources, it is      continued availability of land for the
            necessary to provide for the              production of food and fiber, for the
            development by the state, regional        enjoyment of scenic beauty, for recreation,
            agencies,     counties    and     cities, and for the use of natural resources.
            including charter cities, of statewide    Discouraging premature and unnecessary
            coordinated        plans    for      the  conversion of open space land to urban
            conservation and preservation of          uses     benefits     urban     dwellers      by
            open space lands.                         discouraging noncontiguous development
        (e) That for these reasons this article is    patterns, which unnecessarily increase the
            necessary for the promotion of the        costs of community services to community
            general    welfare     and    for     the residents.
            protection of the public interest in      The purpose of the Open Space Element is
            open space land.                          to define those policies and to designate
      65562. It is the intent of the Legislature      those parcels or areas of land to be
      in enacting this article:                       conserved or preserved as open space.
        (f) To assure that cities and counties        Background
            recognize that open space land is a
                                                      The Camarillo area is blessed with a relative
            limited and valuable resource which
                                                      abundance of open space and is populated
            must     be     conserved    wherever
                                                      with persons who have a high degree of
            possible.
                                                      appreciation for it. The local technology and
        (g) To assure that every city and county      culture have been employed to enhance
            will prepare and carry out open           open space (water for irrigation, the means
            space plans which, along with state       to get easily to the park or countryside and
            and regional open space plans, will       the time to enjoy it) but these activities
            accomplish the objectives of a            have also contained the potential for
            comprehensive          open      space    environmental destruction: Waterlogging
            program.”                                 and chloride saturation from unwise
     “65562.5 On and after March 1, 2005, if          irrigation,    seawater     intrusion      from
     land designated, or proposed to be               overpumping, crop and foliage destruction
     designated as open space, contains a             from smog and oxidant build-up in the air,
 9.2                                                                                      July 12, 2006

                                                                      OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
  eutrophication     of   water    courses   by  uses by confining development within urban
  phosphate        and    nitrate    nutrients,  limits. (Projects outside the urban limits
  accelerated erosion and runoff loss by         require a public vote.) A SOAR Ordinance
  unwise grading and paving, and the             has been adopted by the County of Ventura
  consequent urban sprawl.                       and other neighboring cities as well, to help
  At present, the city has ample, surrounding    prevent the loss of watershed, subdivision
  rural and scenic land. There is a substantial  of prime agricultural land and exploitation
  watershed lying partly outside the city’s      of resources of lands in the county.
  Sphere of Influence with a considerable, but   There presently is a substantial greenbelt of
  not uncontrollable, flood plain and flood      contracted agricultural preserves and open
  problem and some water table and               space in the Las Posas and Santa Rosa
  drainage problems in the southern end.         Valleys along the city’s northern and
  There is uniquely productive agricultural      eastern boundaries, and a compatible-
  land which is disappearing or becoming         adopted Open Space Plan (Thousand Oaks)
  subject to urbanization. There are over        protecting the Conejo Valley/Hidden Valley/
  3,000 acres of mountains that should           Lake Sherwood expanse to the east along
  remain in near-wilderness state for the        with the Point Mugu State Recreational
  foreseeable future. The undeveloped land       Area, the Santa Monica Mountains, and the
  within the present city limits could           Pacific Ocean protecting the south.
  accommodate a notable increase in              The greatest threat of development is from
  population, even at a relatively low density   the west, where the land is level and
  residential zoning. There still remains some   eminently     developable,    although    the
  minimal undeveloped municipal park land,       Ventura County Open Space Plan and the
  which is well located with regard to school    increased number of agricultural preserves
  sites and residential population.              have lessened this threat. The city, along
  Opportunities to develop scenic highways,      with the City of Oxnard, the County of
  bicycle paths, and hiking and riding trails    Ventura, and LAFCO have agreed to protect
  exist. There are a variety of natural,         much of these lands through a “Greenbelt
  historical and cultural features, and          Agreement.”
  landmarks which have been and will
  continue to be enhanced and preserved.         DEFINITION
  The city and its environs have a variety of    The following definitions are taken from the
  wildlife habitat, but it is fast disappearing  state laws or adopted for use by the city
  with the intensification of development. The   and are used as a common base for terms
  substantial reserves and refuges in the        used in the Conservation and Open Space
  mountains        and    marshes      at   the  Element.
  southeastern boundary of the city are only     Section 65560. Open Space Land:
  safeguards. The area has an air basin of         “(b) ‘Open space land’ is any parcel or
  limited capacity and mixing ability and high     area of land or water which is essentially
  solar input and, therewith, the potential for    unimproved and devoted to an open
  air pollution, degradation of visibility, and    space use as defined in this section, and
  damage by smog. In an effort to help             which is designated on a local, regional or
  control development within its Sphere of         state open space plan as any of the
  Influence, Camarillo amended the city’s          following:
  general plan in 1998, by adding the SOAR
                                                   1. Open space for the preservation of
  (Save       Open   space    and   Agricultural
                                                       natural resources including, but not
  Resources)      Ordinance.    The   ordinance
                                                       limited to, areas required for the
  created the Camarillo Urban Restriction
                                                       preservation of plant and animal life,
  Boundary (CURB) line to encourage efficient
                                                       including habitat for fish and wildlife
  growth patterns and protect agriculture,
                                                       species; areas required for ecologic
  natural resources, and other open space
                                                       and other scientific study purposes;
July 12, 2006                                                                               9.3

City of Camarillo General Plan
          rivers, streams, bays and estuaries,       unimproved       and    devoted     to     the
          and coastal beaches, lake shores,          preservation of natural resources, used
          banks of rivers and streams, and           for the managed production of resources,
          watershed lands.                           outdoor recreation or for public health
     2. Open space used for the managed              and safety and is also designated as open
         production of resources, including, but     space on the general plan.”
         not limited to, forest land, range land,  It may vary in size from a fractional acre
         agricultural lands and area of economic   park to a several-thousand-acres tree- or
         importance of the production of food or   brush-covered watershed. It may serve as
         fiber; areas required for recharge of     a primarily-aesthetic use, such as freeway
         ground water basins; bays, estuaries,     landscaping, providing contact with nature,
         marshes, rivers and streams which are     or providing for mental and emotional
         important for the management of           development and well being. Such space
         commercial      fisheries;  and     areas would include ponds and special community
         containing major mineral deposits,        features serving some civic function, a
         including those in short supply.          buffer strip between residential and
     3. Open space for outdoor recreation,         industrial zones. These spaces can be
         including but not limited to, areas of    located throughout the city serving as a
         outstanding scenic, historic and cultural scenic community identification, or some
         value; areas particularly suited for park resource management function, such as
         and recreation purposes, including        reservoirs, fire beaks, and aquifer recharge
         access to lake shores, beaches and        beds.
         rivers and streams; and areas which       Conservation is the planned management,
         serve     as   links    between    major  preparation, and wise utilization of natural
         recreation and open space reservation,    resources. The objective of conservation is
         including utility easements, banks of     to prevent the wasteful exploitation,
         rivers and streams, trails and scenic     destruction or neglect of these resources.
         highway corridors.                        The local conservation planning process and
     4. Open space for public health and           program        should    acknowledge         the
         safety, including, but not limited to,    environmental processes that apply to the
         areas      which      require    special  city.
         management or regulation because of       VALUE OF OPEN SPACE
         hazardous or special conditions such as
         earthquake fault zones, unstable soil     It is relatively easy to determine the cost of
         areas, flood plains, watershed, areas     acquiring and maintaining open space--
         presenting high fire risks, areas         particularly, permanent open space within
         required for the protection of water      the city such as its parks, parkways,
         quality and water reservoirs and areas    reservoirs, playgrounds, and golf courses. A
         required for the protection and           reasonable estimate can also be made of
         enhancement of air quality.               the potential revenue lost by not permitting
                                                   commercial/industrial development of the
     5. Open space in support of the mission of
                                                   site. The worth is less easy to evaluate,
         military installations that comprises
                                                   because many of the benefits are intangible
         areas adjacent to military installations,
                                                   or have historically been considered free.
         military training routes, and underlying
         restricted airspace that can provide      The quality of light and air, and the amount
         additional buffer zones to military       of background noise between Los Angeles
         activities and complement the resource    and Camarillo are probably not measurably
         values of the military lands.”            different to instruments, but to either
                                                   visitor or resident, the difference in sensed
   A condensed definition is as follows:
                                                   quality of the atmosphere—the impression
      “Open space land is any parcel or area of    or ambience—is sharply evident. But how
      land or water which is essentially
 9.4                                                                                   July 12, 2006

                                                                       OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
  do you set a price on it?                      The total value of agriculture products in
  The value of a good address is known to        Ventura County more than doubled from
  both      family   and    business;   strongly 1984 to 2004, surpassing $1,389,000,000
  contributing to this reputation is the         in 2004, which was an increase of nearly
  relative amount of open space. Perhaps the     $272,000,000 over the previous year.
  best comparison is that it is like innocence   According to USDA 2002 Census of
  or reputation—having no quoted market          Agriculture, Ventura County ranked fifth out
  price, but universally valued.                 of over 3,000 U.S. counties for total crop
                                                 value, including nursery and greenhouse
  Another measure of the value is estimated
                                                 crops. Ventura was the number one county
  increase in cost per family for health care,
                                                 in the nation for lemons; number two for
  cleaning and deterioration of materials, and
                                                 avocados; and number four for fruits, tree
  foliage if the open space were lost to
                                                 nuts, and berries. The largest value crop in
  residential/commercial/industrial use with
                                                 the county in 2004 was strawberries, with a
  consequent degradation of air quality. The
                                                 gross value of $363,646,000.
  cost of air pollution damage to agriculture
  and industry is reflected in increased         In 2002, there were a total of 332,371
  product cost and the cost of abatement         acres of farmland in Ventura County, a
  legislation and enforcement in higher taxes.   decrease of 3.5 percent over the previous
  Maintenance of existing air quality by         ten years. Thirty-one percent (31 percent)
  preserving existing open space is therefore    of this acreage was harvested cropland (a
  worth some amount per year.                    drop of approximately 4,000 acres in ten
                                                 years), and 19 percent of the total acreage
  The capture and use of storm runoff in
                                                 was orchard (an increase of approximately
  reservoirs and groundwater recharge areas
                                                 5,000 acres during the same time period).
  also provide a substantial savings, both
                                                 The remainder was range land and former
  through reduction of crop and property
                                                 orchard and cropland not in production, but
  damage, and differential in the cost of
                                                 not yet built upon.
  imported water.
                                                 The land being lost to urban uses is largely
  The worth of open space in attracting high-
                                                 prime, irrigated row crop land on the urban
  value       industry   and     job-producing
                                                 fringes and adjoining the freeway and
  universities, hospitals, and government
                                                 major arterials. The number of farmworkers
  centers is certainly a factor in a relocation
                                                 in Ventura County, is estimated to be
  decision but a precise value is difficult to
                                                 35,000, with up to 27,000 additional
  assign. Open space has value and is
                                                 agricultural      support jobs such as
  valuable, but its cost is hard to determine.
                                                 marketing, processing, and shipping. It is
  AGRICULTURE IN CALIFORNIA                      estimated that agriculture generates about
  AND VENTURA COUNTY                             4.6 percent of the county’s economic
                                                 activity. While Ventura County’s agricultural
  California has led the nation as the number    land represents only about 1.2 percent of
  one farm revenue-producing state every         the state’s total, it is uniquely productive,
  year since 1948. The state’s gross farming     well located in relation to the associated
  receipts have risen from $16.6 billion in      market and surrounding land uses, and
  1988, to $24.8 billion in 2000, although the   worthy of being preserved.
  land in California devoted to farming
                                                 Agriculture is an important part of
  decreased from 33 million acres in 1988, to
                                                 Camarillo’s past and present heritage and
  28 million acres in 2004. California
                                                 provides      a   deep     and    continuing
  farmlands constitute 3 percent of the U.S.
                                                 understanding and concern for the land that
  total and produces 12 percent of all U.S.
                                                 underlies    all   development     and    the
  farm income. In the year 2000, farming
                                                 associated water and air resources that
  provided 1.1 million jobs within the state;
                                                 make it useful and valuable. Farm land
  thus, employing 7.4 percent of all
                                                 possesses aesthetic value and provides
  Californians.
July 12, 2006                                                                               9.5

City of Camarillo General Plan
     visual relief from the monotony of urban              incentive. The qualifying requirements for
     development. Because it remains on tax                LCA land changed in 1969, when the
     rolls, in private ownership, and under                definition of agricultural preserve, where
     professional        private      management,          land subject to the contract had to be
     producing substantial employment and self-            located, was broadened to emphasize the
     supporting       economic       return,      while    preservation of open space. This shift in
     contributing to the variety and quality of            emphasis was made in order to provide
     life, it is one of the most inexpensive forms         communities with a tool capable of
     of open space.                                        preserving open space, which could reach
     Williamson        Act    Lands.     The      Land     many more landowners, and not merely
     Conservation Act (LCA), also known as the             those owning prime agricultural lands.
     Williamson Act, was established in 1965, to           Effect of Williamson Act. As of 1998, only
     provide for assessment of prime agricultural          76 acres of LCA land fell within the City of
     land in a manner that would encourage                 Camarillo boundaries; although countywide
     private owners of open space land to                  in 1998, there were 123,781 areas of
     maintain it for open space uses. By the year          contracted     preserves,   which    includes
     2000, nearly 16 million of the California’s           acreage within Camarillo’s area of interest.
     30 million acres of farm and ranch land               The protected LCA land inside of Camarillo’s
     were under the protection of the Williamson           city    limits   is  predominantly      prime
     Act. Recent enhancements to the Act make              agriculture land, but only 36 percent of
     it even more effective. New farmland                  Ventura County’s contracted preserves falls
     security provisions offer 20-year contracts           into this category. The remaining acreage is
     to shield the land from urban pressure by             non-prime agricultural land.
     providing an additional property tax
                                Harvested Acres in Ventura County
    YEAR           FRUIT & NUTS            VEGETABLES                 FIELD CROPS              TOTAL
    1984              59,575                    59,685                   10,507               129,767
    2004              60,190                    34,474                  101,690*              196,354
    * Includes irrigated and non-irrigated alfalfa and pasture.
    DISTRIBUTION AND RELATIVE                               Revolon/Beardsley Wash. They provide
    PERMANENCE OF OPEN SPACE                                aquifer recharge and storm runoff and
                                                            should remain permanently open to prevent
    Earlier studies by the city and county                  degradation of water quality and to
    dealing with Land Use Elements, Open                    minimize flood damage. Other valuable
    Space Elements, and the Open Space and                  open space is in the form of prime
    Conservation Element for the Bell Ranch                 agricultural land within the county. This
    and Santa Rosa Valley have identified all of            farm land is capable of becoming urbanized,
    the city’s current open space areas and                 but most of it should remain open because
    their usability.                                        of its regional economic importance, its
    The most permanent open spaces are the                  essentiality to air and water quality of
    county’s assets in the mountains along the              Pleasant Valley and the Ventura Basin, and
    southeastern border, where steep slopes                 because it is an irreplaceable and non-
    and thin soil preclude any development                  duplicable natural resource for food
    other than wilderness recreation. They                  production for California and for the United
    should remain permanently open for                      States. But when the price per acre can
    watershed. The next most permanent open                 increase by more than ten times with a
    spaces are the natural watercourses are:                change of zoning, or the tax rate remains as
    Calleguas Creek, Conejo Creek, and                      though it were already developed when it is
   9.6                                                                                         July 12, 2006

                                                                        OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
  losing money by remaining in agricultural       resources of statewide significance in the
  use (because of drought, insect infestation,    Camarillo areas as illustrated on the
  cost of water, frost, fire, market collapse,    Aggregate Resources Map. There are areas
  or other periodic hazard), the pressure to      containing     mineral     deposits   whose
  allow urbanization becomes intense.             significance cannot be evaluated from
  The next most permanent open spaces are         available data. There are potential local
  the municipal and regional parks. These         sources of aggregate which need to be
  provide primarily recreational and aesthetic    controlled    due     to   nearby    existing
  value, but also serve to maintain air and       development, particularly, in the southeast
  water quality and area property value. The      portion of the city.
  park      acreage   should     increase      to One valuable mineral resource not often
  compensate for the loss of rural open space     recognized as such is sand and gravel. (It is
  and to accommodate the rising urban             second only to petroleum and natural gas in
  population but, typically, it does not keep     annual production and value in California.)
  pace because of the rising cost of land and     Each average-sized, single-family detached
  park maintenance.                               residence requires several truckloads of
  The least permanent open space contains         concrete. The streets and supporting
  row crops within the city’s CURB area, and      school,     commercial,      and   industrial
  is designated on the General Plan as Urban      developments require additional quantities.
  Reserve. Such land provides scenic natural      In the coastal alluvial plains, gravel
  open space and contain valuable watershed       deposits exist as thin beds (“lenses”)
  area, but which may be subject to future        between thick layers of soil, just as the
  development                                     creeks and rivers laid them down during
                                                  their annual flood rampages and periodic
  The amount of open space per resident,
                                                  changes of course. The only sites where
  considering population growth, will show a
                                                  they are economically feasible to recover
  decline through 2020, reflecting the
                                                  are shallow beds near the present
  development of the open land within the
                                                  watercourses or buried banks exposed
  city limits.
                                                  along the upthrust of a fault, and these
  There are moderate amounts of open space        must be near a source of high-quality water
  within the city limits, some zoned for          and also nearer enough to the construction
  development, while other areas are              site to permit in-transit mixing. The
  intended to be held for agriculture and open    potential for conflict between resource
  space (refer to Land Designated as Open         utilization    and     natural   topography
  Space map for actual designated areas), so      preservation is evident.
  that the actual total contributing to air
  quality, water quality, and the quality of life Relationship to Other Elements
  consists of more than just park and school      The Conservation and Open Space Element
  site acreage.                                   is a primary tool for the protection of the
  NATURAL RESOURCES                               community’s        natural     environment,
                                                  providing critical input into the preparation
  In addition to water, watershed, air and        of the Land Use and Circulation Elements.
  arable soil, another valuable natural           Its concerns relate directly and, in fact,
  resource in the Camarillo sphere is soil        overlap many of the concerns of the seismic
  quality and the foothill recreational areas.    Safety and Scenic Highways Elements.
  Given the extensive exploration and
                                                  The Conservation and Open Space Element
  development of California, it is doubtful if
                                                  can provide the major data and policy
  any undiscovered mineral or petroleum/
                                                  baseline necessary to analyze the impact of
  natural gas deposits exist.
                                                  environmental proposals.
  The county performed a study as part of its
                                                  The General Plan and its Elements comprise
  Mineral Reserve Management Program
                                                  an integrated, internally consistent, and
  which did not identify any aggregate
July 12, 2006                                                                                9.7

City of Camarillo General Plan
  compatible statement of policies. Many               aspects of the local natural environment
  policies,       goals,      objectives,     and      and should be utilized, thereby saving
  implementation measures may also be                  staff and research time. Additionally,
  found in other Elements, such as the Land            they may provide private resources for
  Use or Recreation and Park.                          the implementation of open space plans,
                                                       as well as the local support necessary in
  Scope          and      Methodology          of      open space preservation.
  Conservation           and Open Space            6. Analysis of the relationships between
  Element                                              conservation and development.
  The Conservation and Open Space Element          7. Formulation of criteria and standards for
  requires an appraisal of the community’s             conservation,       development          and
  natural resources and the development of             utilization of resources based on goals
  policy for their preservation or wise                and objectives.
  utilization. Not all communities have forests
  or fisheries and, thus, not all the subject      Principles
  matter listed in the state law applies.          The guiding principles to be used in
  However, all communities have water              conservation and open space planning for
  relationships and need to evaluate ongoing       the City of Camarillo are:
  development which affects the supply and         1. To contain urbanization within a defined
  utilization of this resource. Elements of such       boundary for efficient city management
  appraisal are:                                       and to prevent random annexation and
  1. Identification, evaluation and analysis of        spotty community buildup with vacant
       the community’s natural resources and           intervening parcels.
       open space include:                         2. To secure permanent municipal open
       (a)   Water Resources. Source and               space in the form of park land,
             availability of water, flood control,     transportation and utility corridors,
             water pollution, control of erosion,      reservoir sites, refuse disposal sites, and
             drainage systems, protection of           other similar uses where best placed to
             watersheds, weather and climate           serve the needs of the public and to be
             (study of water resources and             coordinated with community growth and
             consequent policies should be             need by their placement and timing of
             coordinated with all water agencies       development.
             in the planning area).                3. To coordinate the selection and use of
       (b)   Vegetative     Resources.    Forests,     open space with other affected public
             agricultural     areas,   watershed       agencies (park sites with school sites,
             areas, marshes; in urban areas            and flood control storm drains with
             could encompass street trees,             municipal wastewater treatment, and
             parks and other urban vegetation.         reclamation with bridle paths and
  2. Analysis of community needs for open              equestrian trail systems, and other
       space for recreation, health and safety.        similar areas).
  3. Analysis of urbanization and land needs       4. To protect public safety by reserving
       for projected future urbanization.              flood plains, flood control channels,
                                                       earthslide and seismic fault zones, fire
  4. Formulation, with active involvement of
                                                       breaks, and other similar areas and
       citizen groups, of goals, objectives,
                                                       employ them for safe non-disaster-time
       policies, and priorities with special
                                                       occupancies or permanent open spaces.
       attention to unique, endangered or
       critical resources.                         5. To make maximum compatible multiple
                                                       use of open space (hiking and riding
  5. Citizen groups organized around open
                                                       trails along flood control channels, picnic
       space and environmental issues often
                                                       sites at reservoirs, rest stops and
       have a thorough knowledge of specific
 9.8                                                                                  July 12, 2006

                                                                         OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
       viewpoints along scenic highways, after-        natural drainage beds and water
       hour use of school playgrounds); to             recharge areas to achieve recovery of
       prevent      erosion        and    silting,     local water and the preservation of
       eutrophication, waterlogging and, salt          natural plant and animal habitat.
       buildup,     by      good       watershed   8. Preserve the natural features and
       management and irrigation/drainage              general environmental characteristics of
       practice.                                       the hillside areas with minimum
  6. To separate agricultural and urban uses           disturbance to native plants and
      so that efficient agricultural practice          animals. Establish open space areas
      (crop-dusting,      fertilizing,   herbicide     that maintain and enhance the hillsides
      application,    feed     lots,    mechanical     and      provide    a    buffer   between
      harvesting of large contiguous tracts)           developments and open space and
      can be accomplished without adverse              agriculture.
      effects on sensitive crops, which could      9. That the Open Space and Conservation
      be damaged by air contaminants                   Element must be used as basic
      resulting from intensive urbanization.           reference material in the preparation
  Policies                                             and evaluation of environmental impact
                                                       reports.
  The following policies are adopted by the
                                                   10. Encourage development in areas where
  City Council to implement the Open Space
                                                       services and facilities already exist and
  and Conservation Element:
                                                       are     underused.      Promote    efficient
  1. Continue to work closely with parks and           extension of utilities and services.
      school authorities in the development,
                                                   11. In keeping with the city’s Conservation
      maintenance and joint operation of local
                                                       and Open Space plans and policies,
      recreational and park areas.
                                                       actively pursue programs in cooperation
  2. Provide for and encourage dedication of           with the federal, state, regional, county
      areas for schools, parks and public open         and special district agencies.
      space.
                                                   12. Periodically review and redefine the
  3. Continue to abide by Camarillo’s SOAR             Open Space and Conservation Element
      (Save Open-space and Agricultural                to     improve      its    contents     and
      Resources) ordinance, which amended              effectiveness       in    guiding    sound
      the city’s General Plan in 1998 with the         development programs and policies
      adoption of the Camarillo Urban                  soliciting maximum public input.
      Restriction Boundary (CURB) line.
  4. Protect      and      preserve      valuable  GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
      agricultural land by encouraging actions     A.    Economic
      such as agricultural zoning and use of
      the Williamson Act.                          •   To achieve a balanced utilization and
                                                       conservation of natural resources which
  5. Encourage private and quasi-private               meet the economic, social, and material
      landowners to provide open space for             needs of the inhabitants. To encourage
      recreation,        landscaping,         and      the     preservation       of   productive
      preservation of natural land features            agricultural soils, including highly-fertile
      where feasible.                                  and specialty crop lands.
  6. Identify and limit the extent and             •   To provide for managed resource
      intensity of uses and development in             production of sand, gravel, oil, gas, and
      hazardous areas such as, but not limited         other minerals of economic value. To
      to, unstable or erosive soil, steep              conserve        valuable       materials,
      terrain, streambeds or seismic fault             groundwater recharge land, watershed
      zones.                                           and reservoir sites.
  7. Identify and protect natural watersheds,
July 12, 2006                                                                                    9.9

City of Camarillo General Plan
   •    To provide for commercial recreation              encourage land uses which will minimize
        and tourism; control of lands for open            the degradation of air quality.
        space      use;     and     protection      of
        transportation/communication corridors         D.    Community Environment and
        and sites.                                            Support
                                                       •  The     city   will   cooperate    in     the
   B.     Protection,             Safety        and
                                                          development of multiple use reservoirs
            Regulation                                    and recreational waterways.
   •    To     preserve       irreplaceable       and  •  Strive for reclamation of municipal
        nonrenewable natural resources by                 wastewater by treatment and sale to
        protecting      urbanized       areas     and     agricultural uses.
        vegetation      from      high    fire   risk,
                                                       •  To maintain and develop the physical
        exploitation and depletion; protecting
                                                          environment of the city to provide the
        marine habitats from erosion, silting,
                                                          highest possible quality of urban life
        flooding, and pollution; by regulation of
                                                          without destruction of the natural open
        extraction of bed gravel and sand.
                                                          space lands by providing access and
   •    Protection for drainage channels and              separation corridors that maintain
        flood plains will be encouraged to                neighborhood identity and separate
        minimize watershed erosion.                       conflicting land uses, and renewal or
   •    Prevent, reduce        or   eliminate   noise     redevelopment of urban areas to reduce
        pollution.                                        pressures to urbanize lands in current
   •    Uphold quality development with a                 open space use.
        balanced and integrated land use               E.    Education
        pattern and an equitable process for
        bringing about greater compatibility in        •  To    assure     each    generation       the
        use of open space land and urban uses.            opportunity to learn their relationship
                                                          with      nature     through     personal
   C.     Health                                          interaction; to provide observation
   •    The city will protect the watershed,              stations and nature laboratories; to
        groundwater       sources,     fresh    water     preserve     archaeological    sites     and
        treatment, storage and distribution               geological features of note.
        system, and wastewater collection and          •  The city will encourage conservation
        treatment system from contamination               education in the new expanded public
        and damage.                                       library and the local schools by
   •    The city falls under the Ventura                  providing resources available through its
        Countywide         Stormwater         Quality     contacts and studies of local areas.
        Management Program, which requires             •  The city will support conservation
        the    National      Pollutant     Discharge      education to the general public by
        Elimination System (NPDES) be applied             sponsoring     local    programs      where
        to new projects to maintain water                 applicable.
        quality. Protection will be afforded           •  The city will be sensitive to and involved
        surrounding areas from groundwater                with education of its employees on the
        contamination and landslide damage                need and adoption of conservation
        from septic systems.                              techniques,       particularly,     energy
   •    To enhance the physical, emotional and            conservation within its framework.
        mental well-being of individuals in the
        city by providing easily accessible            F.   Transportation, Access and
        opportunities for urban residents to                  Distribution
        relate to natural open space; to protect       •  The city will assure efficient conveyance
        water quality; to provide sites for waste         of and distribution of agricultural,
        treatment     and      disposal,     and    to
 9.10                                                                                     July 12, 2006

                                                                       OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
      industrial and domestic water.            •   To preserve existing agriculture in
  •   The city will be constantly involved with     isolated areas, on flood plains, and
      planning and coordination of regional         unique areas capable of average or
      water districts and resources.                better-than-average crop yields.
  •   To provide recreation and scenic          Constraints
      trailways, roads, paths, and means of
                                                Considerable open space lands exist outside
      access without private transportation to
                                                the city limits and the Sphere of Influence
      enjoy scenic and recreational open
                                                which the city does not exercise direct
      space lands by development of local
                                                control over and is limited in its ability to
      transportation corridors in harmony with
                                                preserve or conserve the natural resources;
      the natural environment.
                                                yet its impact is significant and direct on
  G.     Recreation                             the quality of life in the area. Budgetary
                                                limits often restrict the city’s ability to
  •   The city will permit, encourage, and
                                                construct facilities to protect or preserve
      actively promote multiple use recreation
                                                natural open space. Provision of recreation
      facilities such as the 55-acre park,
                                                and     flood     control  is    the    specific
      which has been designed as the focal
                                                responsibility of other agencies, namely,
      point for the master planned Village at
                                                the recreation and park district and flood
      the      Park   residential/commercial
                                                control district.
      development.
                                                In some cases needed improvements can
  •   The city will take an active role in
                                                only occur with development or limited
      planning for designs that involve
                                                development of certain lands.
      resource utilization and preservation, as
      they have done with the Bike Trail        State law restricts local activities in regards
      Master Plan adjacent to Calleguas Creek   to open space lands as follows:
      from Flynn to Pleasant Valley Roads.        “65566. Any action by a county or city by
  •   To assure a full range of recreational      which open space land or any interest
      facilities, and to protect and develop      therein is acquired or disposed of or its
      those natural areas so that they are        use restricted or regulated, whether or
      accessible to all citizens; to assure       not pursuant to this part, must be
      minimal          development           in   consistent with the local open space plan.
      environmentally-sensitive areas and         “65567. No building permit may be
      those serving as wildlife habitats; to      issued, no subdivision map approved, and
      protect wildlife areas and resting areas    no open space zoning ordinance adopted,
      to maintain a balanced ecology and          unless     the    proposed      construction,
      continued      high-value     recreation    subdivision or ordinance is consistent with
      management; to promote community            the local open space plan.”
      parks throughout the community; to        In some cases, this is more              of  an
      plan and promote the purchase of open     opportunity than a constraint.
      space recreation areas; to seek state
      and federal funding for that purpose;     Available Techniques
      and, to preserve and protect historic,    Certain state and local regulations provide
      scenic, geological and archeological      tools for providing and maintaining open
      sites for the enjoyment of present and    space such as the following:
      future generations.
                                                1. Open Space Easement Act. The Open
  H.     Agricultural Compatibility                 Space Easement Act provides that a city
                                                    or county having a General Plan may
  •   To promote retention of agricultural
                                                    accept grants of open space easements
      uses where they do not interfere with
                                                    in which the owner relinquishes to the
      and are not encroached upon by urban
                                                    public in perpetuity or for a term of 10
      activity.
                                                    years or more, the right to construct
July 12, 2006                                                                               9.11

City of Camarillo General Plan
        improvements on it. The value of the          least ten years and are automatically
        property for tax purposes is established      renewed annually unless either party
        on    the    basis    of  the   easement      files a “Notice of Nonrenewal.” Although
        restrictions    rather   than    potential    many contracts have expired over time,
        development uses, thus providing the          two still existed within the city limits as
        property owner a form of tax relief. The      of 2006.
        easement must be consistent with the       4. Ownership. Acquisition of essential or
        Open Space Element of the General             desirable facilities can be accomplished
        Plan and must be in the best interest of      through the securing of fee title to land
        the state/county/city and important to        either by purchase, gift of the offering
        the public for the employment of scenic       of deeds, or as a part of the process of
        beauty, use of natural resources,             development. This method, of course, is
        recreation or production of food and          best insofar as retaining the land in
        fiber and specifically because:               perpetuity as part of the heritage of the
        -   The public use may acquire the land       city. It is also the most difficult method
            for a park or other public use.           to use because it involves the allocation
        -   The land is unimproved and has            of sizable amounts of money for
            scenic value from a public highway        acquisition either through the capital
            or building.                              improvement program, creation of
                                                      special      districts,     or    b ou n d e d
        -   Retention will add to the amenities
                                                      indebtedness as a result of a vote of the
            of living in adjoining or neighboring
                                                      people.
            urbanized areas.
                                                      Acquisition of land for public parks is a
        -   It is in the public interest to
                                                      district function insofar as urban parks
            preserve the rural character of the
                                                      are     concerned.      Most    of     these
            area.
                                                      recreational facilities are directly related
        -   Because of its value as a watershed       to the service of local residents, except
            and as a means of preventing floods.      in those instances where the parks are
        -   It is a valuable wildlife preserve or     of a special character where a wider
            sanctuary (with covenants to that         usage is anticipated and invited, such as
            end).                                     the soccer fields at the Village at the
   2. The Conservation Easement Act. The              Park. In addition to the usual allocation
        Conservation Easement Act enables a           of land for general public usage for park
        city, county, district or nonprofit           and recreational purposes, land for
        organizations to acquire perpetual            private open space and recreation is
        easements for the conservation of             required as part of large-scale housing
        agricultural land, open space or for          programs, such as mobile homes,
        historic preservation. Unlike open space      condominiums        and    single     family
        easements, there is no procedure for          residential      developments.        These
        non-renewal of conservation easements         supplemental uses, while valuable, do
        and no expiration date. Conservation          not eliminate the need for the type of
        easements are not required to conform         parks and recreation areas that serve
        to local general plans.                       the general public.
   3. Williamson Land Conservation Act. The           Most city parks are located in proximity
        Williamson Land Conservation Act of           to the public schools and wherever
        1965 plays a major role in protecting         possible are an extension of the campus
        and preserving California’s agricultural      of these educational facilities in order to
        and open space lands by offering the          expand the efficiency of both types of
        property owners tax incentives to             education, cultural and physical.
        maintain their designated land use. LCA       The standards for these urban parks are
        contracts begin with an initial term of at    included in the General Plan and their
 9.12                                                                                  July 12, 2006

                                                                         OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
      frequency is based on the population             which creates additional housing supply,
      density recommended for the future of            alleviates some pressure to develop
      each of the several districts of the city.       open space or agricultural land with new
      In portions of the city, where the parks         homes on the cities fringes. Such urban
      are absent, the General Plan denotes             renewal     is   ongoing    on    Ventura
      this deficiency and indicates to the             Boulevard and in the Arneill Road
      governmental authorities the places              Redevelopment Area.
      where funds should be allocated for         5. Regulation. Land can also be secured
      more     adequate     service    to   local      through negotiations associated with the
      residents.                                       several regulatory processes such as
      As indicated in the introductory remarks         subdivision or zoning. In this category,
      to this section, the acquisition of new or       land essential to several programs can
      expanded areas for parks in the already          be set aside by dedication. The land is
      urbanized portions of the city is usually        retained in private ownership, but its
      most difficult and costly since the land         use is reserved for some public purpose
      must, for the most part, be purchased,           by     easement     or    other    device
      often clearing sites already developed.          appropriate under the law. While not the
      In the more open areas where large               most positive method for securing the
      scale subdivisions are possible, such as         land, it is widely used and can invite
      the master planned Village at the Park           participation of land owners and
      with its incorporated 55-acre park, the          developers at the time when they seek
      city can use the provisions of the               to change the use of intensity of use of
      Subdivision Map Act and its own                  their holdings.
      subdivision ordinance to secure the         Also, under regulation, certain land subject
      dedication of parks as part of the land     to danger either from flood, fire, slippage,
      development process. Where sites            or other acts of man or nature can be
      within a proposed subdivision are not       retained in conservation or open use
      practical, the city could also utilize the  categories         until   the    dangerous
      "in lieu” provisions of the act to secure   characteristics are eliminated.
      funds to acquire sites where they would
                                                  In addition, land which cannot be provided
      serve the residents best. In addition,
                                                  with reasonable access, or where the
      the city could use portions of its
                                                  steepness will cause defacing of the
      development fees for the acquisition
                                                  landscape when development takes place,
      and improvement of these areas.
                                                  or where public services cannot be
      In some instances, there have been          provided, can be regulated as to the
      gifts of land for park and recreational     intensity of use to thus retain the open
      purposes. These usually result in special   character of the landscape, as well as the
      types of facilities controlled by the       public health and safety of the potential
      conditions associated with the gift.        occupants.
      An additional potential exists for          In all cases where a regulatory process is
      indirectly    preserving    open     space  applied, there must be a provision for a
      through urban renewal programs. The         reasonable interim use, excepting in those
      creation of the COT (Camarillo Old          situations where it can be demonstrated
      Town) Zone in 1998 and the CMU              that any use would endanger the health,
      (Village Commercial Mixed Use) Zone in      safety, or welfare of the user or the
      2005 have paved the way for mixed use       community at-large. Several of the types of
      development, or ‘smart growth’ by           land use and zoning provisions can
      allowing for increased housing units        illustrate possible forms of regulation.
      combined        with    complementary
                                                     ¾ Agricultural Zoning. This type of zone
      commercial      uses.    This    increased
                                                         would     permit,    in   addition    to
      intensity of land use in the city core,
July 12, 2006                                                                                9.13

City of Camarillo General Plan
          agricultural uses, those industrial             of precious resources of other kinds,
          activities associated with farming,             or the protection of hillsides and areas
          including the processing, packing, and          of unstable soils.
          storing of produce raised on the site.      ¾ Tax       Deeded      Lands.   When        tax
          There should also be provisions for the         delinquent property reverts to the
          residence of the farm family and                state as tax deed land, the city could
          caretaker. Uses such as labor camps             acquire these parcels and either use
          can, and often are, prohibited. Sale of         them for recreational spaces, or trade
          products raised on the site is                  them for land more suitable for public
          frequently permitted via a limited              purposes.
          number of temporary stands.
                                                      ¾ Private Golf Courses. Efforts should be
      ¾ Flood Plain Zoning.          This type of         directed to secure golf courses as
          zoning is almost universally used to            permanent open spaces by providing
          restrict or prohibit the use of land to         for:
          protect residents, or uses where they
                                                          (1)   The right of first refusal to
          may from time-to-time be subject to
                                                                acquire the land as a public
          flood damage.
                                                                facility if the private owner
          Where only portions of an ownership                   decides on an alternative use.
          are subject to flood danger, there
                                                          (2)   Provide, through zoning, for the
          could be provisions for compensatory
                                                                retention of the courses by
          density, allowing a greater intensity of
                                                                allowing peripheral land not
          use on the safe land in instances
                                                                essential to the courses to be
          where     the    endangered     land   is
                                                                utilized for residential uses with
          dedicated for permanent open space
                                                                a compensatory density based
          usage. This latter process can be
                                                                on one, or more, dwelling units
          utilized where the arroyos are
                                                                per gross acre of the total site or
          indicated as linkages or desirable
                                                                some       reasonable  alternative.
          locations for trails.
                                                                Should this course be taken, the
      ¾ Subdivision. Under the state and local                  area remaining in the golf course
          laws governing the subdivision of land,               should have its development
          it is possible to secure easements for                rights dedicated to the city to
          numerous public purposes, as well as                  preserve it as a permanent open
          the dedication of land for both schools               space.
          and parks, or fees in lieu thereof.
      ¾ Development Fees. The city will             Area of Interest
          continue its program of obtaining         The city, working in cooperation with the
          parkland and in lieu of fees as part of   county, should require the acquisition and
          the development process. The funds        development         of    urban   parks       and
          will be used for beneficial acquisitions  recreational areas in those portions of the
          of    parkland,     open    space,   and  county where urban development is
          recreational uses.                        anticipated or proposed. In these instances,
      ¾ Overlay Zones. These are secondary          the standards and facilities should be equal
          zones which may be placed on critical     to, or greater than, those that can be
          areas of the community where, in          secured in the urban areas, recognizing
          addition to the basic uses and            that the already-urbanized area frequently
          regulations, there may be such            requires compromise as to both character
          conditions as may be essential to         and quality that should not affect newly-
          protect the quality of an area, the       developing areas.
          architectural     unity   therein,   the  Since many of these areas may someday
          preservation        of   historical   or  become a part of the city, it is imperative
          archaeological sites, the safeguarding    that each development be considered in
 9.14                                                                                    July 12, 2006

                                                                              OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
  terms of the provisions of a total balance of        3. Priority should be given to annexation of
  public use facilities.                                    relatively undeveloped areas designated
  In a portion of the Area of Interest, there               for urban uses so that the city can
  also may be opportunities to secure larger                exercise      control     over      future
  regional types of open space and                          development through the planning
  recreational areas. These areas may take                  process.
  the form of wilderness parks and                     4. Agriculturally-designated       lands    and
  conservation areas that involve excessively               open space should not be annexed,
  steep lands, flood plains, and similar                    unless there is some compelling need or
  opportunities       to    utilize       legislative       benefit to the city.
  regulations to protect the public health and         It should be kept in mind that this is a
  safety, as well as the special scenic,               preliminary analysis of lands continuous to
  archaeologically-/historically-/ecologically-        or near the city boundary intended as an
  important sites.                                     overview for the purposes of identifying
  Growth and Annexation                                annexation potential. Area boundaries are
                                                       tentative and subject to modification, but
  The city’s economic study and Land Use               nevertheless logical and in conformity with
  Element indicate that growth will most               good planning practice. Where annexation
  likely occur to the west and east. The city          interest ripens in a particular area, a
  should continue to work with the county to           detailed     report    should    be    prepared
  assure sound planning outside the city               thoroughly covering the advantages and
  limits.                                              disadvantages of annexation to property
  As a matter of overall policy, the city shall        owners and inhabitants of the area and to
  encourage development to occur within the            the city.
  city and that development should be of high          IMPLEMENTATION
  quality bringing with it benefits that are not
  just fiscal, but efficient and cultural as well.     Cities and other public and private
  The city should continue to be concerned             agencies are constantly involved in
  and try to influence land use change                 implementing their planning program. It
  requests bordering the city.                         is at this point where portions of the
                                                       long-range plans become current short-
  Criteria for Annexation                              range,      action-oriented     considerations
  Annexation policy        should      include     the governed by the availability of staff time
  following criteria:                                  and funds from a multiplicity of sources.
                                                       In addition to the sources generally
  1. Annexation areas should be of sufficient          available      to   private     organizations,
       size to enable efficient planning and           communities have the ability to prepare
       economical provision of public facilities       and adopt regulations which may permit
       and services. Small annexations should          the acquisition or the reservation of
       be avoided, unless necessary to round           essential facilities which are deemed
       out    city   boundaries        to      prevent appropriate to protect the public health,
       unincorporated islands or to bring into         safety, and general welfare. In many
       the city lands of a unique nature.              cases, the ability to legislate becomes the
  2. Annexation areas should be compact,               most important of the local vehicles,
       regular in shape, and contiguous to the         since the availability of funds for outright
       city. Although some irregularities in           acquisition may be limited, either by
       boundaries are inevitable as annexation         resources       or   by    restrictive    public
       increments        progress          outward,    regulations, state or local.
       “shoestring”       a n n ex a t i o n s ,  and  The following are the existing programs
       gerrymandering of annexations creating          which should be continued or added. They
       unincorporated peninsulas should be             are not listed by any particular priority, as
       avoided.                                        all are considered important.
July 12, 2006                                                                                      9.15

City of Camarillo General Plan
   A.     Economic                                     Knightsbridge housing developments.
                                                    5. Compliance with up-to-date building
   Current Programs
                                                       codes and soil report requirements, as
   1. W i l l i a m s o n    Land    Conservation      well as special investigation on land
        Contracts: 76 acres as of 1998.                with suspected fault or hazard zones.
   2. Agricultural Exclusive Zone:         Adopted  6. Participation in county Air Quality
        and applied.                                   Management Plan (AQMP) and limits on
   3. Conditional Use Permit procedure and             residential building permits to protect
        conditions established for oil, sand, and      air and water quality.
        gravel extraction.                          7. Compliance with city Grading Ordinance
   4. Encourage the assessment of farm land            to prevent erosion and silting.
        to be based on the agricultural use and     8. Noise Ordinance adopted in 1981.
        not on projected or adjacent land uses.
                                                    9. Hillside    Development       Standards
   Recommended Programs                                Ordinance adopted in 1988. Subdivision
                                                       Ordinance amended to include a
   1. Prime agricultural lands will be utilized        subsection on agricultural land use and
        and       preserved     by   flood  control    the Williamson Land Act in (1994) with
        improvements of Calleguas and Conejo           the adoption of Ordinance 810.
        Creeks.
   2. Develop            regulated    methods    of
                                                    Recommended Programs
        extraction and use of accumulated           1. The city should consider suggesting
        stream bed gravel and sand for use in          comparable hillside grading standards
        construction projects which respect the        to the County of VenturaAdopt new and
        environment, particularly examining air        amended sections to the Subdivision
        and noise quality impacts, while               Ordinance that will further strengthen
        providing          for   public   meetings     the Open Space and Conservation
        encouraging input in the process.              Element policies.
   3. Monitor controlled irrigation pumping,        2. Encourage the Fire Protection District to
        irrigation control and recharging is           provide fire breaks and fire access
        strongly encouraged.                           roads, and enforce open-fire and vehicle
                                                       regulations in brush-covered hillsides
   B.     Protection, Safety and                       within the city.
             Regulation                             3. The city will make every effort to
    Current Programs                                   encourage      the   development         and
                                                       application of open space zoning for a
   1. Flood plain mapping underway to
                                                       balanced and integrated land use
        establish boundaries of developable
                                                       pattern by making open space zoning in
        land.
                                                       conformity with the Open Space and
   2. Requirement for flood control channel            Conservation Element of the General
        improvements with subdivisions and             Plan. The city will also provide an
        planned development permits.                   equitable     process    for    resolving
   3. Open Space Zone adopted in 1978.                 conflicting open space and related
   4. Existing zoning regulations are being            property uses by:
        used in conjunction with ‘smart growth’        a. Considering all development under
        design policies to create clustered                the environmental impact process
        residential            and    commercial           and its relationship to the Open
        developments, which allows for the                 Space and Conservation Element;
        dedication of portions of project sites as     b. Actively      seeking   review        and
        improved open space. Examples of such              comment on the Open Space and
        projects include Village at the Park and           Conservation Element prior to future
 9.16                                                                                  July 12, 2006

                                                                      OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
           revisions;                                into water courses.
     c. By adequate public notice and news        8. Wastewater       management       system
           releases, formal and informal public      provides for the cleaning and video
           discussions and a publicly-available      monitoring of lines to prevent raw
           text and map depicting the open           sewage spills.
           space.
                                                  Recommended Programs
 4. Acquire significant natural areas. The
      city should weigh and judge what is         1. Use streams and aquifers to carry out a
      acceptable open space land and what it         natural purification and filtering versus
      can be used for, rather than receiving         introducing     more    chemicals    and
      any land offered.                              constructing        power-consuming
                                                     treatment facilities wherever possible.
 5. Only compatible land uses will be
                                                     Planting of trees and orchards is
      permitted adjacent to open space lands
                                                     encouraged to aid in the natural air
      and agriculture. Industry is considered
                                                     regeneration to enhance air quality in
      one acceptable land use. Minimum
                                                     both populated and open space areas.
      six-foot-high fences should be required
      in these areas to maintain separation.      2. Locate noisy open space recreation
                                                     (motorcycle courses, drag strips, rifle
 C.     Health                                       ranges, rock concerts, as examples)
 Current Programs                                    away from residential areas.
 1. Limitation policy       on private sanitary   D.   Community           Environment
      systems.                                           and Support
 2. Master plans        for   water   and   sewer Current Programs
      systems.
                                                  1. Camarillo’s SOAR (Save Open-space
 3. Fees to pay for capital improvements.
                                                     and Agricultural Resources) Ordinance
 4. Quality of waste water treatment meets           amended the city’s General Plan in
      State Department of Health Services            1998. The purpose of the ordinance
      standards.      Current    high   level  of    was to adopt the Camarillo Urban
      treatment allows effluent to be used for       Restriction Boundary (CURB) line to
      recycled purposes such as farmland             encourage efficient growth patterns and
      irrigation, rather than being discharged       protect agriculture, natural resources
      into the creek.                                and other open space uses by confining
 5. Irrigation systems and lake/pool supply          development within urban limits.
      and drainage systems are constructed to     2. “Greenbelt Agreement” with Oxnard,
      guard against the possibility of backflow      County of Ventura, and LAFCO to
      contamination. The city shall be guided        preserve agriculture and open space
      in the review of potential commercial          between communities around the city.
      uses in relation to any products or
                                                  3. The city intends to build upon the shade
      effluents     which     are    defined   as
                                                     tree corridor effect, which began with
      hazardous.
                                                     the    remaining    old    segments     of
 6. Similar precautions shall also be                eucalyptus rows along the U.S. 101
      exercised in locating and monitoring air       Freeway. To this end, the Village at the
      pollutant emission sources (domestic,          Park was required to provide a dense,
      commercial, agricultural, industrial, or       wooded landscape along the length of
      municipal) to protect and preserve the         the project’s freeway frontage. The city
      quality of the air shed and air basin.         also urges the State Department of
 7. Separate storm runoff and normal                 Transportation to provide additional
      sewage disposal systems, so floods do          landscaping along the freeway right-of-
      not result in the release of raw sewage        way.
July 12, 2006                                                                              9.17

City of Camarillo General Plan
   4. The city plans for recreational facilities     corridors, and a surrounding mountain/
        within reasonable walking distance of        agricultural greenbelt through open
        any resident (as school sites are now        space      preserves,      zoning,        and
        planned), so that all ages and income        maintenance.
        groups can enjoy their benefits.          2. Encourage      citizen   involvement        in
   5. In conjunction with several new housing        community           appearance           and
        projects, a Bike Trail Master Plan is        beautification by such means as
        being implemented along the bank of          providing care and maintenance advice
        the Calleguas Creek from Flynn Road to       leaflets for parkway trees, anti-litter and
        Pleasant Valley Road.                        litter cleanup projects, and container
   6. There are requirements for private open        recycling.
        space recreation in housing projects and  3. Encourage the Recreation and Parks
        encouragement for private facilities         District to provide channels and
        within    industrial    and   commercial     permanent recognition for farsighted
        projects.                                    and philanthropic residents who wish to
   7. Park land must be dedicated or in-lieu         give or bequeath parklands, historical
        fees paid to gain approval of residential    sites, recreation facilities, and scenic
        projects in accordance with the city-        amenities and easements. The city
        adopted formula.                             should develop a policy to be willing to
                                                     negotiate for public lands to be used for
   8. Acquisition of sites for additional public
                                                     public uses and serve as coordinator
        schools is based on the findings by the
                                                     and catalyst to preserve historical
        school districts that such sites are
                                                     buildings so the city can react when the
        essential to answer the growth needs of
                                                     opportunities arise.
        the community in areas where this
        growth takes place. While these           4. The city will permit and encourage
        decisions on location of actual sites        Campfire/Scout camps, and private and
        must be approved by the Planning             commercial campgrounds where both
        Commission prior to purchase, the final      residents and visitors can enjoy the
        decision rests with the districts. A new     vacation, summer camp, and wilderness
        elementary school, Rancho Rosal, has         experience.
        been added within the Village at the      5. The city will encourage the development
        Park.                                        of historical parks in which our heritage
   9. Approval of development based on               is recalled and preserved.
        consistency with the Open Space Plan.     E.    Transportation, Access and
        Section 65567 states:
                                                          Distribution
        “No building permit may be issued, no
        subdivision map approved, and no open     Current Programs
        space zoning ordinance adopted unless     1. The city requires paths to schools, and
        the proposed construction, subdivision,      cooperates with other agencies in
        or ordinance is consistent with the local    providing long-distance and cross-
        Open Space Plan.”                            country bicycle paths along the natural
   10. Identify,      preserve     and   develop     watercourses, flood control channels and
        reservoir sites to insure adequate water     streets, such as the Bike Trail Master
        storage for personal, emergency, and         Plan along Calleguas Creek.
        public use.                               2. The city plans for and requires
   Recommended Programs                              adequate-sized       water    and      sewer
                                                     pipelines to handle expected future
   1. There must be assurance of continuing          needs when development occurs to
        community identity by preserving hills,      conserve resources.
        watercourses        and   transportation
                                                  3. The    city   cooperates    with    regional
 9.18                                                                                 July 12, 2006

                                                                         OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
       districts in planning facilities within the    example, recreational bicycle paths
       area for efficiency, least disruption of       along or under power transmission line
       open space, and to conserve supplies.          corridors,    parks     adjoining     school
                                                      grounds with school play yard facilities
  Recommended Programs
                                                      and equipment usable during non-
  1. Support the designation of the Ventura           school hours, picnic grounds combined
      Freeway, Beardsley, Santa Rosa, and             with swimming pools, and horse
      Potrero Roads as state/county scenic            showground or rodeo arenas combined
      highway corridors.                              with riding trails.
  2. Develop hiking and riding trails along        2. The city coordinates and actively
      the watercourses (Beardsley, Revolon,           participates with the Pleasant Valley
      Calleguas, and Conejo) and at other             Recreation and Park District in the
      appropriate areas.                              planning and overall development of
  3. Provide neighborhood bicycle paths to            their park system.
      elementary schools, high schools, and        3. The city endorses expansion and
      parks.                                          development of state and county park
  4. The use or riprap and channeling will be         holdings, believing that each region
      suggested for flood channels.                   should provide recreational facilities
  5. Silt, debris and vegetation in channel           adequate to support its own residents.
      bottoms will be removed and checked          Recommended Programs
      on a periodic basis to keep clear the
      flood control structures and facilities.     1. Urge     state/county     acquisition   and
                                                      development         of   large     regional
  6. The use of fire roads, fire breaks and
                                                      recreational     tracts    adjoining     the
      protection       of   watersheds        and
                                                      Camarillo Sphere of Influence: Point
      undercutting will be practiced to protect
                                                      Mugu,      Camarillo      Grove,     Round
      watersheds in conjunction with local fire
                                                      Mountain, and Santa Rosa Valley Park.
      department recommendations.
                                                   2. Locate additional neighborhood park
  7. City, county and state laws which
                                                      sites in developing areas of the city.
      specifically      address       watershed,
      groundwater        sources,      freshwater  3. Coordinate locating parks with school
      treatment, storage and distribution             sites.
      system, and wastewater collection and        G.   Education
      treatment       system,      as    well   as
      contamination of groundwater and             Recommended Programs
      landslides thereof will be strictly          1. The city, in cooperation with the school
      enforced and adhered to.                        districts and other agencies in the area,
  8. Through interaction with the Corps of            will strive to provide opportunities for
      Engineers, Pleasant Valley Park and             school children and adults to observe
      Recreation District and Ventura County          unartificed nature by preserving wild
      Flood Control District, the city will           areas and wildlife cover along the
      cooperate in the development of                 natural watercourses and in the
      multiple use waterways and reservoirs           mountain sides and valleys.
      whenever feasible on Calleguas, Conejo,      2. The city will encourage the development
      and Revolon channels.                           of botanical gardens and nature
                                                      museums.
  F.     Recreation
                                                   3. The city will encourage the new
  Current Programs                                    Camarillo Library to provide additional
  1. The city, in cooperation with the park           resources and education in support of
       and     school   districts,    seeks    and    local     natural      resources        and
       promotes multiple-use open space; for          environmental conservation.
July 12, 2006                                                                                  9.19
City of Camarillo General Plan
   Air Quality                                    County hopes to continue the trend of
                                                  improving overall air quality.
   The City of Camarillo considers air quality
   as a resource which it desires to conserve.    Recommendation
   As such, a discussion of Air Quality is being
                                                  It is the city’s goal to continue to support
   included as part of the 2006 update of the
                                                  the adopted strategies and methods of the
   Conservation element.
                                                  county’s Air Quality Management Plan and
   Overview                                       implement measures on its own to help
                                                  maintain acceptable air quality. These
   On January 1, 1989, the California Clean Air
                                                  measures include proper land use planning,
   Act took effect setting State Ambient Air
                                                  transportation planning, the environmental
   Quality Standards (SAAQS), which were
                                                  review process, and implementing the goals
   more stringent than the NAAQS. In 2005,
                                                  and policies of the city’s General plan. By
   the Californian Air Resources Board (ARB)
                                                  use of these measures, the city hopes to
   approved          the       nation’s      most
                                                  achieve a jobs-housing balance, reduce
   health-protective       ozone      standard in
                                                  average trip lengths, promote alternative
   response to special concern for children’s
                                                  forms of transportation and increased
   health. Though compliance with these
                                                  ridership, thereby maintaining or improving
   standards has been difficult, and despite an
                                                  air quality in accordance with federal and
   increasing California population, positive
                                                  local standards. This does not preclude the
   strides have been made in improving state
                                                  use of overriding considerations. The city
   air quality.
                                                  does recognize in some instances, after the
   Camarillo is within the Ventura County Air     application of various alternatives, that
   Pollution Control District (APCD). The APCD    overriding      considerations    may        be
   works in coordination with other federal,      considered and used by the approving
   state, and regional control efforts to         author.
   achieve air quality standards as established
   by federal and state agencies. Ventura
   County’s air exceeds both the state and the
   federal air quality standards for ozone and
   the state standard for particulate matter,
   including carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide,
   and nitrogen dioxide. Yet the county’s air
   has improved dramatically over time, with
   the number of days per year exceeding the
   state and federal standards steadily
   decreasing.
   During the smog season (May through
   October), certain atmospheric conditions
   exist to increase smog-producing chemicals
   like ozone and nitrogen oxide, as well as
   other pollutants. In these warm weather
   months, westerly winds sometimes bring a
   layer of warm air that creates an inversion,
   which acts essentially as a lid preventing
   the polluted air from rising and dissipating.
   Inversion      layers     typically   occur at
   elevations of 800 to 1,000 feet above sea
   level, but may occur as low as 200 feet.
   While air quality is continually challenged
   by increased urbanization, traffic and
   smog-holding weather conditions, Ventura
 9.20                                                                                July 12, 2006

City of Camarillo General Plan                                                                    RECREATION
                                                                     8.0 RECREATION
            INTRODUCTION                                  • Provide a full and varying range of
                                                            recreational and cultural activities for
            This section of the General Plan sets           all residents of Camarillo and its
            forth objectives, principles, standards         environs;
            and proposals for a system of park and
                                                          • Wherever possible, coordinate school
            recreation facilities that will best satisfy
                                                            and park facilities for maximum
            the recreational and cultural needs of all
                                                            u ti li za t io n   and    ef f icie n c y   in
            the people of Camarillo and its Sphere of
                                                            maintenance and operation;
            Influence. The specific plans for park
            development and program content can           • Establish a comprehensive program of
            be obtained at the Pleasant Valley              sequential        land    acquisition      and
            Recreation and Park District Office in the      development for future park and
            Community Center complex at 1605 East           recreation sites as well as expansion
            Burnley Street, Camarillo.                      of existing sites;
            At the root of a good park system are         • Provide and sustain high standards of
            the neighborhood and community parks,           design, improvement and maintenance
            which serve the citizenry on a daily            of all recreation facilities.
            basis. It is for this reason that             STANDARDS
            neighborhood and community parks are
                                                             Park         and   recreation     standards
            emphasized. But, there is a need for a
                                                             provide useful criteria by which some
            variety of recreation; special use parks,
                                                             measurable evaluation can be applied
            regional parks and major private facilities
                                                             toward the recreation needs of a
            are included, thereby offering a total
                                                             specific area. Standards will vary
            park and recreation system. Regional
                                                             from city to city; therefore, each
            parks and private facilities are included
                                                             agency must evaluate its own needs
            in this plan only as they exist or are
                                                             and develop standards accordingly.
            proposed by the city or county.
                                                             It      must     be    remembered         that
            OBJECTIVES                                       standards are only basic guidelines
                                                             and variations may occur. It is with
            The General Plan proposes that land
                                                             this in mind that the following
            areas and programs be established to
                                                             standards are proposed.
            provide a wide range of recreation
            facilities and activities that will serve all    As a general standard, the Pleasant
            the people of Camarillo and its environs         Valley Recreation and Park District
            with adequate year-round recreation.             and         the    City    of     Camarillo
                                                             recommends that for each 1,000
            PRINCIPLES                                       persons, a total of 2½ acres of
            • To achieve the objectives of the Plan,         neighborhood parks and 2½ acres of
                the      fo llo win g princ ip le s  a re    community parks should be required
                established:                                 for a combined total of 5 acres of
            • Provide a balanced park and recreation         parkland per 1000 residents.
            • system by locating facilities where            Mini‑parks are those parks that fall
                they will most adequately serve the          below the size and facilities standards
                needs of residents;                          of neighborhood parks. The primary
           October 9, 2002                                                                               8.1

City of Camarillo General Plan
         function of this type of park is to act as  Community Parks are designed to
         a rather specialized facility in terms of   serve the residents of several adjoining
         size, location and purpose to fill the      neighborhoods. They are intended to
         gap in a specific area. Normally, the       provide a wider range of recreational
         limited facilities are geared towards       and cultural opportunities than the
         passive      recreation    green    space,  Neighborhood Park. With a greater
         pedestrianways or perhaps act as            service population, more specialized
         perimeter grounds for a site of             activities can be supported.             In
         historical significance. These parks are    addition to the broad range of activities
         often called mini‑parks because they        offered by the community parks, it can
         are sometimes no larger than a              function as a neighborhood park. The
         residential lot and less than a             design of the community park should
         neighborhood park.                          be based on the following standards:
         Neighborhood Parks are primarily            The Community Park should be
         intended to provide neighborhoods           planned to provide a service radius of
         with space and facilities for active as     not more than 1½ miles.
         well      as     passive     recreation.    The     suggested    acreage     for      a
         Neighborhood parks should serve all         community park should range from 10
         residents; however, design of facilities    to 25 acres.
         and activities should emphasize the
                                                     When adjacent to an intermediate
         character of the environs of which it is
                                                     school or high school, the Community
         a part. In order to fulfill its role in the
                                                     Park should be between 8 to 15 acres
         neighborhood, the following standards
                                                     and the school playground should be
         are established:
                                                     about 12 acres.
         •   The most preferable service radius
                                                     The Community Park should have good
             for a neighborhood park is ¼ mile
                                                     access and be as centrally located to
             and the maximum is ½ mile.
                                                     the service area as possible. The
         •   The suggested acreage for a             primary functions of the community
             neighborhood       park    should    be park are both recreational and cultural;
             between 5 and 10 acres.                 therefore, the following facilities are
         •   The most desirable acreage for a        suggested:
             neighborhood park immediately           ⎯ Children’s play area
             adjacent to an elementary school
                                                     ⎯ Picnic areas
             should be from 2 to 5 acres, with
             the school supplying about 6 acres      ⎯ Athletic Fields
             of playground.                                (soccer and   baseball)
         •   The neighborhood park should,           ⎯ Tennis courts
             whenever possible, be located so        ⎯ Community/Recreation
             that patrons need not cross a               Building
             major street or highway when
                                                     ⎯ Specialized activity
             walking to a park site. Ideal
             facilities for the neighborhood park          (i.e., swimming pool)
             include:                                ⎯ Restrooms
              ⎯ Children’s play area                 ⎯ Parking
               (apparatus play structures)           Special Use Parks include park sites,
              ⎯ Picnic areas                         which provide the citizenry with a
                (within passive setting)             single activity or group of closely
              ⎯ Open play area                       related activities. Size would be
              ⎯ Recreation building                  determined on the basis of the
              ⎯ Restrooms
    8.2                                                                           October 9, 2002

                                                                                       RECREATION
     particular activity, however, its size          recreation network will consist of some
     would generally be greater than a               major private facilities. These facilities
     neighborhood park. Examples of a                usually     have      use   restrictions;
     special use might include a nature              nevertheless, they fulfill a need.
     center, skateboard park or tennis               Private recreation facilities usually
     complex. No service radius is assigned          include golf courses, swim clubs and
     because of the area-wide interest that          recreation      areas   within   planned
     would be generated.                             residential developments.
     A District‑Wide Park is the multi-              Linkages are a network of linear paths
     faceted recreational and cultural center        through which a system of similar or
     of the city. Located in a central               related uses are tied together to
     position, it would serve the total Park         provide buffering between uses and
     District and should offer facilities and        visual relief. Linkages can be of several
     activities beyond that which the                forms, including bikeways, sidewalks,
     community park does. Its size should            hiking and riding trails and other
     be no smaller than 25 acres.                    special corridors. In addition to joining
     Regional Parks are planned and                  uses, linkages can give form and
     administered by agencies of the                 identity to a city or community. In
     County of Ventura or State. These               respect to a network of parks and
     sites usually provide recreation on a           recreation facilities, linkages are a
     large scale and therefore attract all           prime binding force.
     categories of people from throughout        PROPOSALS
     the County. Usually a regional park
                                                 The park and recreation proposals
     offers an environment of unique
                                                 contained in this Plan were developed
     natural surroundings, an area of
                                                 through a review and analysis of both the
     historical significance, or extensive
                                                 City of Camarillo Recreation Element and
     man-made          recreation    facilities.
                                                 the Pleasant Valley Recreation and Park
     Ventura County has set a size standard
                                                 District’s Park and Recreation Plan
     of 50 acres minimum for regional
                                                 (hereafter called ‘Park Plan’), which was
     parks, with some modification for
                                                 adopted by the City of Camarillo on
     beach parks and parks of a natural
                                                 May 14, 1975. The Park Board of Directors
     setting. (Source – Ventura County
                                                 adopted a revised park plan in January 10,
     General       Plan-Goals,   Policies   and
                                                 1990. The Park Plan was analyzed and
     Programs, December 17, 1996.)
                                                 proposals were made on the basis of the
     Although not specifically designed for      Land Use Element of the General Plan.
     recreation, Public School Playgrounds
                                                 By way of summarizing, the results of the
     offer      and    provide   a    form    of
                                                 analysis showed that the existing Park
     supplemental          neighborhood     and
                                                 Plan was a well-conceived and well-
     community recreation. Because of
                                                 thought-out document. The variations
     limited      facilities   and   operating
                                                 reflected in this, the Camarillo General
     schedules, school playgrounds are
                                                 Plan, primarily are based on changes in
     considered as supplemental to the park
                                                 the proposed land use characteristics and
     system and should not discount the
                                                 changes in terminology and definitions.
     need for park facilities. Recreation
     facilities found at school playgrounds      The discussion which follows is a review of
     usually include: playfields, hard-court     the park and recreation facilities and
     areas, apparatus multipurpose rooms,        consideration for general location and
     and gymnasiums.                             types of future park sites and expansion or
                                                 modification of existing park sites or
     In addition to the public recreation
                                                 services.
     facilities discussed above, a total
October 9, 2002                                                                              8.3

City of Camarillo General Plan
    REGIONAL PARKS                                    restaurants.
    The County of Ventura and the State of            Another club in the area is the Las Posas
    California address regional park needs.           Swim Club, which includes a swimming
    The present park system includes the              pool, open green space, and community
    Camarillo Grove Park, which contains              room for group picnics and barbecues.
    approximately 25 acres serving Camarillo          Several private projects in the City have
    with family, group picnic and activity            also included recreational facilities, such
    areas.     The    park’s     oak     trees    and as Leisure Village, which has a building
    accessibility to the open hillside areas          containing approximately 20,000 square
    provide uniqueness not found in formal            feet of floor space for group activities and
    City parks. The park district recently            assembly, plus a swimming pool, jacuzzi,
    obtained Camarillo Grove Park from the            golf course, tennis courts, shuffleboard,
    County of Ventura and is in the process of        and lawn bowling area.            Residential
    incorporating the park within the Pleasant        projects should have the requirement for a
    Valley Recreation and Park District.              proportionate share of space for recreation
    The State of California presently provides        uses to reduce the need in the public
    a share of regional recreational facilities       sector.
    with the development of Sycamore Canyon           Types of recreational uses that can be
    recreational area located within the Santa        incorporated into projects include pools,
    Monica Mountains National Recreation              tennis courts, jogging paths, and open
    Area. Mugu Lagoon is also designated as a         space for active and passive recreation.
    regional area although intended for
    passive-type recreation and is to remain in       Public Recreational Facilities
    a natural setting as one of the last              Sterling Hills Golf course is located at the
    remaining wetland habitat areas along the         northwesterly portion of the City of
    California Coast.                                 Camarillo and is a semi‑public 18-hole golf
    This plan also calls for the development of       course and includes a clubhouse, pro shop
    a 50‑acre surplus site immediately                and restaurant.
    adjacent to the California State University       The Camarillo Springs Golf Course located
    at Channel Islands that could serve a             on the easterly side of the City of
    variety of regional activities including          Camarillo is an 18‑hole public golf course
    Chumash Indian           interpretive     center, with clubhouse, pro shop and restaurant.
    possible skeet range, hobbyist facilities,        This facility provides a significant amount
    campground facilities, and picnicking for         of open space and should be continued as
    large groups.                                     a satisfying part of the regional needs for
                                                      recreation.
    PRIVATE RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
                                                      Pleasant Valley Pool is a public pool
    Private     recreational     facilities,   either
                                                      utilized by the Pleasant Valley Swim Team,
    maintained for members or those open to
                                                      youth water polo, local community college
    the general public with a fee being               classes and a variety of public programs
    charged, supplement public recreational           (i.e. water aerobics, Junior Life Guard,
    facilities. Such facilities in the Camarillo      therapeutic and lap swimming). The
    planning area which help meet the local           Pleasant Valley Pool is located on Temple
    recreation needs include the Spanish Hills
                                                      Avenue.
    Golf and Country Club and Las Posas
    Country Club. Both clubs include private          Freedom Park Pool is located in the
    18‑hole golf courses and are located              southwesterly portion of the city adjacent
    northwesterly of the City of Camarillo in         to Camarillo Airport. Between the months
    the Spanish Hills area and the Las Posas          of September and May, various schools
    Estates. Both facilities include swimming         and the Pleasant Valley Swim Team use
    pools, tennis courts, pro shops, and              the swimming pool. During the summer
    8.4                                                                                 October 9, 2002

                                                                                      RECREATION
 months the swimming pool is used by the        design    and    implementation      of   the
 swim and water polo teams and is also          Recreation Element of the General Plan:
 used for public programs that include          Park Design Review
 water aerobics, recreational swimming and
                                                •  Children’s    play   area     located    in
 lap swimming
                                                   neighborhood and community parks
 LINKAGES                                          would serve a greater purpose if new
 When initially adopted, the General Plan          or    replacement     equipment       were
 for the city called for the development of a      designed by a consultant specializing in
 network of trail systems, such as the             apparatus play structures emphasizing
 pedestrian pathways that have been                sensory motor integration and in
 constructed and are proposed along                accordance with the Americans with
 Calleguas Creek between Upland Road and           Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
 Mission Oaks Boulevard. As indicated in        •  In designing parks, direction should be
 the Circulation Element of the General            given towards the overall design of the
 Plan, a bicycle plan is currently in place for    park to prevent park vandalism, which
 the City of Camarillo.                            in turn would reduce the amount of
 A system of trails should take advantage          time and energy spent in repairing or
 of the natural waterways and drainage             replacing damage created by such
 areas existing within Ventura County. The         action. Consideration should include
 system may include a trail capable of             location of buildings for clear visibility
 serving bike riding and equestrian use.           to public areas, lighting of buildings,
 The trail system should follow the                exterior surface material, interior
 ridgelines and the various creekbeds, such        design of public facilities with attention
 as those recently completed along                 given for ease of access for repair.
 Calleguas Creek and that could be              •  Park layout should involve professional
 developed along Conejo Creek. Therefore,          input and include greater creativity in
 the topography or water feature would act         design     to   generate     interest    in
 as an integral part of the design and             participation and to serve the special
 include appropriate landscape buffer              interest needs of its residents. This
 between the trail system and the adjoining        consideration     could    include    such
 developments which would also tend to             activities     as   motocross       trails,
 improve and enhance the system.                   bikepaths, jogging paths, exercise
 It is recommended as part of the                  stations, etcetera.
 Recreation Element of the City that a          •  The design of any park should utilize
 program be implemented with joint use             professional consultants and receive
 between the cities within the County of           community input for the development
 Ventura to develop a network of urban and         and review of the facilities proposed
 rural trails. Efforts should be made to link      with consideration given to the
 these trails with existing and proposed           compatibility of the design to remove
 parks and schools wherever possible.              any nuisance aspects of the park in
 Bikeways are an extremely vital element           relation to the adjoining residential
 in a linkage system. The use of the bicycle       units. The park design should also be
 for exercise, transportation or pleasure is       required to comply with City standards
 popular and indications are that this trend       and be reviewed and approved by the
 will continue.                                    City Planning Commission.
                                                Programs
 ELEMENT GOALS
                                                •  Consideration should be given to
 In addition to the recommendations for            greater expansion and improvement of
 each of the existing or proposed parks, the       the various recreational programs
 following are goals to be applied in the
October 9, 2002                                                                             8.5

City of Camarillo General Plan
         offered the community by the Park         to serve the community in general and
         District.                                 also assist the educational programs
    Marketing                                      established by the public school system.
                                                   Consideration of a joint County/City
    •    Consideration should be given to
                                                   project should be given in light of the fact
         utilization    of     more   productive
                                                   that Camarillo is the closest to the
         marketing and/or public relations
                                                   demographic center of the County.
         techniques to encourage the use of the
         park program being offered to ensure      In conjunction with this facility, adequate
         the viability of the program and the      recreational facilities and space to satisfy a
         maximum use of the facilities for such    community‑wide          need     should      be
         functions.                                considered which is not evident by the size
                                                   of the existing parks within the City.
    FUTURE PARK CONSIDERATIONS
                                                   As mentioned previously, the park district
    At the time of consideration of conversion     is    proposing      a    Chumash      Indian
    of any land use designation, attention         interpretive center located in the vicinity
    must be given to the recreational needs of     of California State University at Channel
    the area to be developed with site             Islands (CSUCI). The interpretive center is
    selection and size based on the type of        proposed to be located easterly of Lewis
    activities to be conducted and ease for        Road, south of the City of Camarillo city
    pedestrian and vehicular access.               limits in the unincorporated area of the
    Commercial and Industrial Zones                County of Ventura.
                                                   Neighborhood Parks
    Commercial and industrial areas should be
    encouraged to provide passive and active       The location of neighborhood parks should
    recreational space to supplement the need      be    on    the    interior   of   residential
    for their employees and those frequenting      neighborhoods and not on major or
    the facility. This can be accomplished by a    secondary arterials to insure neighborhood
    series of walkways, fountains, seating,        access.
    green space, or active play space, such as     Community Parks
    basketball courts, soccer areas, baseball      The consideration of future development
    fields, et cetera.                             projects     should      include   providing
    Multi-Family Residential                       recreation areas in the form of community
                                                   parks to provide additional recreation
    Various types of recreational uses are
                                                   space to further meet the goal of parkland
    currently      incorporated     into    multi-
                                                   for the residents and to satisfy the city’s
    residential projects as part of the
                                                   community goals.
    development review including pools,
    tennis courts, jogging paths, and open
    space for active and passive recreation.
    The inclusion of these recreational
    elements is part of the open space
    requirement of the city’s multi-family
    Residential Planned Development Zone.
    Cultural Arts Facility
    In consideration of the various land use
    proposals      throughout     the    City  of
    Camarillo, the City should consider the
    establishment of a cultural arts facility to
    serve the performing and visual arts.
    This facility should be placed in a location
    8.6                                                                              October 9, 2002

                   RECREATION
RECREATION ELEMENT
October 9, 2002        8.7
City of Camarillo General Plan
                        DEVELOPED MINI AND NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS
                                                  Size in    Year
     Park Name     Location                                          Facilities
                                                  Acres    Developed
                                                                     Play Equipment
                                                                     Running Track
    Adolfo         Adolfo Road & Almendro Way       2.7       1980
                                                                     Play Equipment
                                                                     Restrooms
                   Sweetwater Avenue &
    Arneill Ranch                                  4.99       1980   Volleyball Poles
                   Truman Street
                   Birchview Lane &
    Birchview                                       0.7       1977   Play Equipment
                   Laurel Ridge
    Calleguas      Avenida Valencia &                                Play Equipment
                                                   3.22       2000
    Creek          Via Jacaranda                                     Open Play Area
                                                                     Fitness Course
                   Charter Oak Drive &                               Play Equipment
    Charter Oak                                    5.69       1981
                   Parkway Drive                                     Volleyball Poles
                                                                     Basketball
                                                                     Picnic Tables
    Carmenita      Carmen Drive &                                    BBQ Pit
                                                   1.82       2000
                   Sevilla Street                                    Play Equipment
                                                                     Half-court basketball
                                                                     Play Equipment
                   Crestview Avenue &
    Crestview                                      3.39       1968   Volleyball Poles
                   Camino Esplendido
                                                                     Restrooms
                                                                     Play Equipment
                   Ventura Boulevard &
                                                   0.99       1965   Restrooms
    Dizdar         Glenn Drive
                                                                     Multipurpose Building
                                                                     Tot Lot
                   Las Posas Road &                                  Play Equipment
    Dos Caminos                                    4.39       1966
                   Ponderosa Drive                                   Restrooms
                                                                     Multipurpose Building
                   Avenida Encanto &                                 Play Equipment
    Encanto                                         3.0       1971
                   Blanco Court                                      Volleyball Poles
                                                                     Play Equipment
                   East Cranbrook &
    Foothill                                       2.32       1973   Volleyball Poles
                   North Lathan Avenue
                                                                     Basketball
                   Heritage Trail near                               Play Equipment
    Heritage                                       8.89       1990
                   Joshua Trail                                      Barbecues
                   Mobil Avenue &                                    Play Equipment
    Laurelwood                                     1.53       1981
                   Dexter Drive                                      Volleyball poles
                                                                     Picnic Tables
                                                                     BBQ Pit
                   Vista Coto Verde       & Calle
    Lokker Park                                       7.70    1999   Play Equipment
                   Higuera Avenue
                                                                     Volleyball Court
                                                                     Basketball Courts
                                                                     Play Equipment
                                                                     BBQ Pit
    Quito          Quito Court & Calle Dia          5.0       1995
                                                                     Picnic Tables
                                                                     Volleyball Courts
    Springville                                                      Play Equipment
                   Terra Santa and Via Zamora      4.88       1999
    Park                                                             Tennis Courts
    Trailside      Willow View Drive                0.5       1976   Play Equipment
                                                                     Picnic Tables
                   Woodcreek Road & Lynnwood                         BBQ Pit
    Woodcreek                                       4.6       1998
                   Drive                                             Play Equipment
                                                                     Soccer Field
                   Ridgeview Avenue & Japonica
    Woodside                                        4.9       1981   Play Equipment
                   Avenue
    8.8                                                                                    October 9, 2002
                                                                                               RECREATION
                                 DEVELOPED COMMUNITY PARKS
                                                    Size in  Year
      Park Name                 Location              Acres   Developed             Facilities
                                                                        Auditorium
                                                                        Cafeteria
  Community Center     Burnley Street and                               Meeting Rooms
                                                      12.85      1969
                       Carmen Drive                                     Tot Lot
                                                                        Horseshoe pits
                                                                        Volleyball poles
                                                                        Meeting Rooms
                                                                        Swimming Pool
                       Pleasant Valley Rd. &                            Restrooms
                                                      33.86      1977
  Freedom              Eubanks Street                                   2 Tennis Courts
                                                                        3 Lighted Ballfields
                                                                        6 Soccer Fields
                                                                        Snack Bar
                       Mission Oaks &                                   6 Tennis Courts
                                                       10.0      1983
  Mission Oaks         Oak Canyon                                       3 Ballfields
                                                                        Parking Lot
                                                                        Indoor Swimming Pool
                                                                        Play Equipment
                       Temple Avenue, South of                          2 Horseshoe pits
  Pleasant Valley                                     12.95      1969
                       Ponderosa Drive                                  3 Lighted Ballfields
                                                                        6 Tennis Courts
                                                                        2 Volleyball Courts
                                                                        Play Equipment
                       Valle Lindo & Aileen                             5 Tennis Courts
  Valle Lindo                                          10.0      1978
                       Street                                           Restrooms
                                                                        Amphitheater
                          UNDER CONSTRUCTION COMMUNITY PARK
         Park Name                              Location                           Size In Acres
  Mariposa                 Flynn Road & Calle Brisa                                     10.0
                                   DEVELOPED REGIONAL PARK
                                                    Size in Year
        Park Name                Location            Acres   Developed              Facilities
                                                                        Picnic Tables
                          U.S. 101/ Ventura                 Acquired    BBQ Pit
  Camarillo Grove Park    Fwy. & Camarillo            24.5  from County Play Equipment
                          Springs                           2002        Horseshoe Pits
                                                                        Group Picnic
October 9, 2002                                                                                    8.9
City of Camarillo General Plan
                                      SPECIAL USE COMMUNITY PARKS
                                                 Size in    Year
            Park Name               Location      Acres       Developed               Facilities
      Las Posas Equestrian   Via Veneto            2.06          1982        Arena Dressage Area
    SPECIAL USE PARK
                                                                           Year
             Park Name               Location     Size In Acres                              Facilities
                                                                        Developed
                                Carmen Drive &                                          Performing Arts
      Constitution Park                                 4.0
                                Paseo Camarillo                            1977         Pavillion
    PROPOSED PARKS
           Park Name                   Location               Size In Acres               Facilities
                                                                                   Soccer Fields
                                                        55-acre Community          Softball Fields
      Village at the Park   Pleasant Valley Road
                                                        Sports Park                Basketball Courts
                                                                                   Tennis Courts
    8.10                                                                                   October 9, 2002
ADOPTED MAY 8, 2013
                                    Safety Element 2013
  This element establishes goals,
 objectives, and policies to assist
                                     CAMARILLO
 the City of Camarillo in assuring
 that the community is safe from
 natural and man-made hazards.
                                          CITY OF CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT  2013

            Prepared for:
          City of Camarillo
Community Development Department
         601 Carmen Drive
   Camarillo, California 93010
            Prepared by:
           RBF Consulting
       14725 Alton Parkway
     Irvine, California 92618
                    CITY OF CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT  2013

              11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
Adopted: May 8, 2013
Previously Adopted: November 29, 1989 & August 8, 1990
TABLE OF CONTENTS
11.1 Introduction ...............................................................................................................11-1
     11.1.1 Authority for Element .....................................................................................11-1
     11.1.2 Element Organization......................................................................................11-1
     11.1.3 Relationship to Other General Plan Elements ..................................................11-2
11.2 Camarillo Safety Setting, Regulations, and Related Documents ..................................11-3
     11.2.1 Existing Setting................................................................................................11-3
     11.2.2 Regulatory Framework ..................................................................................11-52
11.3 Context for Safety Element Policy .............................................................................11-58
11.4 Goals, Objectives, and Policies ..................................................................................11-61
11.5 Implementing Actions ...............................................................................................11-73
11.6 Sources Cited ............................................................................................................11-75
                                                                                                               MAY 2013  11-i

                 11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
EXHIBITS
11-1   Regional Soils Map......................................................................................................11-5
11-2   Camarillo Fault Map ...................................................................................................11-9
11-3   Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone Map ................................................................11-13
11-4   Liquefaction Susceptibility Map ...............................................................................11-15
11-5   FEMA Flood Zones ....................................................................................................11-19
11-6   Dam Inundation Areas ..............................................................................................11-21
11-7   High Fire Hazard Zones .............................................................................................11-25
11-8   Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan ......................................................................11-33
11-9   Camarillo Airport Master Plan Concept .....................................................................11-37
11-10a Camarillo Airport Sphere of Influence .......................................................................11-41
11-10b Camarillo Airport F.A.R. Part 77 Airspace Plan .........................................................11-43
11-10c Camarillo Airport F.A.R. Part 77 Airspace Plan ..........................................................11-45
TABLES
11-1   Dams with Inundation Potential in Ventura County ..................................................11-17
11-2   Adopted Land Use Compatibility Standards Related to Aircraft Noise
       for Ventura County Airports .....................................................................................11-32
11-3   Adopted Land Use Compatibility Standards in Safety Zones for Civilian Airports.......11-36
                                                                                                            MAY 2013  11-ii

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
11.1         INTRODUCTION
The Safety Element describes potential hazards that exist in Camarillo and the measures that
the City is taking to address them. Some naturally occurring hazards may be unavoidable, but
their impacts on communities can be reduced through planning and preparation. Thus, the
Safety Element addresses geologic, seismic, flood, and fire hazards. This Element also
addresses hazards created by human activity: hazardous materials and waste, aircraft hazards,
and incidents that require emergency response. Expecting that emergencies will occur even
when precautions are taken against hazards, the Safety Element describes the City’s efforts to
prepare for and respond to emergencies.
11.1.1 Authority for Element
California Government Code Section 65302(g)(1) requires that a General Plan include:
    “ . . . A safety element for the protection of the community from any unreasonable
    risks associated with the effects of seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking,
    ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope instability leading to mudslides
    and landslides; subsidence, liquefaction, and other seismic hazards identified pursuant
    to Chapter 7.8 (commencing with Section 2690) of Division 2 of the Public Resources
    Code, and other geologic hazards known to the legislative body; flooding; and wildland
    and urban fires . . . .”
11.1.2 Element Organization
This element has been organized to be consistent with the other General Plan Elements. As
such, the goals, objectives, and policies are the essence of the element, providing declarative
statements setting forth the City’s approach to various issues. A definition of these key terms is
provided below, along with a table explaining the hierarchy and numbering for the goals,
objectives, and policies.
Goal: A general statement of desired community outcome.
Objective: A subset of a goal, an objective is more specific and provides measurable strategies.
Policy: Policies are actions that a community will undertake to meet the goals and objectives.
Implementing Action: A list of recommended actions necessary to achieve element goals,
objectives, and policies; implementing actions are discussed in Section 11.6.
                                                                                  MAY 2013  11-1

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
        Goal, Objective, and Policy Hierarchy
                                                              Element Acronym Example
                  and Numbering
 1. Goal                  Each goal number starts   Goal SAF-1         Each goal statement
                          with the element                             follows the goal acronym
                          acronym and is followed                      and number and generally
                          by the number of the goal                    has one or more objectives
                                                                       associated with the goal.
 2. Objective             Each objective number     Objective          Each objective statement
                          starts with the element   SAF-1.1            follows the objective
                          acronym and is followed                      number and generally has
                          by the number of the goal                    a policy associated with
                          and objective.                               the objective.
 3. Policy                Each policy number starts Policy             Each policy statement is
                          with the element          SAF-1.1a           associated with a specific
                          acronym and is followed                      goal and objective
                          by the number of the
                          goal, objective, and
                          policy.
11.1.3 Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
The Safety Element supports the other General Plan elements and focuses on community
safety. The elements of the General Plan that have the greatest relationship to the Safety
Element are: Land Use Element, Circulation Element, Housing Element, and Open Space &
Conservation Element. While the Safety Element has a less direct relationship with the
remaining General Plan elements, each element is singularly important, and collectively, the
elements form the framework of Camarillo’s future.
Land Use Element
The Land Use Element of the General Plan identifies the classifications of land within the City.
The Safety Element provides additional guidance on potential natural and man-made hazards as
they relate to the siting and development of future land uses.
Circulation Element
The Circulation Element discusses road design and non-motorized mobility. The Safety Element
considers the road system throughout the City for emergency response services.
                                                                                  MAY 2013  11-2

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
Noise Element
The Noise Element serves as a comprehensive program for controlling noise in the Camarillo
Planning area. The Noise Element: 1) provides noise environment information in the form of
CNEL contours so that noise may be effectively considered in the land use planning process; 2)
includes noise standards, policies, and implementation measures to avoid incompatible land
uses due to excessive noise; and 3) protects existing regions within Camarillo where noise
environments are deemed acceptable and protect existing and future areas throughout
Camarillo that are considered to be noise sensitive. The Safety Element considers the noise
levels associated with the Camarillo Airport.
Housing Element
The Housing Element includes an identification and analysis of existing and projected housing
needs, and a statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives and scheduled programs for the
preservation, improvement and development of housing; along with the identification of
adequate sites for housing and the adequate provision for the existing and projected needs of
all economic segments of the community. The Safety Element addresses hazards or nuisances
that should be avoided in the location of housing, or mitigated in the construction of housing.
Open Space and Conservation Element
The Open Space and Conservation Element is the primary tool for the protection of the
community’s natural environment, providing critical input into the preparation of the Land Use
and Circulation Elements. The Safety Element directly relates to topics of concern in the Open
Space and Conservation Element, particularly with respect to natural hazards (i.e., seismic,
flooding) and their correlation to areas identified for open space or conservation.
11.2        CAMARILLO SAFETY SETTING, REGULATIONS, AND RELATED
            DOCUMENTS
11.2.1 Existing Setting
SOILS
There are many types of soils within Camarillo. Generally, soils in Camarillo are expansive in
nature and have a high shrink-swell potential. Highly expansive soils are present in the east and
west ends of the City of Camarillo. Less expansive soils are present in the core of the City.
Below is a listing of the common soils in the eastern, western, and central portions of the City,
as identified by United States Department of Agriculture Soils records and maps, and are shown
on Exhibit 11-1, Regional Soils Map):
                                                                                 MAY 2013  11-3

            11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
 NAACP sandy loam and gravelly loam
 Azure loam
 Badland
 Calleguas shaly loam
 Calleguas-Arnold Complex
 Camarillo loam, sandy loam, and substratum
 Castaic-Balcom complex
 Cibo Clay
 Corralitos loamy sand
 Cropley Clay
 Diablo Clay
 Garretson loam
 Gilroy Clay loam and very rocky clay loam
 Gullied land
 Hambright very rocky loam and very rocky clay loam
 Hueneme loamy sand, sandy loam, and substratum
 Huerhuero very fine sandy loam
 Igneous rock land
 Metz loamy and loamy fine sand
 Mocho gravelly loam, clay loam and loam
 Pacheco silty clay loam
 Pico sandy loam and loam
 Rincon silty clay loam
 Riverwash
 Salinas clay loam
 San Andreas sandy and clay loam
 San Benito clay loam
 Sandy alluvial land
 Soper loam and gravelly loam
 Sorrento loam and silty clay loam
 Vina loam, gravelly loam and silty clay loam
 Zamora loam
                                                     MAY 2013  11-4

Source: City of Camarillo GIS, USDA-NRCS Soil Data Mart Data dated 2006; ESRI Terrain Basemap.
                                                                                                   CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                               Regional Soils Map
                  05/13 • JN 10-108718 (130358)
                                                                                                               Exhibit 11-1

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-6

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
These expansive soils present potential hazards in Camarillo because they expand when wet
and collapse or shrink when dry. The change in volume due to high shrink-swell potential can
exert detrimental stresses on buildings and cause structural damage. In the past, damage has
been recorded in the Camarillo Heights area and on the west side of the City. The residential
areas on the east side of the City on Santa Rosa Road are also located in areas of highly
expansive soils.
LOADING SETTLEMENT
Loading settlement can be immediate or occur gradually over a long period of time. Immediate
settlement is normally associated with loose granular soils when they are subjected to loads.
These soils are generally found in young alluvium or loosely deposited materials.
SUBSIDENCE AND INUNDATION
Subsidence is the ground settlement that results over time from the extraction of oil or
groundwater. This process usually extends over a large area and occurs on a gradual basis so
the settlement effects on a single site, relative to its immediate neighbors, may be negligible as
the neighboring properties are also subsiding.
Inundation is a potential secondary effect of subsidence in Ventura County. Both the ocean and
the Santa Clara River could flood into depressed areas of the Oxnard Plain. The Santa Clara
River is building up sediments within its present course while no longer adding deposits to the
remainder of the Oxnard Plain. If the old deposition consolidates, a flood could change the
river course and thus inundate the lower land. Extraction of oil and/or water could increase the
potential for such an occurrence and increase the area affected.
SEISMIC HAZARDS
The City of Camarillo, like the rest of Southern California, is located within a seismically active
region. Faults and earthquakes present direct hazards from fault rupture and ground shaking
as well as indirect hazards, described below.
FAULTS
The most significant known active fault zones that are capable of seismic ground shaking and
can impact Camarillo are discussed below, and are shown on Exhibit 11-2, Camarillo Fault Map.
Simi/Santa Rosa Fault. The Simi/Santa Rosa fault zone is a complex zone of faults that trends
westward from the Santa Susana Mountains, along the northerly margin of the Simi and Tierra
Rejada Valleys, along the southern slopes of the Las Posas and Camarillo Hills, to their westerly
slopes of the Las Posas and Camarillo Hills, to their easterly termination at the western edge of
Camarillo.
                                                                                  MAY 2013  11-7

                 11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
Bailey Fault. This fault marks the boundary between the western margin of the Santa Monica
Mountains and the Oxnard Plain and is located in the City of Camarillo. It extends from the
Mugu Lagoon area northerly to an apparent intersection with the Camarillo Fault north of U.S.
101. The location of this fault is inferred based primarily upon water well data.
Camarillo Fault. The Camarillo fault extends in an east-west direction from the southern side of
Camarillo High School to the Camarillo Airport. The trace of the fault is highlighted by the
abrupt linear ridges that have been uplifted along the northern side of the fault in the southern
portion of Camarillo.
Wright Road Fault. This fault is located at the western end of Camarillo, and was named the
“Wright Road fault” after its most prominent scarp across Wright Road. In 1998, CDMG zoned
the Wright Road fault under the Alquist-Priolo Fault Hazard Zone Act after Treiman (1997)
determined that it is an active, near-surface feature.
Sycamore Canyon and Boney Mountain Faults. These faults are the most prominent of a series
of northeast-trending breaks extending from the Point Mugu and south coast area to the
Thousand Oaks area. The presence of the faults is evident by surface exposures showing
displacement of sedimentary and volcanic rocks of pre-Pleistocene age. The faults are
designated as potentially active until more information is available for evaluation.
Oak Ridge Fault System (Not Depicted on Exhibit 11-2). The Oak Ridge fault is a major 35- to
56-kilometer-long, south-dipping reverse fault. The fault extends from the Santa Susana
Mountains, westward to the Ventura area where it has been overridden by the Ventura-Pitas
Point and Country Club faults. The fault system is considered active and a portion of the fault
near the Bardsdale Cemetery in Fillmore (approximately 11 miles north of Camarillo) has been
delineated as an Alquist-Priolo fault-hazard zone by the California Division of Mines & Geology.
Ventura-Pitas Point and Country Club Faults (Not Depicted on Exhibit 11-2). The Ventura fault
has been mapped along the base of the hills south of Sulphur Mountain extending from north
Saticoy westerly to the mouth of the Ventura River then westerly an unknown distance into the
Santa Barbara Channel area, located approximately 11 miles from Camarillo, in the City of
Ventura. The fault is referred to as the Pitas Point fault where it extends offshore.
Red Mountain/San Cayetano/Santa Susana/San Fernando Fault System (Not Depicted on
Exhibit 11-2). This fault system consists of a major series of north-dipping thrust faults, which
extend over 150 miles from Santa Barbara County into Los Angeles County. Geologic evidence
suggests that the fault system should be considered active throughout its length is shown by
location of earthquake epicenters. The system is associated with an intense zone of folded and
faulted bedrock.
                                                                                  MAY 2013  11-8

Source: City of Camarillo GIS Data dated October 31, 2001; ESRI Terrain Basemap.
                                                                                     CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                 Camarillo Fault Map
                  05/13 • JN 10-108718 (130358)
                                                                                                 Exhibit 11-2

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-10

                   11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
Santa Ynez Fault (Not Depicted on Exhibit 11-2). This fault extends from Point Conception in
Santa Barbara County, across the central portion of Ventura County, to near the eastern County
line. It is considered to be one of the major faults in the region and is about 90 miles long. Past
displacement has been about 10,000 feet of the relative uplifting of the south side of the fault.
The fault lies about 4 miles north of Ojai.
North County Line Faults (Not Depicted on Exhibit 11-2). Several large faults occur in the
mountainous area north of the Santa Ynez fault and within Ventura County. The most
significant of these faults are the Tule Creek, Munson Creek, Aqua Blanca, Frazier Mountain,
and Big Pine faults. Of those, the more important appear to be the Pine Mountain Thrust and
Big Pine faults (9 and 16 miles north of Ojai, respectively). Both of those faults are considered
active.
San Andreas Fault (Not Depicted on Exhibit 11-2). The San Andreas is the longest and perhaps
most important fault in California. That historically active fault has a length of over 960
kilometers and forms the tectonic boundary between the Pacific Plate to the west and the
North American Plate to the east. Several major earthquakes have been recorded on the San
Andreas fault, and it is generally considered to pose a significant earthquake risk to California.
In its closest proximity to Camarillo, this fault is located 30-40 miles north of the City of
Camarillo.
FAULT RUPTURE
To assist cities and counties in avoiding the hazard of surface fault rupture, the Alquist-Priolo
Earthquake Fault Zoning Act requires the State Geologist to establish Earthquake Fault Zones
around the surface traces of active faults. The State has identified three Alquist-Priolo
Earthquake Fault Zones within Camarillo, shown in Exhibit 11-3, Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
Zone Map. These zones are located along and just north of Las Posas Road, south of U.S. 101
just to the east of the airport, and north of U.S. 101 in the vicinity of Camarillo Road. To
supplement the State-designated fault-rupture zones, the City of Camarillo has established
several additional fault-rupture zones that also require fault investigations.
SEISMIC SHAKING
The effects of seismic shaking on future structures and land development projects within the
City may be mitigated by adhering to adopted building codes. The California Building Standards
Code regulates the design and construction of foundations, building frames, retaining walls,
excavations, and other building elements to mitigate the effects of seismic shaking and adverse
soil conditions.
                                                                                  MAY 2013  11-11

                    11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
SECONDARY SEISMIC HAZARDS
Ground shaking can induce secondary seismic hazards such as liquefaction, lateral spreading,
subsidence, ground fissuring, and landslides. Liquefaction of saturated cohesionless soils can
be caused by strong ground motion resulting from earthquakes. A large portion of the City,
primarily the western half, lies within a liquefaction hazard zone per the State of California;
refer to Exhibit 11-4, Liquefaction Susceptibility Map. The process of liquefaction may also
produce lateral spreading of soils on properties adjacent to creeks and drainages, such as
Calleguas Creek and Conejo Creek.
Active faults may develop fissuring along the fault trace during a significant seismic event or
groundwater elevation change, which could lead to differential subsidence. If commercial
water wells are installed within or near the subsidence zone, the potential for ground fissuring
and differential settlement effects could be more noticeable.
Earthquake-related landslide potential within the City limits can be understood based on known
conditions and published geologic maps. Landslides and potentially unstable slopes are
especially common in hillside areas underlain by sedimentary bedrock of the Pico, Saugus,
Santa Barbara, Monterey/Modelo and Rincon Formations. Those formations are generally soft
and contain abundant silt and clay strata. Portions of the southern, eastern and western
margins of the Camarillo Hills and the southwestern Santa Rosa Hills are present within the City.
A few significant landslides are known to exist within those areas, and many slopes are only
marginally stable. As in most other hilly terrain, landsliding can be caused by construction
activities, unless stability considerations are incorporated in the design of development.
Additionally, the potential for rock fall due to a seismic event or natural weathering and
instability is also present in properties at the base of hillsides where rocks and boulders exist.
FLOOD HAZARDS
CREEKS AND FLOODING
The Calleguas and Conejo Creeks are both located within the eastern portion of the City of
Camarillo, and the Beardsley Wash/Revolon Slough is located west of the City. Although
extensive channel improvements have been constructed within the City, there are continuing
efforts to reduce the flood risk east of Somis Road and off of Howard Road, along with building
greater community resiliency through flood control project partnerships with the City and the
Ventura County Watershed Protection District. Uses in the hazard areas are largely agricultural,
with some residential and industrial development. Sections of U.S. 101 and rail lines of the
Southern Pacific Railroad are also in the hazard zone. The Ventura County Watershed
Protection District has designated Calleguas and Conejo Creeks and Beardsley Wash/Revolon
Slough as District jurisdictional red line channels, and as such the District holds the right-of-way
over the reaches of Calleguas and Conejo Creeks and Beardsley Wash/Revolon Slough and all
other District jurisdictional red line channels within the current Camarillo city limits.
                                                                                   MAY 2013  11-12

Source: City of Camarillo GIS Data dated November 8, 2002; ESRI Terrain Basemap.
                                                                                                           CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                 Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone Map
                  05/13 • JN 10-108718 (130358)
                                                                                                                       Exhibit 11-3

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-14

Source: City of Camarillo GIS Data dated September 27, 2002; ESRI Terrain Basemap.
                                                                                                   CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                   Liquefaction Susceptibility Map
                  05/13 • JN 10-108718 (130358)
                                                                                                               Exhibit 11-4

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-16

                           11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
      Flooding in special risk areas can occur rapidly or slowly, depending on the heaviness and
      severity of rainfall. According to the Ventura County General Plan Hazards Appendix, much of
      Camarillo lies outside identified 100-year flood zones. This has also been confirmed on FEMA
      Maps dated January 22, 2010, as shown in Exhibit 11-5, FEMA Flood Zones.
      DAM INUNDATION AREAS
      According to the Ventura County General Plan Hazards Appendix, there are many dams within
      the County. Additionally, much of Camarillo is within an area subject to potential inundation.
      The City is within the vicinity of the Bard Reservoir, which holds approximately 11,000 acre-feet
      of water. In addition, potential dam inundation associated with failure of the Pyramid Dam
      could affect parts of the City. Potential dam inundation areas are shown on Exhibit 11-6, Dam
      Inundation Areas. Other dam inundation areas throughout the County are listed in Table 11-1,
      Dams within Inundation Potential in Ventura County.
                                                             TABLE 11-1
                                   Dams with Inundation Potential in Ventura County
                                                  Capacity                                         Impacted Areas In
 Dam/Reservoir Name              Owner           Acre-Feet       Type            Flood Route        Ventura County     Special Features
Bard Reservoir         Calleguas Municipal         11,000       Earth     Arroyo Simi             Simi Valley,
(Wood Ranch)           Water District                                                             Moorpark,
                                                                                                  Camarillo
Bouquet Canyon         Los Angeles City Dept of    36,500       Earth     Santa Clara River       Fillmore,           Dam near S.A.
                       Water and Power (DWP)                                                      Bardsdale, Santa    Fault Zone (5
                                                                                                  Paula, El Rio,      miles)
                                                                                                  Oxnard, Pt. Mugu,
                                                                                                  Pierpoint Bay
Casitas Dam            Bureau of Reclamation      254,000      Earth Fill Coyote Creek Ventura    Casitas Springs,    Short Time for
                                                                          River                   Ventura Avenue      Warming
Castaic Dam            California Department of   325,000       Earth     Santa Clara River       Piru, Fillmore,     Hot Potential for
                       Water Resources                                                            Bardsdale, Santa    Debris
                       (CDWR)                                                                     Paula, Oxnard Plain
Drink Water Reservoir* Los Angeles City DWP           80        Earth     San Francisquito Canyon Santa Clara River   River Drainage
Dry Canyon*            Los Angeles City DWP         1,140      Hydrofill  Santa Clara River       Immediate Vicinity  Hydrofill
                                                (Maintained)                                      of River
                                                   Empty)
Elderberry Flood       Los Angeles City DWP        33,000       Earth     Santa Clara River       Fillmore, etc.      Drains into Lake
Basin*                                                                                                                Castaic
Ferro Debris Basin*    V.C. Watershed               7,900       Earth     Beardsley Wash/Revolon  Agricultural Area,
                       Protection District                                Slough                  Highway 118
Lake Eleanor           Conejo Open Space and         128       Constant   Eleanor Creek           Westlake Blvd. to   Concrete Arch
                       Conservation Agency                      Radius                            Westlake            (1881) Short time
                                                                 Arch                                                 for Warming
Lake Sherwood          Murdock Development          2,694      Constant   Petrero Creek           Westlake area to    Concrete Arch
                       Company                                  Radius                            Thousand Oaks       (1904) Short time
                                                                 Arch                                                 for Warming
Las Llajas Reservoir   V.C. Watershed               1,250       Earth     Las Llajas Canyon       Simi Valley
                       Protection District                                                        (midsection)
Las Posas Estates      V.C. Watershed                 42        Earth     Beardsley Wash
Debris Basin*          Protection District
                                                                                                            MAY 2013  11-17

                                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
                                                                   TABLE 11-1 [continued]
                                          Dams with Inundation Potential in Ventura County
                                                                Capacity                                                     Impacted Areas In
 Dam/Reservoir Name                    Owner                    Acre-Feet        Type                 Flood Route              Ventura County    Special Features
Matilija Dam                  V.C. Watershed                       1,800       Variable        Matilija Creek Ventura       Matilija Hot        Dam Declared
                              Protection District                               Radius         River                        Springs, Friends    unsafe (Notch
                                                                                 Arch                                       Ranch, County       reduces storage
                                                                                                                            Dump, Live Oak      capacity,
                                                                                                                            Acres, County       monitored
                                                                                                                            Honor Farm,         quarterly by
                                                                                                                            Casitas Springs,    VCFCD)
                                                                                                                            and Ventura
                                                                                                                            Riverbed
Meiners Oaks*                 Meiners Oaks County                    15          Earth
                              Water District                      (out of
                                                                 service)
Sycamore Canyon*              V.C. Watershed                        890          Earth         Arroyo Simi                  Simi Valley         Inundated by
                              Protection District                                                                                               Bard (Wood
                                                                                                                                                Ranch)
Pyramid Dam                   CDWR                               179,000       Earth Fill      Piru Creek, Santa Clara      Piru, Bardsdale,    Flows into Lake
                                                                                               River                        Fillmore, Santa     Piru (Santa Felicia
                                                                                                                            Paula, Oxnard Plain Dam)
Runkle Debris Basin           V.C. Watershed                        100          Earth         Runkle Canyon                Simi Valley
                              Protection District                                                                           (Midsection)
Santa Felicia Dam             United Water                       100,000         Earth         Piru Creek, Santa Clara      Piru, Bardsdale,    Short time to Piru
(Lake Piru)                   Conservation District                                            River                        Fillmore, Santa
                                                                                                                            Paula, Oxnard, Pt.
                                                                                                                            Hueneme
Senior Canyon                 Senior Canyon Mutual                   78          Earth         Senior Canyon, San           Ojai
Reservoir                     Water Co.                                                        Antonio Creek
Sinaloa Lake                  Sinaloa Lake Home                     200          Earth         Oak Canyon Arroyo Simi       Simi Valley         Inundated by
                              Owners Association                                                                                                Bard (Wood
                                                                                                                                                Ranch)
*Exempted by State Office of Emergency Services (OES) from preparing Dam Inundation Plans or Inundation Maps for Ventura Coun ty.
Source: Figure 2.11.1, Ventura County General Plan, June 28, 2011.
                                                                                                                                     MAY 2013  11-18

Source: City of Camarillo GIS Data dated January 22, 2010; ESRI Terrain Basemap.
                                                                                   CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                 FEMA Flood Zones
                  05/13 • JN 10-108718 (130358)
                                                                                               Exhibit 11-5

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-20

Source: City of Camarillo GIS Data dated August 28, 2012; ESRI Terrain Basemap.
                                                                                      CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                Dam Inundation Areas
                  05/13 • JN 10-108718 (130358)
                                                                                                  Exhibit 11-6

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-22

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
FIRE HAZARDS
WILDLAND FIRES
A wildland fire is an uncontrolled fire spreading through vegetative fuels that may expose or
consume structures. Although not located in a wilderness area, the threat of a wildland fire in
or near Camarillo is high due to the wildland urban areas in and around the City, where
structures and other human development meet or intermingle with wildland or vegetative
fuels. The threat of wildfire is particularly significant during dry summer months and when
there are strong Santa Ana winds. The fire season typically extends approximately five to six
months, from late spring through fall. The aftermath of wildland fire produces new areas of
potential landslide as burned and defoliated soils are exposed to winter rains.
The undeveloped hillside areas in and adjacent to the City present a potentially serious hazard
due to the high potential for large-scale wildland fires, as shown in Exhibit 11-7, High Fire
Hazard Zones. The hills along the northern and eastern boundaries of the City are notorious for
their threat of wildland fires that move quickly through the area. According to the Ventura
County Community Wildfire Protection Plan, these areas are within the “Very High” Fire
Severity Zone. Other portions of land to the north and east are within the “Moderate” Fire
Severity Zone.
There are a number of building criteria and site maintenance techniques available for the
Ventura County Fire Department (also known as the Ventura County Fire Protection District)
and property owners to use for areas within a Fire Severity Zone or areas described as
Communities at Risk.
Communities at Risk include areas and Cities where structures and other human development
meet and intermingle with undeveloped wildland or vegetative fuels. The various techniques
are detailed in the California Building Standards Code, Chapters 7 and 7A, and the California
Fire Code, Chapter 47 (California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9), and address topics such
noncombustible siding for buildings and 100-foot fuel modification (buffer) zones.
In addition, community planning, awareness, and involvement are proven elements of
effectively reducing the occurrence of wildland fires and damage associated with them. Weed
abatement notices are sent to property owners in Camarillo, and the Fire Department actively
enforces weed abatement procedures. The Ventura County Community Wildfire Protection
Plan also outlines a weed abatement procedure along Calleguas Creek. The purpose of this
plan is to ensure that annual combustible plants such as Arundo and Tamarisk are removed to
prevent fire hazards along the creek. Fire staff has confirmed that this program is in process
and ongoing year-round as necessary.
                                                                                MAY 2013  11-23

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
Creating Ignition-Resistant Structures through proper roofing materials, monitoring structural
extensions and openings, and creating defensible space around structures are all proven
methods for reducing potential wildfire hazards. Maintaining access to allow for firefighting
equipment access also plays an important role in reducing wildfire hazards. The Fire
Department has also published a Fire Hazard Reduction Program Plant Reference Guide.
URBAN FIRES
No significant unusual urban fire hazards have been identified in Camarillo. Local high fire
hazard zones are located in the wildland/urban interface areas, as described above.
Management of hazardous materials that can cause fires is described in the Hazardous
Materials Hazards section. Protection from urban fire hazards includes fire prevention and
suppression, described in Fire Protection below.
FIRE PROTECTION
Fire suppression and preventative services in Camarillo are provided by the Ventura County Fire
Department. Mutual aid, automatic aid and other agreements with surrounding departments
allow the Ventura County Fire Department to provide the fastest and highest level of service.
The County Fire Department has three fire stations located within the City of Camarillo,
described below.
Fire Station 50. Located on South Las Posas Road, Fire Station 50 was completed in early 2001
and serves the Camarillo Airport, the western portion of the City of Camarillo and
unincorporated portions of the Oxnard Plain. It is also the headquarters for Division 1.
This District’s hazardous materials response unit and the District’s Hazmat Officer are also
assigned here. The aircraft fire/rescue vehicle also operates out of this Station.
In 2006, a Paramedic Squad with two Paramedic/Firefighters went into service at Station 50.
The Station is staffed daily by five firefighters and houses an engine (Engine 50); a crash truck
(Crash 50); a tractor-trailer HazMat unit (Hazmat 50); a squad (Squad 50); and a utility pickup
(Utility 50). Also assigned to Station 50 are two De-Con trailers used for decontamination at
HazMat incidents.
Fire Station 52. This Station is located on Santa Rosa Road and serves the eastern portion of
the City of Camarillo and much of the Santa Rosa Valley. The Station was built in 1982 on land
donated by the City to provide protection for the growth in the area. In 2002, the firefighter
position was upgraded to Paramedic/Firefighter. This Station is staffed daily by three
firefighters and houses a medic/engine (Medic/Engine 52); a reserve engine (Engine 152); and a
brush engine (Engine 352).
                                                                                 MAY 2013  11-24

Source: City of Camarillo GIS Data dated November 25, 2002; ESRI Terrain Basemap.
                                                                                          CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                  High Fire Hazard Zones
                  05/13 • JN 10-108718 (130358)
                                                                                                      Exhibit 11-7

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-26

                   11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
Fire Station 54. Located at 2160 Pickwick Drive, this Station was built in 1995 to replace the old
fire station and county building on Ventura Boulevard. Fire Station 54 serves the central area of
the City of Camarillo and is the Battalion 1 Headquarters. Battalion 1 commands the Camarillo
and Somis areas and the department’s Special Operations activities. Special operations include
hazardous materials mitigation, urban search and rescue services and specialized fire fighting
activities such as shipboard and aircraft emergencies.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE TIMES AND ISO RATINGS
It is anticipated that average response times within Camarillo is 5 minutes or less. Insurance
Services Offices (ISO) rates are not used by the Ventura County Fire Department.
FIRE PREVENTION CODES
The Fire Department engages in activities that are aimed at preventing fires and compliance
with California Building Standards Code, Chapters 7 and 7A, and the California Fire Code
(California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9). The Department provides fire protection
engineering, building inspections for code compliance, and hazardous materials inspections. As
described later in this Element, the Department also provides education and training in public
safety and emergency preparedness.
Additionally, new development is subject to payment of a Fire Protection Facilities Fee. The
Camarillo Municipal Code Section 16.50.010 states that new construction within the city will
create a need for additional fire protection services and a corresponding need for additional or
enlarged fire stations from which to provide those services. The Ventura County Fire
Department, which provides fire protection services to the City, has the primary responsibility
for providing the additional fire protection services, but its tax revenues are insufficient to
provide the corresponding additional or enlarged fire stations and it is questionable whether
the fire district has authority to directly impose a fee on new construction for such purposes.
The City of Camarillo does have authority to impose such a fee and it is in the interest of the
City to ensure that the Fire Department has sufficient funds to pay for the needed new or
enlarged fire stations.
FIRE PREVENTION PROGRAMS
Ready, Set, Go! -- Wildfire Action Plan. Since Ventura County is so large and fires can be very
prevalent, a county-wide program called “Ready, Set, Go” is a fire protection plan that is
intended to protect residents from Urban and Wildfires. The purpose of the “Ready, Set, Go”
program is to provide residents with a Wildfire Action Plan that serves as an educational tool
informing residents about wildland/urban interface, defensible spaces, making their homes
more fire resistant, fire preparation, and finally, in the event of a fire emergency, preparing to
leave and evacuate to safety.
                                                                                 MAY 2013  11-27

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE
A hazardous material is any substance that may be explosive, flammable, poisonous, corrosive,
radioactive, reactive, or any combination thereof, because of its quantity, concentration, or
characteristics. Hazardous materials require special care in handling due to the hazards they
pose to public health, safety, and the environment. Potential hazards associated with
hazardous materials include fires, explosions, and leaks. Releases of hazardous materials can
be damaging when they occur in highly populated areas or along transportation routes.
Hazardous materials are transported through the City, and businesses within the City handle,
transport, and/or store hazardous materials. Other sources of hazardous materials include
agricultural operations, illegal drug manufacturing, and clandestine dumping.
Existing Federal, State, and local laws regulate the use, transport, disposal, and storage of
hazardous materials within Camarillo.
Additionally, the County of Ventura’s Environmental Health Hazardous Materials Program is a
Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA). The CUPA is a single local agency designated by the
California Environmental Protection Agency as having regulatory authority for six
environmental programs: Hazardous Waste, Hazardous Waste On-site Treatment, Spill
Prevention Countermeasure Plan (aboveground tanks), Underground Storage Tanks, Hazardous
Materials Business Plan and Inventory, and Risk Management Plan. The Ventura County CUPA
enforces those programs throughout the County, except for the City of Oxnard. In addition to
the CUPA Program, County staff responds whenever there is an accidental release of hazardous
materials.
The program also includes the Leaking Underground Fuel Tank (LUFT) Program that oversees
cleanup of leaky underground tank sites under contract to the State Water Board.
Environmental Health Department Reference Documents include the following:
       California Health and Safety Code, Division 20
       California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Title 22 and Title 23
       Ventura County Ordinance, Chapter 5
       Ventura County Environmental Health Division
TRANSPORT OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Hazardous substance incidents are prone to occur within the City of Camarillo due to the
presence of highways and railways. Transportation of hazardous materials/wastes is regulated
by California Code of Regulations Title 26. The Federal Department of Transportation (DOT) is
the primary regulatory authority for the interstate transport of hazardous materials, and
establishes regulations for safe handling procedures (i.e., packaging, marking, labeling, and
                                                                              MAY 2013  11-28

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
routing). The California Highway Patrol and the California Department of Transportation
enforce Federal and State regulations and respond to hazardous materials transportation
emergencies. Emergency responses are coordinated as necessary between Federal, State and
local governmental authorities and private persons and are treated as Threat Assessment 2
through the Camarillo Multi-Hazard Functional Plan.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SITES
Certain businesses in the City of Camarillo incorporate hazardous materials into their
production or service processes, and some generate hazardous waste. These businesses
include automotive services, dry cleaners, photo processing, printing, lithography, and medical
services. Additionally, the Multi-Hazard Functional Plan identifies the Equilon Pipeline
Company Crude Oil Line, located in the northeast portion of the city east of Upland Road as an
active and a potential threat, as well as transmission/distribution gas lines within and adjacent
to the City.
Hazardous materials disclosure allows for the inspection of businesses that generate, store, and
use hazardous materials. Through regular inspections, the CUPA can identify hazardous
conditions and can obtain compliance through the fire code to provide for the safety of citizens
and fire fighters in the event of a hazardous materials fire or release.
Furthermore, a Hazardous Materials Business Plan (HMBP) provides the Ventura County
Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA), local fire agencies, and the public with information
on hazardous materials at businesses and most government facilities. The HMBP also
incorporates California Health and Safety Code Chapter 6.95 and California Code of Regulations
Title 19. The CUPA is responsible for HMBP program compliance within Camarillo.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENTS
The HazMat Unit of the Ventura County Fire Department responds to hazardous materials
incidents, with further assistance provided by the County Department of Environmental Health.
All Ventura County Fire Department personnel receive first responder operations training and
are trained in hazardous materials decontamination procedures, so that they can determine
that a problem exists, isolate the problem, and assist an advanced team when it arrives. From
there, the County Department of Environmental Health Staff provides organizational assistance
and supervision for cleanup and decontamination of hazardous materials incidents.
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Hazardous waste is waste with properties that make it dangerous or potentially harmful to
human health or the environment. Camarillo and Ventura area landfills do not accept
hazardous waste. However, households may bring hazardous waste to collection centers and
collection events within the City of Camarillo, while businesses that generate hazardous waste
                                                                                MAY 2013  11-29

                   11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
are required by State and Federal Law to contract with registered hazardous waste transporters
and disposers.
AIRCRAFT HAZARDS
CAMARILLO AIRPORT
Camarillo Airport is classified in the National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems (NPIAS) as a
general aviation reliever airport for the Los Angeles metropolitan area (FAA 1995, p. A-1 5).
Reliever airports play a key role in the nation’s aviation system by providing an alternative to
general aviation users in major metropolitan areas. Camarillo Airport is within the corporate
limits of the City of Camarillo, three miles southwest of the City’s central business district (CBD).
The airport is situated less than one mile south of Ventura Freeway (U.S. 101) and seven miles
east of the Pacific Ocean coastline. Access to the airport is provided by Pleasant Valley Road
immediately south of the airport. The airport is bordered to the east by Las Posas Road, which
links the airport to the Ventura Freeway and the City of Camarillo to the north as well as Naval
Base Ventura County - Point Mugu and the Pacific Coast Highway (State Highway 1) to the
south.
The Ventura County Airport Land Use Commission (VCALUC) adopts plans to protect and
promote the safety and welfare of airport users and residents in the airport vicinity. The
Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan (ACLUP) for Ventura County establishes policies
applicable to land use compatibility planning in the vicinity of airports throughout Ventura
County. Compatibility plans serve as a tool for use by airport land use commissions in fulfilling
their duty to review proposed development plans for airports and surrounding land uses.
Additionally, compatibility plans set compatibility criteria applicable to local agencies in their
preparation or amendment of land use plans and ordinances and to landowners (including
special district and other local government entities as well as private parties) in their design of
new development. State law requires each local agency having jurisdiction over land uses
within an ALUC’s planning area to modify its general plan and any affected specific plans to be
consistent with the compatibility plan.
The basic function of airport land use compatibility plans is to promote compatibility between
airports and the land uses that surround them. Compatibility plans set compatibility criteria
applicable to local agencies in their preparation or amendment of land use plans and
ordinances and to landowners in their design of new development. The principal compatibility
concerns involve impacts related to Noise Compatibility, Safety Compatibility, and Airspace
Protection and Heights.
For this purpose, both the ACLUP and the Camarillo Airport Master Plan are summarized below.
                                                                                  MAY 2013  11-30

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
Noise
Noise is a common issue for development surrounding airports. Sensitive receptors such as
residential or institutional uses (i.e., single-family houses, churches, schools, or hospitals) must
be accounted for. The noise compatibility standards and ranges noted in Table 11-2, Adopted
Land Use Compatibility Standards Related to Aircraft Noise for Ventura County Airports, are
measured in decibels in the CNEL range and shown below.
Safety Compatibility
The Camarillo Airport Master Plan states that ALUCs are somewhat limited in their enforcement
power. The statute specifically says that ALUCs have no authority over either existing land uses
or the operation of airports. Local general plans are the primary mechanism for implementing
the compatibility policies set forth in the ALUC’s plan. State law allows for the county board of
supervisors to designate an existing body to fulfill the role of the ALUC instead of creating an
entirely new entity. The Ventura County Transportation Commission (VCTC) has been
designated by the Board of Supervisors to act as the ALUC for Ventura County.
On July 7, 2000, the VCTC adopted the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Ventura
County (ACLUP). The ACLUP included the four airports located in the County. Exhibit 11-8,
Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan, presents the approved compatibility map associated
with Camarillo Airport. This map and the recommendations for land use compatibility have
subsequently been included in the City of Camarillo Zoning Code (Article VI, Chapter 19.170,
Airport Protection Overlay Zone [AP]) as of March 2006. The compatibility map defines several
zones and provides recommended land uses. A summary of the recommended land uses by
zones are as follows:
       Runway Protection Zone (RPZ). Should be free of any land uses that will generate
        congregations of people on the ground. Unacceptable uses include residential, public/
        institutional, commercial, industrial (except utilities and automobile parking), and
        recreation/open space (with the exception of golf courses).
Outer Safety Zone (OSZ). Roughly corresponds to the 14 CFR Part 77 approach surface
extending between the RPZ and the base of the 14 CFR Part 77 horizontal surface. The size of
this area will differ based on the type(s) of instrument approach(es) and local operating
procedures. For example, the Camarillo OSZ was enlarged to cover the area beneath a
commonly used right turning flight track on Runway 26 departures. Residential and
public/institutional uses are unacceptable in the OSZ. Some commercial, industrial,
transportation, communication, utilities, recreation/open space uses are conditionally
acceptable pursuant to meeting specific guidelines. Conditionally acceptable uses should have
avigation easements and fair disclosure agreements.
                                                                                   MAY 2013  11-31

                            11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
                                                                   TABLE 11-2
                                          Adopted Land Use Compatibility Standards
                                  Related to Aircraft Noise for Ventura County Airports
                                                                                              CNEL Range (dB)
                           Land Use                                  60-65            65-70         70-75           75-80           Over 80
Residential [1]
     Single Family                                               C [a]            U             U               U                U
     Multi-Family                                                C [a]            U             U               U                U
     Mobile Home Parks                                           U                U             U               U                U
Public/Institutional
     Hospitals/Convalescent Homes                                C [a]            C [b]         U               U                U
     Schools                                                     C [a]            C [b]         U               U                U
     Churches/Synagogues                                         C [a]            C [b]         U               U                U
     Auditoriums/Theaters                                        C [a]            C [b]         C [c]           U                U
     Transportation Terminals                                    A                A             C [d]           C [c]            C [f]
     Communication/Utilities                                     A                A             C [d]           C [c]            C [f]
     Automobile Parking                                          A                A             C [d]           C [c]            C [f]
Commercial
     Hotels and Motels                                           C [a]            C [b]         C [c]           U                U
     Offices and Business/Professional Services                  A                A             C [g]           C [h]            U
     Wholesale                                                   A                A             C [d]           C [e]            C [f]
     Retail                                                      A                A             C [g]           C [h]            U
Industrial
     Manufacturing – General/Heavy                               A                A             C [d]           C [e]            C [f]
     Light Industrial                                            A                A             C [d]           C [e]            C [e]
     Research and Development                                    A                A             C [d]           C [e]            C [e]
     Business Parks/Corporate Offices                            A                A             C [d]           C [e]            C [e]
Recreation/Open Space
     Outdoor Sports Arenas                                       A                C             C               U                U
     Outdoor Amphitheaters                                       U                U             U               U                U
     Parks                                                       A                A             A               U                U
     Outdoor Amusement                                           A                A             A               U                U
     Resorts and Camps                                           A                A             A               U                U
     Golf Courses and Water Recreation                           A                A             A               U                U
     Agriculture                                                 A                A             A               A                A
Notes
A = Acceptable land use
C = Land use is conditional upon meeting compatibility criteria (see footnotes)
U = Unacceptable land use
A fair disclosure covenant shall be recorded for all conditionally acceptable land uses.
[a] New construction or development may be undertaken only after an analysis of noise reduction requirements and necessary noise
     insulation is included in the design.
[b] Noise level reduction [NLR] from outdoor to indoor of at least 25 A-weighted decibels (dBA) must be achieved by incorporation of noise
     attenuation into the design and construction of the structure.
[c] Noise level reduction [NLR] from outdoor to indoor of at least 30 dBA must be achieved by incorporation of noise attenuation into the
     design and construction of the structure.
[d] Measures to achieve NLR of 25 dBA must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public
     is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas or where the normal noise level is low.
[e] Measures to achieve NLR of 30 dBA must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public
     is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas or where the normal noise level is low.
[f] Measures to achieve NLR of 35 dBA must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public
     is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas or where the normal noise level is low.
[g] Noise level reduction [NLR] of 25 dBA is required.
[h] Noise level reduction [NLR] of 30 dBA is required.
[i] Noise level reduction [NLR] of 35 dBA is required.
Source: Table 6A, Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Ventura County, July 2000.
                                                                                                                     MAY 2013  11-32

Sources: Exhibit 1K, Adopted Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Camarillo Airport, Camarillo Airport Master Plan, Coffman Associates, Inc., dated April 2010.
         Exhibit 6A, Adopted Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Camarillo Airport, Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Ventura County Final Report, Coffman Associates, Inc., Adopted July 7, 2000.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan
                   05/13 • JN 10-108718 (130358)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Exhibit 11-8

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-34

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       Traffic Pattern Zone (TPZ). Roughly rectangular area centered on the airport. It is an
        area commonly traversed by low altitude aircraft overflights and touch-and-go traffic in
        the pattern. At Camarillo, the TPZ extends 3,400 feet to either side of the runway.
        Most land uses are conditionally acceptable in the TPZ including residential, commercial,
        and industrial uses; whereas, some uses are fully acceptable including transportation
        terminals, utilities, automobile parking, and most outdoor recreational/open space uses
        with the exception of those creating large gatherings of the public (sports arenas,
        amphitheatres, etc.).       Public/institutional uses are unacceptable in the TPZ.
        Conditionally acceptable uses should have avigation easements and fair disclosure
        agreements.
       Extended Traffic Pattern Zone (ETPZ). Based on the area which is beneath the
        extended traffic pattern on a typical or average busy day at the airport. All land uses are
        acceptable in the ETPZ; however, some uses are conditionally acceptable. Conditionally
        acceptable uses should have avigation easements and fair disclosure agreements.
The ACLUP stipulates that for all conditionally acceptable land uses, the recording of an
avigation easement, fair disclosure agreement, and covenant shall be required. Table 11-3,
demonstrates the Adopted Land Use Compatibility Standards in Safety Zones for Civilian
Airports.
Exhibit 11-8, Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan, shows the noise level contours and air
travel pattern zones as they relate to surrounding land uses. Exhibit 11-9, Camarillo Airport
Master Plan Concept, shows the ultimate buildout of the airport and its runways.
AIRSPACE PROTECTION AND HEIGHTS
The Height Restriction Zone (HRZ) is essential to protecting airspace and structures from
passing aircraft. The HRZ is established in accordance with Federal Aviation Regulation (F.A.R.)
Part 77, which requires people proposing to construct certain tall structures (over 200 feet) or
other structures near airports that would penetrate imaginary surfaces defined in Part 77 to
notify the FAA of the proposed construction. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) will
review the proposal and issue an acknowledgment stating that the proposal: 1) would not
exceed any airspace protection surfaces defined on the airport’s F.A.R. Part 77 Airspace Plan; or
2) would exceed a standard of the F.A.R. Part 77 Airspace Plan but would not be a hazard to air
navigation; or 3) would exceed a standard of the F.A.R. Part 77 Airspace Plan and may be a
hazard to air navigation pending a further aeronautical study. Within 30 days, the project
sponsor may request the aeronautical study. Until an aeronautical study is completed, the
proposed structure shall be presumed to be a hazard to air navigation.
                                                                                 MAY 2013  11-35

                      11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
                                                              TABLE 11-3
                                   Adopted Land Use Compatibility Standards in
                                             Safety Zones for Civilian Airports
                                                                                                         Traffic           Extended
                                                                    Runway         Outer Safety         Pattern         Traffic Pattern
                         Land Use                               Protection Zone        Zone               Zone                Zone
Residential
    Single Family                                               U                  U                 C [a, e]           A [e]
    Multi-Family                                                U                  U                 C [a, e]           A [e]
    Mobile Home Parks                                           U                  U                 C [a, e]           A [e]
Public/Institutional
    Hospitals/Convalescent Homes                                U                  U                 U                  A [e]
    Schools                                                     U                  U                 U                  A [e]
    Churches/Synagogues                                         U                  U                 U                  A [e]
    Auditoriums/Theaters                                        U                  U                 U                  A [e]
Commercial
    Hotels and Motels                                           U                  U                 C [c, e]           A [e]
    Offices and Business/Professional Services                  U                  C [a, e]          C [c, e]           A
    Wholesale                                                   U                  C [a, e]          C [c, e]           A
    Retail                                                      U                  C [a, e]          C [c, e]           A
Industrial, Transportation, Communication, and
Utilities
    Manufacturing – General/Heavy                               U                  C [a, e]          C [a, e]           A
    Light Industrial                                            U                  C [a, e]          C [a, e]           A
    Research and Development                                    U                  C [a, e]          C [a, e]           A
    Business Parks/Corporate Offices                            U                  C [a, e]          C [a, e]           A
    Transportation Terminals                                    U                  U                 A                  A
    Communication/Utilities                                     C [b]              A                 A                  A
    Automobile Parking                                          C [b]              A                 A                  A
Recreation/Open Space
    Outdoor Sports Arenas                                       U                  U                 U                  A
    Outdoor Amphitheaters                                       U                  U                 U                  A
    Parks                                                       U                  C [a]             A                  A
    Outdoor Amusement                                           U                  C [a, e]          A                  A
    Resorts and Camps                                           U                  C [a, e]          A [e]              A [e]
    Golf Courses and Water Recreation                           C [d]              A                 A                  A
    Agriculture                                                 A                  A                 A                  A
Notes
A = Acceptable land use
C = Land use is conditional upon meeting compatibility criteria (see footnotes)
U = Unacceptable land use
[a] Maximum structural coverage must be no more than 25 percent. “Structural coverage” is defined as the percent of building
    footprint area to total land area, including streets and greenbelts.
[b] The placing of structures or buildings in the Runway Protection Zone is unacceptable. Above ground utility lines and parking are
    allowed only if approved by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) as not constituting a hazard to air navigation.
[c] Maximum structural coverage must not exceed 50 percent. “Structural coverage” is defined as the percent of building footprint
    area to total land area, including streets and greenbelts. Where development is proposed immediately adjacent to the airport
    property, structures should be located as far as practical from the runway.
[d] Clubhouse is unacceptable in this zone.
[e] An avigation easement is recommended and a fair disclosure agreement and covenant shall be recorded by the owner and
    developer of the property.
Source: Table 6B, Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Ventura County, July 2000.
                                                                                                                   MAY 2013  11-36

Source: Exhibit 5A, Master Plan Concept, Camarillo Airport Master Plan, Coffman Associates, Inc., dated April 2010.
                                                                                                                                           CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                                                    Camarillo Airport Master Plan Concept
                   05/13 • JN 10-108718 (130358)
                                                                                                                                                       Exhibit 11-9

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-38

                 11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
In 2005, the Airport Land Use Commission amended the ACLUP to have the study areas also be
known as the “Sphere of Influence,” which sets boundaries for the review of development
projects. This boundary is depicted on Exhibit 10a, Camarillo Airport Sphere of Influence.
Additionally, the following standard applies within the HRZ at all airports:
       Any structures proposed within the HRZ must remain below the Approach and
        Transitional Surface.
       Any structures proposed within any part of the F.A.R. Part 77 Airspace Plan which
        require a variance, conditional use, or special use permit because they exceed the
        permitted height requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be reviewed by the Airport
        Land Use Commission and the County of Ventura Department of Airports if the height
        of the proposed structure would penetrate any F.A.R. Part 77 surface.
       If the FAA reviews the proposed structure and finds that the structure would represent
        a hazard to air navigation, the proposal shall be disapproved. The proposal shall also be
        disapproved if the FAA finds that the structure would require the raising of approach
        minimums at any military or public use airport in the County.
       If the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) reviews the proposed structure and makes
        a finding of “no hazard,” the structure shall be permitted, provided that it shall be
        marked and lighted in accordance with the recommendations of the FAA.
Exhibits 11-10b and 11-10c, Camarillo Airport F.A.R. Part 77 Airspace Plan, show the permitted
airspace travel pattern for Camarillo Airport.
AIR TRAFFIC INCIDENTS
As noted above, all development, land use, and operational FAA Regulations in place at the
Camarillo airport are intended to protect residents from potential aircraft crash incidents
Compliance with all applicable FAA regulations severely reduces the potential for aircraft crash
incidents. The various protection zones and height restriction zones are in place so that current
and future development is not subjected to potential aircraft crash incidents. FAA Operational
procedures must also be adhered to for arriving and departing aircraft. In the event that an
incident does occur, Fire Station 50 has a specially trained Crash and Rescue unit that serves as
a responder to aircraft crash incidents.
                                                                               MAY 2013  11-39

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-40

Source: Exhibit 2A, Camarillo Airport Study Area and Jurisdictional Boundaries, Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Ventura County Final Report, Coffman Associates, Inc., Adopted July 7, 2000.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Camarillo Airport Sphere of Influence
                   05/13 • JN 10-108718 (130358)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Exhibit 11-10a

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-42

Source: Exhibit 6F, F.A.R. Part 77 Airspace Plan for Camarillo Airport, Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Ventura County Final Report, Coffman Associates, Inc., Adopted July 7, 2000.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                             Camarillo Aiport F.A.R. Part 77 Airspace Plan
                   05/13 • JN 10-108718 (130358)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Exhibit 11-10b

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-44

Source: Exhibit 6G, F.A.R. Part 77 Airspace Plan in Immediate Camarillo Airport Area, Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Ventura County Final Report, Coffman Associates, Inc., Adopted July 7, 2000.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CAMARILLO SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Camarillo Aiport F.A.R. Part 77 Airspace Plan
                        05/13 • JN 10-108718 (130358)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Exhibit 11-10c

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-46

                 11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
Naval Air Station Point Mugu
Naval Air Station (NAS) Point Mugu lies approximately 6-1/2 miles southeast of the City of
Oxnard on the Pacific coast. Access to the facility is provided by State Route 1, which defines
the eastern boundary of the base. The NAS Point Mugu Study Area and Jurisdictional
Boundaries (as shown on Exhibit 5A in the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Ventura
County, adopted July 7, 2000) includes an area of approximately 88 square miles, which
includes most of the City of Port Hueneme and the City of Oxnard, the south part of the City of
Camarillo, and a small part of the City of Thousand Oaks.
Air traffic operations at NAS Point Mugu are classified as military, air carrier, and general
aviation. The air carrier category includes special charter flights carrying military personnel.
The general aviation category includes operations by contractors or rented aircraft. Flight
tracks at NAS Point Mugu were developed for use in the 1990 Aircraft Noise Study (HMMH
1990), and are depicted on Exhibit 5E through Exhibit 5J in the Airport Comprehensive Land Use
Plan for Ventura County, adopted July 7, 2000.
Airport Noise Exposure
The CNEL noise contours for the NAS Point Mugu are shown on Exhibit 5L, 1990 Noise
Exposure, NAS Point Mugu in the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Ventura County,
adopted July 7, 2000. The shape of the noise pattern reflects the prevalence of arrivals and
departures. The contours are long and narrow to the northeast, reflecting the arrivals to
Runway 21. Near the facility, the contours balloon out, reflecting the traffic patterns and
overhead approach flight tracks. The 60 CNEL contour extends nearly 42,000 feet northeast of
the runway end, and encompasses a small portion of the City of Camarillo that is north and
west of Pleasant Valley Road, east of Calle De La Rosa and Calleguas Creek, and south of U.S.
101.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
EMERGENCY SERVICES
Emergency Dispatch
The Ventura County Fire Department is considered the first responder for emergency
situations, including fires. The even distribution and strategic placement of 31 stations
(including the three discussed above in Camarillo) allow the Fire Department to locate fire
protection services and equipment throughout the county, including the City of Camarillo. One
of the greatest benefits of the new Fire Communications Center (FCC) is state-of-the-art
technology that allows dispatchers to see the closest available fire vehicles and ambulances and
send them where they’re most urgently needed. Incoming 911 calls are displayed on
computerized maps. Fire engines and ambulances are tracked with a Global Positioning System
and dispatched according to location of the calls.
                                                                                MAY 2013  11-47

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
Response levels are based on type of incident, location, weather conditions, existing or
potential emergencies, resources available and ultimately the information the department is
provided with. Staffing levels and the staffing of specialized resources are adjusted according
to existing or potential conditions.
The closest available resource, plus the closest available resources of the type needed, respond
to incidents. GPS (global positioning satellite) systems on the vehicles and CAD (computer
aided dispatch) allow the Fire Department to identify and dispatch the closest available fire
engine. One of the priorities of the first arriving personnel is to determine the incident’s needs
and adjust the response accordingly.
Medical Services
Ventura County Firefighters are cross-trained to provide services for medical emergencies. All
fire suppression personnel are trained to the level of Emergency Medical Technician
Defibrillator (EMT-D). All engines carry a defibrillator. Some firefighters are also trained as
paramedics. The Department’s engine companies are equipped for paramedic service, and
AMR, a private ambulance provider, can transport critically ill or injured persons to hospitals.
Specialized Units
Specialized units with unique capabilities are available for response to incidents involving
special hazards or needs. These units are not normally staffed. Personnel with the specialized
training and qualifications will move from their regularly assigned units at the fire station and
respond with these specialized units as needed. Often, these specialized units will respond and
operate in conjunction with similar units from other fire departments to form a regional
response to incidents that present unique challenges.
       Crash/Rescue. This unit is located in Camarillo at Fire Station 50. This unit responds to
        incidents involving flammable liquids, primarily aircraft crashes, oil field facility fires,
        flammable liquid storage and transportation emergencies. Crash 50 has the capability
        of extinguishing flammable liquid fires and securing spills.
       Hazardous Materials. The Haz Mat unit is based at Fire Station 50 in Camarillo and
        responds to incidents involving chemical, biological, radiological, etiological hazards or
        any other unknown substances. The Haz Mat team will isolate, make entry into a
        hazardous area, identify and mitigate the hazard. They also perform decontamination
        of victims and emergency personnel.
       Urban Search & Rescue. Two USAR units respond to technical rescue incidents. One of
        the units is located at Fire Station 54 in Camarillo. These incidents involve victims who
        are trapped due to earthquakes, building collapse, cave-in, trench collapse, major
        transportation crash or other incidents where the entrapment exceeds the capabilities
                                                                                 MAY 2013  11-48

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
        of the regular crews. The USAR team will stabilize the scene, make access to and
        extricate the victim.
       Water Rescue. Two rescue units respond to water rescue incidents that exceed the
        capabilities of land based units. One unit is located at Fire Station 54 in Camarillo. The
        team is capable of in water rescue and/or watercraft rescue. The team is trained in
        swiftwater, ocean and lake rescues.
       Wildland/Aviation. The Aviation Unit is based at the Camarillo Airport, but not actually
        at Fire Station 50. The Aviation Unit is located at a hangar further down the airport
        from the station. The Wildland Unit operates the Handcrew and bulldozer resources on
        wildland fires in the construction of fire control lines. The unit also operates with the
        Sheriff’s Aviation unit on the helicopter’s response to fire and rescue incidents. Staffing
        levels within the unit vary with the seasons and wildfire threat.
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Evacuation Routes
Evacuation routes in Camarillo are dependent upon the event and need for evacuation. During
a breach of the Bard Reservoir, the only required evacuation route would be the movement
onto high ground out of the flood plain, which is generally north of Ponderosa Road, westerly of
Ponderosa and Las Posas Roads and easterly of Calleguas Creek northerly of the Ventura
Freeway (U.S. 101). In the event of a major chemical spill or other significant disaster, the City
would be evacuated using U.S. 101 for east and westerly traffic or Lewis Road for evacuating
the residents to the north or south.
Emergency Incident Information
In the event of a major natural or man-made disaster, or other incident that could significantly
affect the Camarillo area, the Emergency Alert System (EAS), formerly called the Emergency
Broadcast System is in place in case television and other forms of information are rendered
unusable. The primary radio stations in Ventura County for EAS broadcasts are KVEN (am)
1450, and KHAY (fm) 100.7.
Law Enforcement
Law enforcement and police protection services are provided in Camarillo by the Ventura
County Sheriff’s Office. The Sheriff’s Office department strategy is as follows:
       To preserve peace
       Prevent Crime
       Apprehend Offenders
                                                                                 MAY 2013  11-49

                   11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
        Facilitate problem solving community partnerships
        Enforce laws
        Provide and secure humane detention for persons lawfully entrusted to their care
        Display empathy and respect for the dignity of all individuals
The County Sheriff’s office is comprised of four divisions. The Patrol Division services the
County of Ventura and the five contract cities of Camarillo, Fillmore, Moorpark, Ojai, and
Thousand Oaks, as well as the unincorporated areas of Ventura County. Within Patrol are also
the Mounted Unit, K-9 Unit, Sheriff’s Communications Center and the Office of Emergency
Services.
The Detention Division is the largest of the four divisions in both personnel and budget. This
includes all jobs related to inmate services such as reception, booking and classification, jail
services, court room and pre-trial security. Currently there are three jail facilities: pre-trial
detention facility, Todd Road Jail, and East County Jail.
The Special Services Division includes the Air Unit, Major Crimes, Narcotics, Intelligence, Bomb
Squad, S.W.A.T., Hostage Negotiations, Forensic Science Laboratory, Information Systems and
the Evidence Unit.
The Support Services Division includes important internal departments that are essential to the
structure and operational needs of the Sheriff’s Office across a wide variety of areas. These
departments include the Business Office, Human Resources, Professional Standards Bureau,
Records, and Training Academy Staff.
Camarillo Disaster Assistance Response Team (D.A.R.T.)
The Camarillo D.A.R.T. responds in support of the City of Camarillo and the County of Ventura,
under the direction of local law enforcement, in times of general need, emergency and
declared disasters. To meet this objective, all D.A.R.T. members are trained in advanced
medical intervention, traffic control, emergency radio communications, Incident Command, and
skills necessary for light urban search and rescue operations. D.A.R.T. provided services during
the Northridge earthquake, the La Conchita Mudslide, hazardous materials incidents, missing
person searches, the Alaska FLT 271 plane crash and the Green Meadows Fire, where they
assisted the Ventura County Fire Department. Members also assist the City and Ventura
County Fire Department during CERT classes and training. The Camarillo D.A.R.T has members
of all ages, backgrounds, professions, and talents.
Community Emergency Response Team (CERT)
CERT instruction is provided by firefighters of the Ventura County Fire Department (VCFD). All
Camarillo Area residents at least 18 years of age are eligible to participate in the training. Since
2006, over 500 residents have participated in CERT training.
                                                                                  MAY 2013  11-50

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
The CERT course includes instruction in triage, first aid, extinguishing fires, search and rescue,
cribbing (to remove injured persons from beneath heavy objects), terrorism response, and
more. During emergencies fire and law enforcement personnel may request the services of
CERT-trained residents.
Emergency Preparedness Information
The City’s website provides information on its Emergencies webpage, such as emergency
checklists, links to the CERT websites, and important emergency phone numbers. As in CERT
training, residents are urged to prepare for at least a week of self-sufficiency.
Emergency Operations Plan
The City’s Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) is updated by staff every four years. Emergency
management and preparedness is done in compliance with the CA Standardized Emergency
Management System (SEMS) and the National Incident Management System (NIMS).
Camarillo has an EOP prepared in accordance with SEMS/NIMS standards. The Plan addresses
the City’s planned response to emergencies associated with natural disasters and technological
incidents. It provides an overview of operational concepts, identifies components of the City’s
emergency management organization within the Standardized Emergency Management System
and by extension, the National Incident Management System (hereafter referred to as
SEMS/NIMS) and describes the overall responsibilities of the federal, state and county entities
and the City for protecting life and property and assuring the overall well being of the
population. A general clarification of the potential natural and man-made threats to Camarillo
are addressed in the Threat Assessment section of the EOP in Part 1, pages 35-82. The EOP also
provides the locations of the City’s Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and alternate locations,
as well as the Red-Cross pre-identified emergency shelters and alternate shelter sites
throughout Camarillo.
Mutual Aid Agreements
Incidents frequently require responses that exceed the resource capabilities of the affected
response agencies and jurisdictions. When this occurs, mutual aid is provided by other
agencies, local governments, and the State. Mutual aid is voluntary aid and assistance by the
provision of facilities and services, including fire, police, medical and health, transportation,
communications, utilities, and other assistance.
The California Master Mutual Aid Agreement is designed to ensure that adequate facilities,
resources, and other support are provided to jurisdictions whenever their own resources prove
to be inadequate to cope with a given situation. The City of Camarillo is part of Mutual Aid
Region I. Inter-agency, multi-agency, and discipline-specific mutual aid system coordination is
used by the City of Camarillo and other member jurisdictions of Ventura County for
                                                                                  MAY 2013  11-51

                 11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
coordinating mutual aid. The Ventura County Fire Department is also part of the standard
Countywide and Statewide mutual aid systems.
Volunteer and private agencies are also part of the City of Camarillo’s mutual aid system. The
American Red Cross is a significant organization of response to meet the care and shelter needs
of disaster victims. Private sector medical/health resources are also an essential part of the
medical response. Volunteer and private agencies mobilize volunteers and other resources
through their own systems. They may also identify resource needs that are not met within
their own systems that would be requested through the mutual aid system.
11.2.2 Regulatory Framework
Regulations in place at the Federal, State, and local level are intended to protect Camarillo and
its residents from the possible hazards discussed above. These regulations, programs, or
regulatory agencies are discussed below in the order of potential hazards that were discussed
in existing conditions, above. It should be noted that these regulatory protocols and agencies
already exist, and future development would be subject to them, in addition to the forthcoming
Goals, Objectives, and Policies within this element.
SOILS AND SEISMIC HAZARDS
FEDERAL
The purpose of the Federal Soil and Water Resources Conservation Act (1977) (16 United States
Code Section 2001-2009) is to protect or restore the functions of the soil on a permanent
sustainable basis.
STATE
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act (California Public Resources Code, Chapter 7.5,
Section 2621-2699.6) was passed in 1972 to mitigate the hazard of surface faulting to structures
for human occupancy. The Act only addresses the hazard of surface fault rupture and is not
directed toward other earthquake hazards, such as subsidence or liquefaction. The Act requires
the State Geologist to establish regulatory zones, known as “Earthquake Fault Zones,” around
the surface traces of active faults and to issue appropriate maps.
The Seismic Hazards Mapping Act (SHMA) of 1990 (California Public Resources Code, Chapter
7.8, Section 2690-2699.6) provides a statewide seismic hazard mapping and technical advisory
program to assist cities and counties in fulfilling their responsibilities for protecting the public
health and safety from the effects of strong ground shaking, liquefaction, landslides, or other
ground failure, and other seismic hazards caused by earthquakes.
                                                                                  MAY 2013  11-52

                   11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
California building standards are published in the California Code of Regulations, Title 24,
known as the California Building Standards Code (CBSC). The CBSC applies to all applications for
residential building permits. The CBSC consists of 11 parts that contain administrative
regulations for the California Building Standards Commission and for all State agencies that
implement or enforce building standards. Local agencies must ensure that development
complies with the guidelines contained in the CBSC.
CITY OF CAMARILLO
The Camarillo Municipal Code Title 16 outlines protocols for new construction. Chapter 16.04
of this title states that the Uniform Building Codes are adopted by reference. Of note, Chapter
16.38 discusses the use of Geotechnical Studies for new construction.
FLOOD HAZARDS
FEDERAL AND STATE REGULATIONS
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) performs the following: advises on
building codes and flood plain management; teaches people how to get through a disaster;
helps equip local and state emergency preparedness; coordinates the federal response to a
disaster; makes disaster assistance available to states, communities, businesses and individuals;
trains emergency managers; supports the nation’s fire service; and administers the national
flood and crime insurance programs.
VENTURA COUNTY
The Ventura County Watershed Protection District has a Flood Mitigation Plan for Ventura
County. The Plan notes that portions of Camarillo, particularly the eastern portion along
Calleguas Creek, and the southern portion, are subject to flood inundation either from a dam
failure or from local creek flooding during a storm event. The Plan identifies risk areas and
flood hazard areas throughout the County, and also identifies Federal Agencies, Legal and
Regulatory Resources, and additional Local Ordinances, Policies, Plans, Programs, Fiscal
Resources, and a Mitigation strategy regarding subjecting current and future development to
potential flood hazards. All Goals, Objectives, and Actions contained in the Mitigation Strategy
and Implementation Strategy are anticipated to reduce local and county-wide flood hazards
and potential flood dangers to the fullest extent feasible.
CITY OF CAMARILLO
Camarillo Municipal Code Chapter 16.34 outlines requirements for Flood Damage Protection.
Municipal Code Title 16 Code (in which Chapter 16.34 is located) incorporates the Uniform
Building Code, adopted by reference. The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas.
                                                                               MAY 2013  11-53

                 11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
FIRE HAZARDS
The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) is dedicated to the fire
protection and stewardship of over 31 million acres of California’s privately-owned wildland.
As previously discussed, the Ventura County Fire Department engages in activities that are
aimed at preventing fires and compliance with California Building Standards Code, Chapters 7
and 7A, and the California Fire Code (California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9). The
Department provides fire protection engineering, building inspections for code compliance, and
hazardous materials inspections. As described later in this Element, the Department also
provides education and training in public safety and emergency preparedness.
The Fire Department is responsible for the Publication of the Community Wildfire Protection
Plan which has been prepared by the Ojai Valley Fire Safe Council. The Healthy Forest
Restoration Act (HFRA) enacted by the U.S. Congress on Jan 7, 2003 established a protocol for
the creation of a type of document that articulated a wildfire safety plan for communities at
risk from wildland fires – a Community Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP). The Ventura County
CWPP serves as the implementation tool of the Healthy Forest Restoration Act.
Additionally, the Ready, Set, Go! Program is also implemented by the Ventura County Fire
Department through a series of brochures. These brochures include protocols and fire defense
mechanisms for homeowners, ranchers or farmers, and trail users.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE
The regulation of hazardous wastes is provided on both the Federal and State levels. The
United States Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) and the California Department of
Toxic Substance Control (DTSC) have developed and continue to update lists of hazardous
wastes subject to regulation. Applicable Federal, State, and local regulatory policies and law
that apply to hazards and hazardous materials are discussed below.
FEDERAL AND STATE REGULATIONS
The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), enacted in 1976, is the principal Federal
law in the United States governing the disposal of solid waste and hazardous waste.
The responsibility for implementation of the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) was given to California EPA’s Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) in August
1992. The DTSC is also responsible for implementing and enforcing California’s own hazardous
waste laws, which are known collectively as the Hazardous Waste Control Law.
                                                                                MAY 2013  11-54

                 11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
In addition to the U.S. EPA and the DTSC, the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB),
Los Angeles County Region (Region 4), is the enforcing agency for the protection and
restoration of water resources, including remediation of unauthorized releases of hazardous
substances in soil, groundwater, and surface water bodies.
The California Accidental Release Prevention Program Law (CalARP Program) (California Health
and Safety Code Section 25531-25543.3) provides for consistency with Federal laws (i.e., the
Emergency Preparedness and Community Right-to-Know Act and the Clean Air Act) regarding
accidental chemical releases and allows local oversight of both the State and Federal programs.
Transportation of hazardous materials/wastes is regulated by California Code of Regulations
(CCR) Title 26, Toxics. The Federal Department of Transportation (DOT) is the primary
regulatory authority for the interstate transport of hazardous materials. The DOT establishes
regulations for safe handling procedures (i.e., packaging, marking, labeling and routing). The
California Highway Patrol (CHP) and the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans)
enforce Federal and State regulations and respond to hazardous materials transportation
emergencies.
Occupational safety standards exist to minimize worker safety risks from both physical and
chemical hazards in the workplace. The California Division of Occupational Safety and Health
(Cal/OSHA) is responsible for developing and enforcing workplace safety standards and assuring
worker safety in the handling and use of hazardous materials.
The “Unified Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Materials Management Regulatory Program”
(Program) was created in 1993 by California State Senate Bill 1082 to consolidate, coordinate,
and make consistent the administrative requirements, permits, inspections, and enforcement
activities for environmental and emergency management programs. The Program is
implemented at the local government level by Certified Unified Program Agencies (CUPA).
LOCAL REGULATIONS AND AGENCIES
County of Ventura
The Ventura County Environmental Health Division protects public health and the environment
by ensuring conformance with State laws and County ordinances pertaining to the following
programs: food protection, hazardous materials, hazardous waste, individual sewage disposal
systems, land use, medical waste, ocean water quality monitoring, recreational health, solid
waste, underground fuel tanks, and vector control.
The Ventura County Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA) provides regulatory oversight for
the following six statewide environmental programs: Hazardous Waste, Hazardous Materials
Business Plans, California Accidental Release Prevention Program, Underground Hazardous
Materials Storage Tanks, Aboveground Petroleum Storage Thanks and Spill Prevention Control
                                                                               MAY 2013  11-55

                   11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
and Countermeasure Plans, and Onside Hazardous Waste Treatment. The Ventura County
CUPA implements State and Federal Laws and county ordinance codes, and local policies.
Compliance is achieved through routine and follow-up inspections, educational guidance, and
enforcement actions. The CUPA also is involved with hazardous materials emergency response,
investigation of illegal disposal of hazardous waste and public complaints.
City of Camarillo
Camarillo Municipal Code Section 19.54.085 delineates Hazardous materials and Hazardous
waste management siting criteria. Furthermore, Municipal Code Section 9.04.010 defines
hazardous waste as any waste materials or mixture of wastes defined as a hazardous substance
or hazardous waste pursuant to RCRA, the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) 42 U.S.C. Sections 9601 and following or as defined by
the California Integrated Waste Management Board.
It is anticipated that hazardous materials incidents within the City of Camarillo would fall under
the jurisdiction of Ventura County Fire and the Ventura County CUPA.
AIRCRAFT HAZARDS
AIRPORT COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
The Ventura County Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan (ACLUP) describes the legal
authority of the document. The California Public Utilities Code Sections 21670 et seq. requires
the County Board of Supervisors to establish an Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) in each
county with an airport operated for the benefit of the general public. The Code also sets forth
the range of responsibilities, duties, and powers of the Commission. Instead of creating a new
body to serve as the ALUC, State law allows the county board of supervisors to authorize an
appropriately designated body to fulfill ALUC responsibilities. In Ventura County, the Board of
Supervisors has designated the Ventura County Transportation Commission (VCTC) to act as the
ALUC for the County.
Public Utilities Code Section 21675 requires the Airport Land Use Commission to formulate a
comprehensive land use plan for the area surrounding each public use airport. The Commission
may also formulate a plan for the area surrounding any federal military airport located in the
County. Public Utilities Code Section 21675 also outlines the necessary components of an
ACLUP; these components are addressed in the Ventura County ACLUP.
The Introduction chapter of the Ventura County ACLUP states that the document is intended to
protect and promote the safety and welfare of residents near the military and public use
airports in Ventura County, as well as airport users, while promoting the continued operation of
those airports. Specifically, the plan seeks to protect the public from adverse effects of aircraft
noise, to ensure that people and facilities are not concentrated in areas susceptible to aircraft
                                                                                 MAY 2013  11-56

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
accidents, and ensure that no structures or activities encroach upon or adversely affect the use
of navigable airspace. Implementation of the plan would promote compatible urban
development and restrict incompatible development in the vicinity of the County’s airports.
CAMARILLO AIRPORT MASTER PLAN
The Master Plan for the Camarillo Airport notes that Camarillo Airport is owned by Ventura
County and operated by the Ventura County Department of Airports, which is charged with the
day-to-day operation, repair, maintenance, and administration of the airport. The airport is
overseen by the Ventura County Board of Supervisors.
At the national level, the airport is included in the National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems
(NPIAS). The Camarillo Airport is one of 191 general aviation airports in California included in
the NPIAS. The Camarillo Airport has been designated by the NPIAS as a reliever airport for the
region’s commercial service airports. Reliever airports are high-capacity general aviation
airports in major metropolitan areas. These specialized airports serve as attractive alternatives
to using congested commercial service airports for general aviation aircraft. The Camarillo
Airport is one of seven designated reliever airports in the southern California region.
At the state level, the airport is included in the California Aviation System Plan (CASP). The
purpose of the CASP is to ensure that the state has an adequate and efficient system of airports
to serve its aviation needs. The CASP defines the specific role of each airport in the state’s
aviation system and establishes funding needs. The CASP is updated every five years with the
most recent revision being completed in 2003. Camarillo Airport is one of 244 general aviation
and reliever airports within the state’s aviation system plan.
At the regional level, Camarillo Airport is included in the Southern California Association of
Government (SCAG) General Aviation System Plan (GASP). The GASP evaluates the region’s
capacity and ability to meet aviation demand. The Camarillo Airport is one of 44 general
aviation airports included in the GASP, which SCAG considers important to meeting the region’s
demand for aviation services.
The California Department of Transportation Division of Aeronautics (Caltrans) actively
participated in aviation planning and capital improvement projects in the state. The CASP is
composed of ten Elements and Working Papers and is updated every five years. The CASP is
developed in consultation with regional transportation planning agencies and is adopted by the
California Transportation Commission. The CASP was updated in 2003 and includes minimum
standards depending on the airport classification. The Camarillo Airport is classified as a
metropolitan general aviation airport and it meets the minimum standards for this
classification.
                                                                                 MAY 2013  11-57

                   11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
In addition to the Ventura County Emergency Dispatch Service discussed above, the City of
Camarillo implements its Multi-Hazard Functional Plan (MHFP). The Plan’s purpose is to the
City’s planned response to emergencies associated with natural disasters and technological
incidents. It provides an overview of operational concepts, identifies components of the City’s
emergency management organization within the Standardized Emergency Management System
and by extension, the National Incident Management System (hereafter referred to as
SEMS/NIMS) and describes the overall responsibilities of the federal, state and county entities
and the City for protecting life and property and assuring the overall well being of the
population.
A Major Earthquake (a seismic hazard) is discussed within the plan as a Threat Assessment 1.
Hazardous Materials Incidents are rated as a Threat Assessment 2. Flooding is rated within the
plan as a Threat Assessment 3. Fire is rated within the Plan as a Threat Assessment 4. Dam
Failure is rated as a Threat Assessment 5. A Major Air Crash is rated as a Threat Assessment 6.
Landslides are rated as a Threat Assessment 10.
Finally, Terrorism is rated as a Threat Assessment 9.
The MHFP contains emergency procedures and protocols in the event that any of the
emergency situations listed above should occur. Emergency response actions applicable to all
common hazards are presented in the Checklist Actions in Part II of the MHFP.
It is anticipated that Ventura County Fire, Police, and even public employees would provide first
response aid in major emergency situations. The Camarillo CERT team would also provide its
services.
11.3         CONTEXT FOR SAFETY ELEMENT POLICY
The development of policies within the Safety Element is rooted in a broad understanding of
the issues and hazards that affect the community and residents of Camarillo. The City prides
itself in providing a high level of service to its residents and promotes education and outreach
to community members in hopes of creating a safer environment. City promotes safety
through education, engineering, enforcement, community design, and planning for hazards.
GEOLOGIC AND SEISMIC HAZARDS
Site-specific geologic review is used to evaluate geologic and seismic hazards that may affect
developments within particular areas of the City. The City requires geotechnical engineering
reports for development within areas known for geologic or seismic hazards. In addition,
                                                                                MAY 2013  11-58

                   11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
issuance of grading permits, hillside development areas, and critical uses such as hospitals and
utilities require additional study and evaluation to ensure the public’s safety. The City may
preclude development within hazard areas through the use of open space land use
designations, where necessary.
FLOOD HAZARDS
The Ventura County Watershed Protection District is charged with protecting the streams and
creeks within Ventura County, including the City of Camarillo. Major drainages within the City
include the Calleguas and Conejo Creeks, and Beardsley Wash/Revolon Slough. Calleguas and
Conejo Creeks are located within the eastern portion of the City adjacent to developed and
agricultural areas, these drainages have the potential to significantly affect the surrounding
areas. In addition to these drainage courses, a large portion of the City is located within the
100 year and 500 year FEMA floodplains. This coupled with the potential Dam inundation areas
that could affect the City indicate that a large portion of the City is at risk of potentially
flooding.
Through the use of land use regulations and the City’s development review process, all new
developments will be required to mitigate potential flooding impacts. This in conjunction with
potential flood control improvements will ensure that future impacts are reduced. In addition,
the City will work closely with the Ventura County Watershed Protection District to ensure that
regional improvements that benefit Camarillo as well as surrounding areas are completed on a
timely basis, which will ultimately improve regional flooding and drainage impacts.
FIRE HAZARDS
The City is currently served by the Ventura County Fire Protection District. The major fire
concern for the City is the proximity of existing developments to high fire hazard areas within
the eastern and northern portions of the City. In addition, other areas of the City may pose a
threat due to proximity to the airport or adjacency to open space/agricultural areas. Effective
management of these areas and implementation of proper development controls that reduce
risk to fire hazards is an important component of this Element.
Working closely with the Fire Protection District, the City of Camarillo can emphasize the need
for adequate training of fire fighting personnel to address the changing needs of the
community. As part of this effort it will also be very important that the residents and
businesses within the community understand their role in fire prevention and impact reduction
activities that in the future could save lives.
                                                                               MAY 2013  11-59

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
Preventive measures will continue to be an important part of fire protection in Camarillo,
including conditions of development and weed clearance to deter the spread of wildland/urban
interface fires, Fire Department review of site plans, and community education, engineering,
and enforcement.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE
Protecting Camarillo residents and businesses from the harmful effects of hazardous materials
and waste is a high priority. Through the promotion of effective handling, use, treatment, and
disposal of hazardous materials and waste as well as the education of the Camarillo populace
on these issues, the City is committed to maintaining a safe community for existing and future
residents and businesses.
Through the entitlement review/approval process and adherence to current and future State
and Federal regulations, new developments within the City are expected to incorporate the
necessary protections and improvements that reduce the risk and exposure of hazardous
materials release and minimize impacts if a release occurs. Prevention of future releases is of
great importance due to the City’s reliance on groundwater resources for drinking water and
surrounding agricultural resources that are an important component of the economy.
Household hazardous waste collection events raise community awareness that items such as
cleaning products, batteries, and paint should not be disposed of in the trash. The City and its
waste services contractor should promote these events to divert household hazardous waste
from landfills.
AIRCRAFT HAZARDS
To reduce risk from aircraft operations in the southwestern portion of Camarillo, the City will
continue to ensure that land use policies are consistent with the Camarillo Airport Master Plan,
Ventura County Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan, and applicable federal aviation
regulations.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
EMERGENCY SERVICES
The City of Camarillo has a strong desire to continue providing a high level of emergency
response services to its residents. Working closely with the Ventura County Fire Protection
District and Sheriff’s Office, the City strives to promote safer development of the hillside areas
and facilitate effective notification and response to emergency situations through their
development review processes. Understanding that many aspects of the Fire Department’s and
                                                                               MAY 2013  11-60

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
Sheriff’s Office operations are beyond City control, collaboration with these agencies on
existing and future training and equipment needs will be a priority.
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
The Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) is the master document that organizes emergency
preparedness and response efforts in Camarillo, and that provides a framework for
coordination with other agencies at the regional and state levels. Each department involved in
implementation of the EOP has the responsibility to internalize the plan in its own operations,
as well as keep the plan up-to-date. Dedicated staff support for maintenance and
implementation of the EOP would make this effort more likely to succeed. Staff training at all
levels would also promote readiness to implement the plan.
Public awareness and education is a critical part of emergency preparedness. An educated
public will know how to prevent injury and property damage during and after emergency
events, and also know how to find and offer help to their neighbors. Through collaboration
with the Ventura County Fire Protection District and promotion of educational programs like
Community Emergency Response Team (CERT), community members would receive the
training needed to be self sufficient during a major emergency. In addition to this, the City
would also work to disseminate basic emergency preparation information to all of the
residences and businesses in Camarillo. Education aimed at children has the potential to shift
the expectations of an entire generation while also raising awareness among parents. The City
will continue education about emergency preparedness through such avenues as presentations
to residents, instruction in local schools, and the City’s website.
11.4        GOALS, OBJECTIVES, AND POLICIES
CITYWIDE SAFETY
Goal SAF-1
A community protected from natural and man-made hazards.
Objective SAF-1.1
Protect the public health, safety and general welfare of Camarillo Residents from hazards and
potential disasters.
        Policy SAF-1.1a
        Incorporate new and updated hazards information relevant to the City of Camarillo into
        the Safety Element, Emergency Operations Plan, and/or Local Hazard Mitigation Plan, as
        appropriate.
                                                                               MAY 2013  11-61

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       Policy SAF-1.1b
       Review public safety infrastructure and staff resources as new development is planned
       or proposed within the City of Camarillo Planning Area.
       Policy SAF-1.1c
       Encourage the dedication of open space areas where potential hazards (fault zones,
       floodplains, fire hazard areas, etc.) may be located.
       Policy SAF-1.1d
       Investigate and pursue additional available funding sources to fund safety programs,
       provide services, upgrade/construct facilities, and purchase equipment.
Objective SAF-1.2
Inform the community of natural and man-made hazards, disaster preparedness and emergency
response through education and public outreach efforts.
       Policy SAF-1.2a
       Conduct community education efforts via local media coordination, City sponsored
       activities and events and other methods to reach the broader community.
       Policy SAF-1.2b
       Continue supporting the Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) administered
       through the Ventura County Fire Protection District.
       Policy SAF-1.2c
       Coordinate with the Pleasant Valley and Oxnard Union High School Districts to
       incorporate emergency preparedness and hazards identification into school curriculums.
GEOLOGIC AND SEISMIC HAZARDS
Goal SAF-2
A community that is aware of and has planned for existing and potential geologic and seismic
hazards.
Geologic Hazards (Soils, Landslides/Mudslides, and Subsidence)
Objective SAF-2.1
Decrease the potential risks associated with geologic hazards within the City of Camarillo.
                                                                                MAY 2013  11-62

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
        Policy SAF-2.1a
        Minimize geologic hazards by identifying and addressing potential hazards during the
        planning and engineering of proposed development and/or improvement projects.
        Policy SAF-2.1b
        Require the preparation of a geologic/geotechnical investigation (performed by a
        Certified Engineering Geologist and/or Geotechnical Engineer) for all new development
        or redevelopment projects located in areas of potential hazards. That investigation
        should include adequate analysis and appropriate mitigation of potential hazards to the
        satisfaction of the City Engineer or their designee. Special consideration should be given
        to terrain, soils, slope stability, and erosion issues, where applicable.
Seismic Hazards
Objective SAF-2.2
Reduce the potential effects of seismic hazards on existing and new developments within the
City of Camarillo.
        Fault Rupture
        Policy SAF-2.2a
        Review development projects involving construction within Earthquake Fault Hazard
        Zones (as depicted on the State of California, Earthquake Fault Hazards Map for County
        of Ventura in accordance with the requirements of the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
        Zoning Act and the policies and criteria established by the State).
        Policy SAF-2.2b
        Consider the designation of land located within Earthquake Fault Hazard Zones and
        potentially active fault areas for less dense or intensive uses, such as Open Space or
        Agricultural, where feasible.
        Policy SAF-2.2c
        Design roadways, streets, highways, utility conduits, and oil and gas pipelines, to avoid
        crossing active faults where feasible. When such location is unavoidable, the design
        should include measures to reduce the effects of any fault movement as much as
        possible.
                                                                                  MAY 2013  11-63

                 11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       Policy SAF-2.2d
       Locate new critical facilities, special occupancy structures, or hazardous materials
       storage facilities outside of active fault zones unless demonstrated that the facility is not
       subject to fault rupture hazard.
       Seismic Shaking
       Policy SAF-2.2e
       Continue to adopt the most current version of the California Building Code to ensure the
       use of the most up to date seismic requirements within the State of California.
       Policy SAF-2.2f
       Require roadway engineering standards that meet or exceed seismic requirements of
       the California Building Code to reduce potential damage and maintain emergency access
       in the event of an earthquake.
       Liquefaction
       Policy SAF-2.2g
       Require additional analysis for development within areas susceptible to secondary
       seismic impacts (liquefaction, landsliding, subsidence, etc.) to determine the potential
       risk to these hazards and identification of mitigation measures, to the satisfaction of the
       City Engineer or their designee.
FLOODING
Goal SAF-3
A community carefully planned and protected from flooding hazards.
Floodplain Hazards
Objective SAF-3.1
Provide adequate flood control mitigation to reduce the potential risk associated with floodplain
hazards within the City of Camarillo.
       Policy SAF-3.1a
       Design and construct appropriate surface drainage and flood control facilities as funding
       permits.
                                                                                MAY 2013  11-64

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
        Policy SAF-3.1b
        Prevent incompatible land uses and development within the 100-year and 500-year
        floodplains and prohibit residential development within the regulatory floodway.
        Policy SAF-3.1c
        Limit land uses in the regulatory floodway to open space, agriculture, or passive to low
        intensity recreational uses, subject to the approval of the Planning Director, City Flood
        Plain Administrator, or their designee.
        Policy SAF-3.1d
        Coordinate with the Ventura County Watershed Protection District or other appropriate
        watershed protection agencies to evaluate the effectiveness of existing regional and
        local flood control facilities and actively participate in the planning, design, and
        construction of regional improvement projects that affect the City and meet capacity
        demands.
        Policy SAF-3.1e
        Identify natural drainage courses and designate drainage easements to allow for their
        preservation, or for the construction of necessary drainage facilities to protect
        community health, safety, and welfare.
        Policy SAF-3.1f
        Develop and maintain floodplain inundation evacuation plans in cooperation with the
        Ventura County Watershed Protection District and Ventura County Fire Protection
        District.
        Policy SAF-3.1g
        Promote low impact development techniques such as pervious paving, on-site
        groundwater recharge, rainwater harvesting, minimization of building footprints, and
        bioretention to improve defensive measures against storm events and storm water
        pollution.
Dam Inundation Hazards
Objective SAF-3.2
Ensure land use regulations and emergency response plans focus on reducing potential damage
resulting from inundation associated with dam failure.
                                                                               MAY 2013  11-65

                 11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       Policy SAF-3.2a
       Coordinate with the Ventura County Watershed Protection District, Army Corps of
       Engineers, and California Division of Safety of Dams on updated mapping of dam
       inundation areas within the City as new studies and projects are completed.
       Policy SAF-3.2b
       Develop dam failure evacuation plans in cooperation with the Ventura County Fire
       Protection District and Ventura County Office of Emergency Services.
       PolicySAF-3.2c
       Discourage critical and essential uses within designated dam inundation areas.
Tsunami Hazards
Objective SAF-3.3
Support tsunami response and recovery efforts within Ventura County in the event of a tsunami
occurring along the California coast line.
       Policy SAF-3.3a
       Identify supporting activities and resources within the City’s Emergency Operations Plan
       that can assist jurisdictions within the Ventura County Operation Area directly impacted
       by tsunami inundation.
       Policy SAF-3.3b
       Identify potential areas for emergency response and recovery coordination activities, as
       well as areas where affected populations can receive shelter and assistance, if
       necessary.
FIRE HAZARDS
Goal SAF-4
A community that has planned for and is protected from hillside fire conditions.
Objective SAF-4.1
Ensure that development in high fire hazard areas is designed and constructed in a manner that
minimizes risk to life and property.
                                                                               MAY 2013  11-66

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       Policy SAF-4.1a
       Ensure that new and existing developments have an adequate water supply and access
       for fire protection and evacuation purposes.
       Policy SAF-4.1b
       Include fire-resistant building materials, fire-resistant vegetation, cleared firebreaks,
       and/or a long-term comprehensive fuel management program into the design of any
       project in a fire hazard area.
       Policy SAF-4.1c
       Require that all new residential subdivisions provide adequate access for emergency
       vehicles and resident evacuation.
       Policy SAF-4.1d
       Assess all new developments located in or adjacent to wildland areas to determine their
       vulnerability to fire and/or potential as a source of fire.
       Policy SAF-4.2e
       Encourage the use of development features such as roads and fuel modification zones
       to buffer homes from wildland fire.
Objective SAF-4.2
Minimize risk associated with wildland and urban fires through preventive measures,
maintenance, and education.
       Policy SAF-4.2a
       Promote weed abatement to reduce fire hazards on private properties.
       Policy SAF-4.2b
       Educate residents on creating defensible space around homes.
       Policy SAF-4.2c
       Promote public safety education programs through the Fire Protection District to reduce
       accidents, injuries and fires, as well as to train members of the public to respond to
       emergencies.
                                                                               MAY 2013  11-67

                    11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
        Policy SAF-4.2d
        Continue efforts to reduce fire hazards associated with older buildings, multi-family
        housing, and fire-prone industrial facilities throughout the City.
        Policy SAF-4.2e
        Ensure dedicated open space and undeveloped areas meet specifications for fire safety.
        Policy SAF-4.2f
        Promote the use of grazing animals to conduct weed abatement activities on public and
        private properties.
Objective SAF-4.3
Coordinate with the Ventura County Fire Protection District to maintain an adequate level of
service and protection for fire and emergency response within the community.
        Policy SAF-4.3a
        Continue to coordinate fire protection services through the Ventura County Fire
        Protection District, CAL FIRE, and all other agencies and districts with fire protection
        powers.
        Policy SAF-4.3b
        Ensure that Ventura County Fire Protection District provides adequate service and
        facilities for new developments as they occur.
        Policy SAF-4.3c
        Coordinate with the Ventura County Fire Protection District to ensure adequate levels of
        fire suppression personnel and equipment are available for all areas of the City and all
        types of development.
        Policy SAF-4.3d
        Coordinate with the Ventura County Fire Protection District on the maintenance and
        implementation of a Fire Department Strategic Plan to address staffing and facility
        needs, service goals, deployment strategies, and other department goals.
                                                                               MAY 2013  11-68

                 11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE
Goal SAF-5
Residents and businesses are adequately protected from hazardous materials and hazardous
waste.
Objective SAF-5.1
Protect the community from the harmful effects of hazardous materials, hazardous waste, and
environmental contamination.
       Policy SAF-5.1a
       Promote the handling of hazardous wastes and hazardous materials so that waste
       reduction through alternative technology is the first priority, followed by recycling and
       on-site treatment, with disposal as the last resort.
       Policy SAF-5.1b
       Coordinate with the Ventura County Fire Protection District on the response procedures
       associated with a release or threatened release of a hazardous material within the City.
       Policy SAF-5.1c
       Locate potentially hazardous facilities and operations in areas that would reduce
       exposure of the public to a significant risk of injury, loss of life, or property damage.
       Policy SAF-5.1d
       Raise public awareness of appropriate disposal for household hazardous waste, and
       publicize collection events and locations.
       Policy SAF-5.1e
       Promote the use of integrated pest management techniques to keep City properties
       free of herbicides and pesticides.
       Policy SAF-5.1f
       Encourage and educate residents and businesses to implement integrated pest
       management principles and reduce or discontinue the use of pesticides and herbicides
       on their property.
                                                                                     MAY 2013  11-69

                11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       Policy SAF-5.1g
       Review new development or redevelopment projects located on sites with known
       and/or potential hazards to ensure hazards have been identified and remediated in
       accordance with applicable regulatory requirements.
Objective SAF-5.2
Minimize threats to public health and safety and to the environment posed by a release of
hazardous materials.
       Policy SAF-5.2a
       Require new development that will generate hazardous wastes or utilize hazardous
       materials to identify hazardous waste reduction, recycling, and storage areas on site
       plans.
       Policy SAF-5.2b
       Ensure that land uses involved in the production, storage, transportation, handling, or
       disposal of hazardous materials are located and operated to reduce risk to other land
       uses.
       Policy SAF-5.2c
       Periodically review and amend the appropriate ordinances which regulate the storage
       and handling of hazardous materials to conform to the standards and definitions of the
       State and other regulatory agencies.
       Policy SAF-5.2d
       Continue to monitor the operations of businesses and individuals that handle hazardous
       materials through the planning and business permit processes.
       Policy SAF-5.2e
       Designate appropriate transportation routes for the movement and transport of
       hazardous materials within and through the City.
       Policy SAF-5.2f
       Require that new pipelines and other channels carrying hazardous materials avoid
       residential areas and other sensitive land uses to the greatest extent possible.
                                                                                MAY 2013  11-70

                11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       Policy SAF-5.2g
       Actively coordinate with the operators of existing pipelines (oil, gas, etc.) to ensure
       existing development in close proximity to these facilities are protected from future
       incidents to the greatest extent possible.
Objective SAF-5.3
Promote Interagency Collaboration, Training, and Coordination of Hazardous Materials
Response and Clean Up.
       Policy SAF-5.3a
       Support Caltrans and California Highway Patrol efforts to ensure safe transportation of
       hazardous materials on freeways.
       Policy SAF-5.3b
       Coordinate with Ventura County Fire Protection District to ensure personnel are trained
       and ready to operate at the level of Hazardous Materials First Responder, as deemed
       necessary.
       Policy SAF-5.3c
       Work with the appropriate local, State, and Federal agencies to identify previously
       unidentified contaminated sites in the City, particularly on sites with a high likelihood of
       past contamination, such as old gas stations or industrial sites, and work with the
       property owners and applicable agencies to remediate them.
       Policy SAF-5.3d
       Develop an educational awareness program for residents and businesses about the
       dangers of hazardous materials and proper disposal methods.
       Policy SAF-5.3e
       Maintain cooperative relationships with the chemical handlers, response agencies, and
       community representatives to ensure an informed and coordinated response to
       chemical emergencies.
                                                                                 MAY 2013  11-71

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
AIRCRAFT HAZARDS
Goal SAF-6
A community thoughtfully planned and compatible with existing airport facilities.
Objective SAF-6.1
Facilitate safe development within the vicinity of Camarillo Airport.
        Policy SAF-6.1a
        Coordinate with the Ventura County Department of Airports and the Airport Land Use
        Commission (also known as the Ventura County Transportation Commission) on future
        development projects associated with or located in the vicinity of Camarillo Airport.
        Policy SAF-6.1b
        Review development and redevelopment projects for consistency with the Ventura
        County Comprehensive Airport Land Use Plan (ACLUP).
        Policy SAF-6.1c
        Refer discretionary development within the Airport Hazard Zones to the Airport Land
        Use Commission (also known as the Ventura County Transportation Commission) and
        the County of Ventura Department of Airports for consistency review with the Ventura
        County Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan (ACLUP), as applicable per the study area
        boundaries shown on Exhibit 11-10a, Camarillo Airport Study Area.
        Policy SAF-6.1d
        Require development projects within the Airport Hazard Zones to comply with Part 77
        of the Federal Aviation Regulations (objects affecting navigable airspace).
        Policy SAF-6.1e
        Ensure private airstrips and agricultural landing fields are sited outside of areas that
        would present significant hazard or an annoyance to existing or planned land uses and
        would not conflict with the flight paths of existing airports.
                                                                                MAY 2013  11-72

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Goal SAF-7
A community fully responsive to emergencies and disasters.
Objective SAF-7.1
Establish effective response and recovery efforts for major emergencies and/or disasters.
        Policy SAF-7.1a
        Maintain an up-to-date Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) in partnership with Ventura
        County, the State of California, and other agencies.
        Policy SAF-7.1b
        Support a safe, secure, and technologically advanced Emergency Operations Center
        (EOC).
        Policy SAF-7.1c
        Conduct regularly scheduled disaster exercises with Police, Fire, City employees, and
        other agencies.
        Policy SAF-7.1d
        Conduct joint emergency and disaster preparedness exercises to test operational and
        emergency plans with other agencies.
11.5        IMPLEMENTING ACTIONS
The following list identifies recommended actions that the City, County Agencies, and private
property owners can pursue in order to implement the Camarillo Safety Element.
    a. Continually review the Safety Element, Emergency Operations Plan, and Local Hazard
        Mitigation Plan to ensure that new information/mapping is being incorporated in a
        timely manner.
    b. Update the Emergency Operations Plan as needed to comply with federal, state,
        regional, and local requirements.
    c. Identify new grant or other funding sources on an annual basis to support future
        emergency response and hazard mitigation initiatives within the City.
                                                                              MAY 2013  11-73

             11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
d. Develop programs that inform and educate the community about potential risks,
   resources, roles, and responsibilities for addressing safety.
e. Using the City’s website, City publications, or other methods (such as pamphlets),
   provide public safety education/information, focusing on in-city natural or man-made
   hazards; the prevention of life or property-threatening events; and the appropriate
   preparation for and reaction to local or regional disasters by the public.
f. On an annual basis, review local, State, and Federal building codes and requirements to
   ensure the most up to date information is enforced within the City. Update the City’s
   Municipal Code to reflect current information/requirements and ensure appropriate
   review requirements are included within existing ordinances.
g. Review the Ventura County Fire Protection District Fire Department Strategic Plan and
   provide comments/input, as appropriate.
h. Monitor the Ventura County Fire Protection District’s fire protection rating and
   cooperate with the Ventura County Fire Protection District in the correction of
   deficiencies.
i. Continue to work with the Ventura County Fire Protection District to review current
   standards for wildfire prevention and improve standards and/or regulations where
   required. Coordinate infrastructure improvements aimed at reducing natural hazards
   and disasters with the Ventura County and City of Camarillo Capital Improvements
   Plans.
j. Maintain and update, as appropriate, a Master Plan of Drainage for the City.
k. As a component of the Emergency Operations Plan, develop evacuation plans for
   flooding/dam inundation, wildfire, earthquake, and hazardous material spill scenarios
   and coordinate these plans with the City’s identified evacuation routes.
l. Coordinate disaster planning efforts with neighboring jurisdictions in the County.
m. Coordinate code enforcement activities with the Ventura County Fire Protection District
   to ensure that hazardous property conditions are adequately addressed to meet current
   fire safety standards.
                                                                             MAY 2013  11-74

                   11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
    n. Coordinate with the County of Ventura’s Environmental Health Hazardous Materials
        Program, a Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA), to update and maintain the
        County’s hazardous materials database for all properties within the City that
        manufacture, store, and/or dispose of these materials. Coordinate with the County of
        Ventura’s Environmental Health Hazardous Materials Program to annually update the
        list of sites contaminated with hazardous materials requiring cleanup activities
        (Brownfield Sites) within the City. Coordination with Environmental Protection Agency,
        Department of Toxic Substances Control, County of Ventura’s Environmental Health
        Hazardous Materials Program, and Ventura County Fire Protection District when new
        sites are identified or cleanup activities are initiated/completed is recommended.
    o. Annually conduct emergency response drills and exercises with City staff and
        coordinating Agencies to ensure adequate preparations and response activities are in
        place prior to an actual event.
    p. Provide information on available non-hazardous product alternatives, proper storage,
        management, and disposal of hazardous wastes on the City’s website, at City Hall, and
        other public facilities.
    q. Review any proposed updates or modifications to the Ventura County Airport
        Comprehensive Land Use Plan and/or Camarillo Airport Master Plan as they pertain to
        the City and provide comments/input, as appropriate.
11.6        SOURCES CITED
COMMUNICATIONS
Telephone conversation with Ryan Kraai, Fire Prevention Officer, Ventura County Fire
    Department, June 26, 2012.
Telephone conversation with Rick Bandelin, Manager at Ventura County CUPA, June 26, 2012.
MAPS
USDA Soils Maps
State of California Department of Conservation Liquefaction Map
FEMA Maps
California Department of Conservation, California Geological Survey, Geologic Map of the
    Camarillo 7.5' Quadrangle, Ventura County, California: A Digital Database, Version 1.0 by
    Siang S. Tan, Kevin B. Clahan, and Christopher S. Hitchcock, Digital Database by Carlos I.
    Gutierrez And Marina T. Mascorro, 2004.
                                                                                  MAY 2013  11-75

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
DOCUMENTS
City of Camarillo Emergency Operations Plan.
City of Camarillo SEMS/NIMS Multi-Hazard Functional Plan, Part 1, page 3.
City of Camarillo General Plan Safety Element, November 28, 1989 and August 8, 1990.
Ventura County General Plan Goals, Policies and Programs, June 28, 2011.
Ventura County General Plan Hazards Appendix, June 2011.
Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Ventura County, July 2000.
Camarillo Airport Master Plan, April 2010.
Thesis: Surface and Subsurface Geology of the Camarillo and Las Posas Hills area, Ventura
    County, California, Mary Clare Jakes, August 2, 1979.
WEBSITES
Ventura County Fire Department website
    http://fire.countyofventura.org/AboutVCFD/FireCommunicationsCenterFCC/tabid/90/Defa
    ult.aspx, accessed on August 30, 2012.
http://fire.countyofventura.org/AboutVCFD/EmergencyResponse/tabid/84/Default.aspx,
    accessed on August 30, 2012.
City of Camarillo website
    http://www.ci.camarillo.ca.us/i3.aspx?p=844, accessed on August 30, 2012.
Environmental Health Department website
    http://www.ventura.org/rma/envhealth/about.html, accessed on August 30, 2012.
Ventura County CUPA website
    http://www.ventura.org/rma/envhealth/cupa/index.html, accessed on August 30, 2012.
D.A.R.T website
    http://www.camarillodisasterassistanceresponseteam.com/, accessed on September 27,
    2012.
Ventura County Sheriff’s Office website
    http://www.vcsd.org/overview & http://www.vcsd.org/divisions, accessed on September
    27, 2012.
                                                                              MAY 2013  11-76

                  11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
Scholars Archive at Oregon State University website for Thesis: Surface and Subsurface Geology
   of the Camarillo and Las Posas Hills area, Ventura County, California
   http://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/xmlui/handle/1957/11592, accessed on March 22, 2013.
                                                                              MAY 2013  11-77

11.0 City of Camarillo Safety Element
       This Page Left Blank Intentionally
                                          MAY 2013  11-78

